Miscellania. OR, A Collection OF Necessary, Useful, and Profitable TRACTS ON
Variety of Subjects,

Which for their Excellency, and Benefit of Mankind, are Compiled in one Volume.

By THOMAS TRYON Physiologus.

London: Printed and Sold by T. Soul* in White-Hart-Court in
Grace-Churchstreet, 1696.

THE CONTENTS.
THe true and Natural Methods how to Cure all sorts of Cuts, Bruises, Pricks of
Thorns, Weapons, or any kind of Wounds, also Old Ulcers, and to prevent
Gangreens, and other Evils whatsoever. p. 3. How to Cure Pricks in any Member
of the Body p. 4. To Cure Old Ulcers, 5. To Cure Gauls, or the skin being
rubbed off by any accident, 5. 61. An Excellent Poultis to Cure sore Breasts,
6. A rare Poultis to ^llay all Swellings, or Contusions in any part of the
Body, 6. Another Excellent Poul^is to dissolve, ripen and Cure any Rising,
Swelling, or Boyls in the Flesh, 7. The best Spirit of Scurvy Grass is made
thus, 8. How you may make this plain Spirit of Scurvy Grass into a Purging
Spirit, 8. An Excellent Drink against the Stone Gravel and other Obstructions,
9. How to Purgo by Herbs and Foods, 10. Another Way to Purg^ by Foods and
Drinks, 11. An Excellent Poultis against the Headache, pain in the side, also a
rare Remedy against the Disease called St. Anthony's Fire, 11. An Excellent
remedy against any Wound, Stab, Prick or Cut with a Sword, or other Weapon, 12.
Pythagoras's method and advice to his Disciples, 13. An Excellent remedy
against all Old (...) and Sores Occasioned by the Disease called the Kings
Evil, p. 14 An Universal F^mentation for all Tumors, Bruises' Hard-Swelled
Members or parts of the Body, 15, A famous Poultis against Sprains, 16 A good
method to Cure Sprains, if you cannot have the forementioned Poultis (viz.) 16
An excellent Wash against all Old Aches, and Sciatica's in any part or member
of the Body, 17. An excellent Method to Cure the Sores occasioned by the Kings
Evil, 17. A rare Poultis against all Inflammations, Rhumes, and other Sores in
the Eyes, 18. A rare Poultis against the Headache, 19. An excellent Poultis
against all sorts of Sprains, 20. A brave Noble Poultis against all hot Tumors,
Bruises, or Swellings, or the like, 20. A method how any Person may s^^ply the
place of Hop^ with Wormwood to all extents and purposes, and please the pallats
of the Drinkers* for Wormwood is an excellent Herb, and of far greater
Strength, Power, and Virtue, than Hops, provided it be gathered in its pr^^er
season, and dried in the Sun, and bagg'd up (...) Hops are, so keep them for
use according to the Directions in our Way to Health, Long Life and Happiness,
viz. 21. Of Brandy, Rum and Rack, from Page 1. to the 12. What Powers Meats and
Drinks have in the Body, from p. 12. to 20. What Inconveniences and Evils the
Drinking Brandy and other Spirits, bring upon Women and their Children from p.
20. to 28. Of Eating of Flesh, and its Operation on the Body and Senses, from
p. 29. to 53. Of Herbs, Fruits and Grains, and their inward Operation on the
Body and Mind, from p. 53. to 60. Of Cleanness in Houses; and Beds, and the
great Evils of stale Feather-Beds, from p. 60. to 66. How Buggs breed, from 60.
to 70. Other Inconveniences arising from the same Cause, to p. 73 How to
prevent the Generation of Vermin, and preserve Health, from p. 73. to 79. How
the preservation of Men's Health resides in the Wisdom and Temperance of Women,
from p. 79. to 87. Of the pain in the Teeth, also from what cause, and how to
prevent it, from p. 87. to 97. Observations on the great Frost, 1683. from p.
97. to 111. Some Considerations on the keeping Christmas, with remarks on the
many Irregularities committed therein, from p. 111. to p. 137. Good News for
the Poor, and better for the Rich; wherein is shown how 20 or 15000. l. might
be Weekly raised for support of the Poor, and no Body the worse, from p. 137.
to p. 151. A true and Natural Method of preparing Gruels and Paps made of
Flower and Pease, wherein is shown the great advantage and benefit the Poor may
receive thereby, from p. 151. to 156. A Proposal to Sr. T. Lane Lord Mayor, and
the Court of Alderman, and other Citizens of London, for the Erection of 20
free Schools for poor Children, from p. 156. to 164. An excellent way to make
Water Gruel, or any other Pottages, from 164. to the End.
THE PREFACE.
OBserving the tedious methods of some unskilful Chyrurgeons, together with
their improper Compositions and unatural Applycations, which do not only Ruin
and Undo many poor necessitous People, but to the losing of their Limbs and
sometimes their Lives too; therefore I think it no worthless Service to
recommend unto the World, especially to the Poor, the use of the following
Remedies, which are not only cheap and easily Come-at-able, but certain in
their Operation, far beyond any things hitherto known or published.

These are noble Poultices, and all the Ingredients do cast a friendly aspect
to each other, being of a cleansing mild Balsamic Nature and Operation, and
therefore they do by their active penetrating Power, strengthen and raise up
the dismayed Oil or wounded Spirits, by meliorating and asswaging the irritated
or awakened fierce poisonous Humors, by which this does as far exceed the
common and usual methods and practices of Chyrurgeons, and other Practitioners,
as that Light does Darkness.

But here I shall meet with a swingeing Objection, viz. Why do you leave out of
your Poultices the great Ingredient, viz. The fulsom Grease of Swine and other
Fats? Which all skilled in the Art of Curing, have for the most part advised,
and for (...) other reason as I know, then that their Poultices should not
offend the patient by sticking to the Sore or wounded part, for their long
lying on the grieved part, if there were not some Fats or Oils, the Poultices
would occasion them to become hard and stiff, and so stick to the Sore, which
we prevent by our often repetition; for the Spitituous Virtues and Qualities of
Fats, are so hid and looked up in the oily Body, that Nature cannot separate no^
draw forth their fine sweet Spirituous Virtues to that degree, as she can from
Vegetations, as all men skilled in Nature and Chemistry do know, they being of
a heavy dull flat Nature and Operation, very offensive to the tender Spirits
and Blood, by which they im^ede and hinder the Cure, therefore those Poultices
wherein Fats are mixed, the fine Spirits and Virtues thereof do not so easily
nor powerfully penetrate the Wound as rich Vegetations, whose Spirit and lively
Virtues are as it were on the Wing, and therefore Poultices aptly compounded
thereof, their Virtues do in a moments time penetrate to the Center, and
incorporate with their similes, by which they strengthen and raise up the
wounded Spirits, and at the same time do qualify the fierce raging Poisons,
more especially if our method be observed; and do effect the Cure, not only in
shorter time, but much safer, and with greater ease to the Patient. For by this
Philosophical Operation, of repeating it so often, it does mightily advance and
forward the Cure: And Note, that every fresh Application of this
Homogenial-Poultice to the grieved part, do add new and fresh Supplies of
Virtue, for in all Operations of this Nature, the fine healing Spirituous
Qualities thereof, do first impart and give themselves forth, which by a secret
simpathetical Power, do penetrate the whole, and incorporate with their
similes, administering their sweet Virtues, which gives a new Life to the
wounded Spirits, and dismayed Oils, and do at the same time withstand and
allay the fierce raging awakned or irritated poisonous Humors; it being the
way of Nature for all homogenial Bodies, that have passed through any
Preparation, Digestion, or Fermentation, when aptly applied or joined to any
Proper Subject or thing. For the fine cleansing healing Qualities and good
Virtues, do give themselves forth and join or incorporate with their Similes;
even as the fine sweet Spirituous Qualities of (...) do imbibe or give
themselves forth and incorporate with the hot Water in^ our Mash-Tub, in the
method of Brewing; therefore every Applycation does add new supplies of Virtue
and strength to the wounded Spirits, and draws forth and consumes the gross
humidity, and exalts the Essential Life of that part, and are as refreshing to
the wounded Spirits, as the pleasant influences and salutiferous Breezes of
Wind in a hot season: For Note, that the Spirits and fine Qualities of each
thing, are light, volatile, ready, quick and powerful in Operation, that in a
moments time they penetrate even to the Center; for every particular Quality in
Nature, has a Key in it self to open the Gate of its own Principle; what Man in
the World would believe the attractive inclination which the Lodestone has
upon Iron, if it did not appear to his sight; the very same simpathetical Power
have all other things, though in some it is more occult. And for this cause,
one Body works upon another, by a certain natural attraction and simpathetical
Inclination. Thus the wise and wonderful Creator, has endued every thing with
an attractive and influential Virtue; it is not therefore the gross Body of
your Poultice, that will do your Business, that is full of corrupt and
poisonous Humors, which are awakened by the long Continuation thereof, for
these Reasons, the long lying of Poultices and Plalsters, on Wounds and Sores,
have no better Effects, then the long Continuation or standing of the Liquor on
the Malt in your Mash-Tub, which if it continue more then two, three or four
Hours, it will spoil and corrupt the whole, for First, (as I said before) the
fine sweet Volatile Spirituous Virtues, imbibes or incorporates themselves with
the hot Liquor, and then if there be not a separation made in two, three or
four Hours, by drawing it off, but the applycation continued, then there will
soon awaken another Quality of a gross harsh sour ^een Nature, which with a
rapid motion, tinges or transmutes all the fine sweet healing Virtues into
their own Qualities, which all Brewers and good House-Wifes are sensible of;
the like is to be understood in the applycations of Poultices and Plasters, do
not their long lying of them on the wounded or sore part, cause them to smell
four and stink, when they have been continued on for twelve or twenty four
Hours, which do not only endanger the part, and prolongs the Cure, but it puts
the patient to great Pain and Torment, and often the Limb is cut off, and
sometimes the Life too, which by this forementioned method might have been
prevented; for if Physicians and Chyrurgeons do not understand Nature, then
there can be no certainty in their Operations or Cures.

Also Note, that during the time your Poutices, Plasters, Ointments, or
Salves, are making on the Fire, that you keep them stirring, by which you keep
the fine Spirits and Qualities Living, for by this stirring, the friendly
Powers and thin Spirits of the Air do penitrate the whole Mass or Body, which
incorporate and assist the Spirits and good Virtues, and keep them from being
Stagnated and Suffocated, the Air being the Life of all things and where its
Friendly influences and circulations are prevented, the Life and Spirits
becomes heavy, dull and gross; for these Reasons, all Spoon-Meats made thin,
are sweeter and of a more quick penetrating Operation and Digection, then those
made thick, therefore despise not our method, nor our plain home bread
Poultices, I could produce many living Testimonies of its Success, but it is
needless, since every Man's Experience that tries it, will soon confirm the
Truth of what is here delivered, nor I am not much Solicitous whether I am
credited or not; it is the consideration of the public good it may do to many
poor People, pomps me to publish it, whether you will follow the forementioned
Rules or not, I have done my Duty in offering it, and therefore am satisfied.

True and Natural Methods, how to Cure all sorts of Cuts, Bruises, Pricks of
Thorns, Weapon's, or any kind of Wounds. Also Old Ulcers, and to prevent
Gangreans and other Evils whatsoever, viz.
To Cure Cutts,
TAke Spirit of Wine, one Pint, put in three Ounces of double refined Sugar,
shake it together, -- With this wash your Wound, or Cut very well, then take
some of the same Spirit, and mix so much Sugar as will make it as thick as a
Salve; clap this into the Wound, then bind it up for Ten or Twelve hours; after
this open it, wash it again with your Sugared Spirits very well, then sow it up
with a small Needle and Silk; then temper a little Water, Bread and Sugar
together, and lay a little on a Linen Cloth, and bind it on. Repeat this every
five Hours, always washing the outside of your Wound, with your forementioned
Spirits: This will Effect the Cure in a few Days, provided the Humors be not
too Venomous, and the Parties keep themselves Temperate.

How to Cure Pricks, in any Member of the Body.
Take one Pint of double Spirit of Wine, three Ounces of double refined Sugar,
one Ounce of Camphir; mix them well-together, and if your Prick or Wound be
deep, then take ths Spirit, and with a good Serringefrce it into the Wound,
then Temper some of this Camfired Spirit with Sugar as thick as a Salve; clap
this on the mouth of the Wound, then bind it up with a Cloth, that the Air may
not penetrate the Wound; repeat this every seven Hours, for five or seven
times, every time Cleansing the Wound with your Serringe, then ^ew it up,
laying the forementioned Poultis to it, repeat it as you did the former, and
wash it every time you lay your Poultis on with said Spirits: -- This does
likewise Cure with great ease and safety.

To Cure Old Ulcers.
Take one Pint of the best double Spirits of Wine, half an Ounce of Aloes
beaten, three Ounces of double refined Sugar, half an Ounce of Mirrh, and mix
them well together. Use it thus, First wash your Ulcer with Rain Water very
clean, dropping some of the forementioned Spirits into your Ulcer, then apply
this Poultis following. Take one Quart of Rain Water, Parsley, Mint and Balm of
each a like Quantity cut small, two Ounces of good Sugar, as much Bread as will
make it of a fit Consistency for a Poultis, make it boyilng hot, stirring it
all the time, then put a Glass of Wine, Sider, Ale, or good Beer into it, lay
this Poultis on every three Hours, always washing it with the Rain Water and
Spirits: If this Method be observed, it will Cure almost to a Miracle.

To Cure Gaul's, or the Skin being rubbed off by any accident.
Take Spirit of Wine and Vinegar, mix it well together, wash your Sore every
Hour, for a Day or two, laying on it a Diaculum Plaster: This will heal and
Cure the most inveterate Gaul in a few Days time.

An Excellent Poultis to Cure Sore Breast's
Take one Quart of Rain or River Water, some Sorrel cut small, half an Ounce of
Coriander Seed beaten to Powder, two Ounces of good brown Sugar, as much Bread
as will make it into a Poultis, make it Boiling hot, stirring it all the time,
then it is done, -- Apply this every Hour, or every two Hours as warm as your
Blood on a Linen Cloth for two or three Days more or less, as you see
occasion, and remember to wash your Breast with good Water and fresh Butter
beaten together, every time you apply the Poultis, and you need not doubt but
with God's Blessing the Cure will be Effected in a short time.

A rare Poultis to allay all Swellings or Contusions, in any part of the Body.
Take one quart of Rain or River Water, Rosemary and Balm cut small, two Ounces
of Sugar, a Glass of Wine, Sider, Ale, or good Beer, as much good Bread as will
make it into a Poultis, make it boiling hot, stirring of it all the while, then
it is done, -- Lay this pretty thick on a Linen Cloth, as warm as your Blood
every Hour, or at least every two Hours, for a Day two or three according to
the occasion, washing of it well with Spirit of Wine, wherein Sugar is
disolved, This is a safe and secure remedy.

Another excellent Poultis to Disolve, Ripen and Cure any Rising, Swelling, or
Boil in the Flesh, viz.
Take white Lilly Roots, good Figgs* boil them soft in River or Rain Water,
then Temper them together, add as much Bread as will make it thick enough for a
Poultis; add to this one Ounce of white Sugar, and half an Ounce of Carr^way
Seeds beaten to Powder, stir them all together on the Fire, till they are
boiling hot, then it is done. Apply this Poultis every Hour, washing the
Grieved part with Ale and Sugar every time you lay the Poultis on, this is a
Noble Poultis, and is likewise good to cure sore Breasts, applied as abovesaid,

The best Spirit of Scurvygrass is made Thus.
Take the Leaves of Scurvygrass, some Horse-Redish-Roots Scrapt small, put this
into a Glass, or Earthen Vessel, put to it as much strong double Spirit of Wine
as will cover it, stop this Vessel close, and let it stand three Days and three
Nights, then Pour it off into Glass Bottles; when settled, you may put it into
other Bottles, and then it is fit for use. This is called The plain Spirit of
Scurvygrass, and it is the best that is made; you may take in a Morning, of
this Spirit from 60 to 80. or 90. Drops in good Water, Beer, Ale or Wine,
fasting two or three Hours after it, then eat some of our Gruel with Bread.

How you may make this plain Spirit of Scurvygrass into a purging Spirit.
Take one Quart of this plain Spirit, put into it, one Ounce of Rozin of
Scamony, and half an Ounce of Rozin of Jallop, both beaten to Powder; let it
stand one week, and^ then it will be fit for your use. Take 50, 60. or 80.
Drops of this in a Glass of Ale, Beer or Wine, Drink plentifully of our thin
Gruel after it, staying within, it will purge you very well, and not gripe, or
but very little.

An Excellent Drink against the Stone, Gravel, and other Obstructions.
Take Scurvygrass Leaves, the Seeds of Dorcas, some Horse-Redish-Scrapt, put
them in an Earthen Vessel, and then add as much White Wind as will cover the
Herbs, Seed and Roots, let them stand five Days and Nights, then pour it off
and keep it in Glass Bottles; it will continue good four or five weeks. Take a
Sack Glass of this, and a like quantity of Water every Morning, fast two Hours,
and then Drink at least a Quart of our thin Water Gruel, either of the cold or
hot. The constant use of this, is not only a prevention and Cure, but it moves
most sorts of obstructions of the Stomach, begets appetite, Generates good
Blood, causing it to circulate freely.

How to purge by Herbs and Foods.
When you are minded to purge your self with both ease and safety, and to
preserve your Health, then observe the following Method, viz. In the Morning,
drink a Quart of our thin Watergruel, either the cold or the hot, Eat a small
piece of Bread with it, at dinner take Spinnage, Lettis, Onions, parsley and
Sage; wash them and Eat plentifully of them with your Food, be it what it will,
at night Drink a like quantity of Gruel and Eat some good Bread as you did in
the Morning; this you must do for four or five or six Days together more or
less, as you see Occasion; the like Method you are to observe, If you would
purge your self with Carrots, Turnips and Parsnips, as you did with Herbs, with
this Variation, viz. Drink your Gruel and Eat your Bread Mornings and Nights,
and at Dinner, Eat only Carrots; Parsnips or Turnips, boiled only in good
Water, and Eat them freely with no other thing but a little Salt and Bread,
during these several Days, you may Purge your self to what degree you please.

Another way to Purge by Food's and Drinks.
Drink in the Morning at several times, three Pints or two Quarts of thin
Watergruel, at Dinner drink a Pint or a Quart, at Night drink a Quart more, and
Eat some Bread. This Method will Purge, or at least will keep your Body open,
let your Foods at Dinner be what it will, the Body being kept open and cool
does prevent and Cure Various Diseases in hot costive constitutions.

An excellent Poultis against the Headache Pain in the Side, also a rare Remedy
against the disease called St. Anthonies Fire.
Take Sage, Parsley and Balm, of each a like quantity cut small, one Quart of
Rain or River Water, one Pint of Whitewine, three Ounces of white Sugar, two
Ounces of Coriander Seed beaten, as much good Bread as will make it fit for a
Poultis; mix them and stir them over the Fire till they are boiling hot, then
it is done. Spread this Poultis on a Linen Cloth indifferent thick, apply to
the grieved part every Hour or two at most, and by God's assistance it will
effect the Cure to your Heart's desire.

An excellent Remedy against any Wound, Stab, Prick, or Cut with a Sword, or
other Weapon.
Take Spirits of Wine, with some double refined Sugar, or other Sugar mixed
with it; Wash or Serringe your Wound with this Sugared Spirit very well, then
take a small quantity of the fine Powder of Refined Sugar, and put into the
said Wound, and presently sow it up with a fine Needle and Silk, the quicker
you do it, the better will the Cure be performed, for the more the Air is kept
out of it the better: If this Method be observed, it will do wonders; the way
of tenting is generally pernicious and prolongs the Cures of the above
mentioned hurts, keeping the Parts from closing or cementing, for this prevents
the flowing of the Humors, and putrefaction and Nature does her own work
without trouble cost or pain.

Pithagoras's Method and Advice to his Disciples, viz.
Whenever they had Occasion to make any Medicine, Poultis, Plasters,
Decoctions of Herbs, or any other thing, they were always to be mindful to take
of those things that their Genius did first dictate to them, and not only the
Herbs or Seeds grains or other things, but likewise the number of their
Composition, that is, how many ingredients they were to mix together, the
manner form and postures they were to observe in gathering of them, also what
Words, Invocations and Prayers they use, also naming the name of the Person
they operate for, expressing in words for whom they do it, for to Cure such, or
such a Disease. And if you would know more of this, Read Pythagoras's, Letters
(lately Printed by T. Soul, in White-Hart-Court) and observe the Methods and
Numbers there treated off at large, and your understanding will be enlightened,
if you are in good earnest, and live in the Fear and under the Dominion of the
Fountain of Benignity whose Signal Character is plainness, Simplicity and
Innocence.

An excellent remedy against all Old Inveterate Vlcer's and Sores occasioned by
the Disease, called The Kings Evil, viz.
First take Rain or River Water, with which wash the Grieved part very clean,
then take strong Spirits mixed with white Sugar, and wash it several times, and
fill up the Mouth, or cover the Sore with Sugar and Spirits mixed thick, then
apply this following Poultis, viz. Take two Quarts of Rain or River Water, as
much dried Wormwood as the Water will cover, let it lie and infuse two Hours,
then strain it off, and add as much good Bread as will make it thick, add to it
two or three Ounces of white Sugar, with half or a Pint of good strong Beer, or
Wine, then make it boiling hot, stirring it all the time, then it is done.
Apply this every two Hours as warm as your Blood, washing the Sore every time
with water, and then with the Sugared Spirits as is mentioned before. --
Remember that the Water wherein the Wormwood is infused two Hours, must be
cold, and after the Ingredients are put in, made boiling hot, as in other
Poulises.

An Universal fomentation for all Tumors, Bruises, Hard Swelled Members or
parts of the Body.
Take a good quantity of dried Wormwood, put it into two, three, four or five
Quarts of Rain or River Water, make it boiling hot, then take it off the Fire,
and let it lie in the Water one Hour, then add to every Quart of this Wormwood
Liquor, half a Pint of old Wines, three Spoonfuls of good Spirit of Wine, two
Ounces of double refined Sugar, and one Ounce of Salt of Tartar, with this wash
or foment the part very well for half an Hour together, or more, resting one
Hour, and in the Interim apply this following Poultis, viz.

Take two or three Handfuls of the Green Leaves of Sorrel, infuse them in two
Quarts of boiling Water one Hour, Strain it off, and add to this Water as much
good Malt Flower as will make it thick; to every Quart put half a Pint of Ale,
and two Ounces of double refined Sugar, apply it warm every Hour fomenting the
part as you are taught before, and you need not doubt but it will have a good
Effect and Cure to Admiration.

A Famous Poultis against Sprains.
Take two or three Quarts of good Water, and a Quart of good strong Beer, four
Ounces of refined Sugar, make this just boil, then put in it as much fresh
gathered Thyme as the Liquor will cover, make it ready to boil again, and then
Strain it from the Herbs, and add to it as much Brown Bread as will make it
thick, stir this over the Fire till it be boiling hot, then it is done. Add to
this three Ounces of Spirits of Wine; stirring it all well together, spread
this thick on a Linen Cloth and apply it every three Hours as warm as your
Blood.

A good Method to Cure Sprains, if you cannot have the Forementioned Poultis,
viz.
So soon as you have Sprained any Member of your Body, then presently put that
part into cold Water, wherein some Wood-Ashes are put, continue the grieved
part one Hour, or at least half an Hour, this will give you ease, and have a
good Effect.

An Excellent Wash against all old Aches, and Sciatica's in any part or Member
of the Body.
Take Rain Water in March, April, May, June, or July, and keep it in Glass
Bottles open, standing either without Doors or in Airy Rooms, wash your infirm
part three times a Day Very well, the Water must be cold, and the Part or
Member must not be kept warmer then is usual, This do for two three or four
weeks if you have occasion, but in many this Method will effect the Cure much
sooner.

An Excellent Method to Cure the Sores occasioned by the Disease called The
King's Evil.
Fist take Water wherein Wormwood is infused, wash the Sore part very well,
then take Spirits of Wine, Malt or Sider mixed with Sugar, and wash it again,
then apply this following Poultis, viz.

Take three Pints or two Quarts of Rain or River Water* make it boil, then put
into it as much Hyssop as the Water will just cover, continue it on the Fire
till it boil, then take it off and Strain it, add to this Liquor as much Bread
as will make it thick, to every Quart put two Ounces of Refined Sugar, and half
a Pint of Ale, spread this pretty thick on a Linen Cloth, and repeat the
application every Hour, two or three, the oftener the better, the like is to be
understood in all applications, of this Nature, as we have demonstrated in our
Book Entitled The Good Hous-wife made a Doctor.

A rare Poultis against all Inflamation^ Rhumes and other Sores in the Eyes,
viz.
First wash your Eyes with Rain or other good Water, then apply this following
Poultis, viz.

Take one Quart of Water, the whites of three Eggs beaten well together, with
three Ounces of double refined Sugar, as much white Bread as will make it into
a Poultis, then make it boiling hot, stirring it all the time, then it is done.
Spread this thick on a Linen Cloth, apply it to your Eye every Hour fresh,
and you will have your desire, but this course and repeated application must be
continued for 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, or 6. Days as you see occasion.

Observe that you never apply your Poultis hotter then your Blood, nor bind the
Grieved part hard, both are great Evils, but more especially the last.

A rare Poultis against the Headache.
Take one Quart of Rain or River Water, one Ounce of white Sugar, as much Malt
Flower new Ground as will make it thick enough, add to it half a Pint of good
Ale, making it boiling hot, and stirring it all the tim^, then it is done.
Spread this on a Linen Cloth pretty thick, apply it as warm as Milk from the
Cow, every Hour, or every two Hours, continue the application one, two or three
Days, more or less, as occasion.

An Excellent Poultis against all Sorts of Sprains.
Take two Quarts of Rain or River Water, make it boiling hot, or boil up, put
to it as much good Green Sage as the Water will cover, then make it just boil,
take it off the Fire, and let it stand one quarter of an Hour, Strain the Water
off, then add to this Sage Liquor as much Bread as will make it thick, put to
this three Ounces of double refined Sugar, and a quarter of a Pint of Red Wine,
and five Spoonfuls of Spirit of Wine, Sugar or Malt, stir them well together,
and make them boiling hot, stirring it all the time, then it is done. Spread
this likewise on a Linen Cloth, and apply it warm as your Blood, every Hour
or two, for one Day or two resting all the time.

A brave Noble Poultis against all hot Tumors, Bruises or Swellings or the like.
Take two or three Quarts of Rain or River Water, as much Spinnage as the Water
will cover. But first let the Water be boiling hot, then make it boil, take it
off the Fire, and let it stand one quarter of an Hour, the Vessel uncovered,
Strain it off, add to it as much Household Bread as will make it thick, with
two Ounces of course Sugar, make it boiling hot, then it is done. Spread this
on a Linen Cloth, apply it every two Hours as warm as your Blood for two,
three, four or five Days, and you will find good Effects thereof; always
observe and be careful that you do not bind the Grieved part too hard, but very
Gently, there being nothing worse then hard binding, it often occasions great
Evils, even to Mortification.

Wormwood Smokt in Pipes, being well dried in the Sun, and Bagg'd in Paper
close, is far better and more a vail^ble for the help and Cure of all, or most
of the Diseases, Tobacco is taken in Pipes for.

A method how any Person may supply the place of Hops with Wormwood to all
intents and purposes, and please the pallats of the Drinkers, for Wormwood is
an Excellent Herb, and of far greater Strength, Power and Virtue then Hops,
provided it be gathered in it is proper Season and dried in the Sun, and bagg'd
up as Hops are, so keep them for use, according to the Directions in our way to
Health long Life and Hppiness, viz.
Take what quantity you think fit of dried Wormwood, as you have occasion to
keep your Drink a longer or a shorter time, and put it into your hot Water, in
your Mash-Tub or Vessel, and then presently put your Malt in, and stir it
together as is usual, and when it has stood the common time, draw it off, then
you must take the Wormwood out, and add some fresh to your Liquor that you put
up the second time, and do the like when you put up your third Liquor, if you
mash more than twice; by this Method or way you will only extract the thin fine
saline Virtues of the Herb, and leave the Gross Churlish bitter behind, and
Drink thus made, does not only Drink pleasant and keep well but i^ far more
wholesome, and healthy than the best Hopped Drink and if your Wormwood is well
preserved, it will keep three, four or five Years good, and the second and
third Year, it is better than the first. The very same Method is to be observed
in useing all other Herbs.

But if the forementioned way should make the Grains so bitter, that Cattle
will not eat them. Then observe the following Method, viz. Make of fine thin
Canvas Baggs, both for your strong Beer, Ale and small Beer, and put such a
quantity of your Wormwood as you think fit into them, and when your several
sorts of Drink is Working in the Tun, then hang these Baggs in your Working
Drink for three Hours, and then take them out; this being an approved way,
which do impregnate or imbibe the fine airy Spirituous Virtues of the Wormwood
into the Drink. The natural and common virtues of this Drink is, it warms and
strengthens the Stomach, fines the Blood, purges by Urine, Generates like pure
Spirits, and Drink thus made, if not too strong nor too great a quantity Drank,
then it will prove a Friend both to the Eyes and Head. -- as well as to the
Stomach.

Healths Grand Preservative, OR THE Women's best Doctor.
CHAP. I.
Of the Nature and Operation of Bandy, Rumm, and Rack, which of late years are
become as common Drinks amongst many, as Beer and Ale, not only in England, but
also in all the West Indies where the English inhabit, and of the evil
consequences that do attend the Drinkers thereof.
BRandy, Rumm, Rack, and other distilled Spirits are all very pernicious and
hurtful to the Health of the Body, if not sparingly taken on extraordinary
occasions in a Physical way; for the Intention of all such Chemical
Preparations, when first Invented, was for Medi^inal uses, and not be used as
Common Drink, as of late years indiscreetly they are, to the Destruction of
many thousands, the frequent use of them contracting such grievous and stubborn
Diseases, as for the most part are incurable.

1. All such Spirits as are drawn by common Distillation, though those cruel
Sulphurous Fires, where the Air has not its free egress and regress, atheir
Volatile Spirit and Balsamic Body, is as it were totally destroyed: As for
Example, take the best Sack (which is the Richest and most Cordial of all
Wines, and has the greatest Body) put it into a Limbeck, or any other Furnace
of the like nature, and draw it off, and you shall have nothing but a strong
harsh fiery Spirit or Brandy. The same you shall have if you distill Sugar,
only it yields a stronger Spirit, for the more Balsamic the Body of any thing
is, the stronger and fiercer is its Spirit, when that Balsamic Body, and the
pure Volatile Spirits are destroyed or separated from it. Now here you will
see, that the Volatile Spirit and sweet Cordial Qualities or Body, both in the
Sack and also in the Sugar, are destroved, and there does remain, as is said
before, only a fierce harsh Brimstony Spirit, void of all the wholesome
Qualities Sack and Sugar did contain; for the Volatile Spirit or Tincture, is
the Essential Life of every thing, and its the maintainer of its Color, Smell
and Taste. Now these pure Spirits will not endure any violent Heat or harsh
Fire, but through the fiery heat, and want of the free Egress and Regre is of
the Air, they presently become Suffocated, and then the sweet Balsamic Body is
turned sour; for this sweet Balsamic Body is the pleasant Hab tation of the
Volatile Spirit, and this pure Spirit is the true Life of that Balsamic Body;
they are inseparable Companions, the one cannot subsist without the other;
destroy either, and both die.

Therefore all such Spirits so drawn, do lose their Balsamic Body with all
their Cordial Virtues and Tinctures, put what Herbs or Liquors you will into
such Furnaces, they are presently Plundered of their natural Color, and run
off white, whereby it appears, that this common way of Distillation destroys
the pure Natural Virtues and Tincture, for from the Tincture proceeds all the
Variety of Colors, both in Vegetables, Minerals, and Animals, so that such
Spirits do only contain a harsh fierce fiery Nature, and for that Reason, if
they be frequently Drunk, do Prey upon the Natural Heat, and by degrees weaken
it, destroying the very Life of Nature, by way of Simile: for every Like works
upon its likeness, whence it comes to pass, that in those who addict themselves
to the drinking of these high Fiery or Brimstony Spirit, their Natural Heat
grows cold and feeble, and their App^tites are weakened, they destoying the
Power of the Digestive Faculty of the Stomach, so that many such People after
Eating, are forced to Drink a Dram to help Concoction; all other Drinks proving
too cold for them, which constrains them to continue Seoping of such Liquor; a
sad Remedy, when we go about to help a mischief by increasing the application
of the same ill means which first occacsioned it; for these wrathful Spirit,
have awakened the Central Heat, which is the Root of Nature, that ought not to
have been awakened or kindled, for if the Central Heat be stirred up by any
unnatural Meats or Drinks, or other violence done to Nature, then presently
follows the Consumption of the Radical Moisture, and the pure Spirits and
lively Tinctures become Suffocated, wherein consists the Essential Life of
Nature. And as in the beforementioned Example, the pure Spirit and Balsamic
Body in Sack will not endure these cruel harsh Sulphurous Fires, where the Air
has not its sree Influence, but presently becomes suffocated, or destroyed,
and the most pleasant sweetness thereof turned into a Stink, so neither will
the Radical Spirits and pure Oil in the Body, endure those Sulphurous Flames,
and fierce Spirits, without sustaining the like prejudice; for that pure Virtue
or Essential Principle, which the Lord in the Creation endued every thing with
(which is the true Life thereof,) will not endure any violent Motion or harsh
Fire to touch them; especially if the circulation of the Air be wanting, as it
is in all such Distillations, for these Spirits are are so pure and subtle,
that when any Injury is offered to them, they either evaporate or become
suffocated; for this Essential Powder or pure Life, is the Moderator or
Friendly Quality in all Minerals, Vegetables and Animals, which does mix and
qualify the harsh Fiery dark Principal, and does allay and moderate the cruel
harsh Nature of the dark Fire, as does plainly appear in all the forementioned
Liquors, and also in Charcoal, for before the Sack, or any Balsamic Liquor,
was put in the Still and drawn off, those very same fiery harsh Sulphurous
Spirits were essentially in the Wine, or whatever else it be, for it is the
Root of Nature, and the Original to every Life, but being mixed or incorporated
with the Balsamic Body and pure Spirit, the fiery fierce Sulphurous Spirit is
thereby swallowed up, and as it were hid and moderated; for in what thing
soever the pure Balsamic Body is predominant, there this dark furious Spirit
is hid or captivated; an Example whereof we have in Sugar, where when the sweet
Balsamic Body is potent, there also this fiery Sulphurus Spirit is strong, but
not manifest; but as soon as this Essential Spirit and Balsamic Body are
separated or destroyed, this dark fiery Brimstony Spirit appears in its own
form, and becomes like a mad furious Devil in Nature, its clothing being the
dark Fire; for this Spirit has lost its Sweet Water or Friendly Life in its
Separation, which before did qualify its harsh fierce Fire, it also loses its
pure Color, or bright native Shine, because the Essential Oil is consumed, in
that Separation, so that there does remain no true Life nor Light in it, but
being set on Fire, its Flame is of a dim Brimstony color, which demonstrates
that the dark wrathful Properties of Saturn and Mars, and their fierce Fires
are predominate in all such Liquors or Spirits.

This is further manifest in Charcoal (as war hinted before) which is made of
Wood, but in the making thereof the pure Oil or sweet Water, which is the
Essential Life of the Wood, is suffocated or destroyed, for from that Friendly
quality, the Wood had its bright Shine or Flamo, which is of a benevolent
refreshing Operation: Now this pure Oil or Balsamic Body, the Essential Life
and Moderator of all harsh fiery dark Fumes or Qualities in the Wood, being
suffocated or totally destroyed in the making it, whereby the Original dark
Sulphurous Fire becomes strong and raging, giving greater and stronger Heat
than the Fire of Wood, but its Flame is not bright, clear, and refreshing as
that of Wood, but it is of dim Brimstony color, sending forth strong fulsome
Fumes and Va^ours very offensive to the pure Spirits and Health of those that
are near it; for having lost its pure Spirits and Oil of Life, in its making
into Charcoal, there does only remain in it, the fierce dark Original Fire, an
untamable devouring Spirit in Nature; for every Quality in Nature has power
only to kindle and awaken its likeness; therefore all such things as have lost
their pure Spirits and Balsamic Body in the Separation or Preparation, must
needs endanger the Health, because they do awaken by Simile their own, or like
Poisonous Properties in the Body; and if it were not so, a little Poison taken
into the Body, would not destroy the Life; but Poy^ons taken in, do by Simile
join or incorporate themselves with the Internal Poison or Destructive
Principle in the Body, which before laid hid, or as a Man may say, was
mode^^^ted or captivated by the sweet Body and pure Spirits, even as the fiery
Spirits of Brandy are in Sack or Sugar; but so soon as the outward Poison that
is taken in, Incorporates it self with the inward Poison in the Body, it does
so powerfully strengthen and awaken it, that in a moment it over comes the pure
Oil of Life, and the pure Spirits become suffocated, and then the Natural Life
is at an end, for every Property in Nature (both in the evil and also in the
good) does with highest diligence seck out its likeness, and wheresoever it
finds its Simile, there it joins forces, and mightily stirs up its own
Quality; which when it happens in the Evil Nature, as it does in Brandy, Rumm,
Rack, and other Distilled Liquors, then it endangers the Health and Welfare of
the Body.

Nor is it otherwise in all sorts of Food and other Drinks, if the pure Virtue
thereof be separated or any way destroyed, for then forth with the dar^
Brimstony Spirit is set at l^berty, which before the Separation, the Balsamic
Body and pure Spirits did qualify and hold Captive, that it could not manifest
its self in its own Nature, but being separated from the good Properties and
Friendly Principle, this dark fiery sulphurous Spirit, becomes of a furious
Nature and Operation, endeavoring to bring all in Subjection to it self;
therefore such Liquors or Spirits frequently taken, burn up the Radical
Moisture and Natural Heat, and are grreedy devourers of the sweet Oil in the
Body, whence proceeds General Obstructions, Crude Windy Humors, Consumptions,
unnatural Heats and Flushings, loss of Appetite, Reachings to Vomit, and many
other Disorders; and if those of the Female Sex take to drink such Spirits, as
of late years they do too frequently, the Evils are doubled unto them.

2. In all the beforementioned Spirits that have passed through those cruel
harsh Fires where the Air has not its free Egress and Regress, the pure Spirit
and sweet Body is totally destroyed, which is the Root of Motion and
Fermentation; therefore such Spirits will not Work or Ferment as all other
Drinks and Liquors will, even water it self; but you may put what quantity of
Sugar you will to Brandy, Ramm, or any other Distilled Spirits, they will
continue a strong Fire, void of Mo^ion or Fermentation; this does further
declare that all the good Principles and Virtues are destroyed by the
Preparation, and that there remains only a strong fixed Fire, which has its
Uses in Physic, as is mentioned before, but not otherwise.

3. Such Spirits being frequently drunk, do generate various Diseases,
according to each Man's Nature and Constitution, and the Climate whether hot or
cold, for they do powerfully Prey upon the Natural Heat, consuming the sweet
Oil and pure Spirits, for the Balsamic Body and pure Spirits of all such
Liquors being destroyed, in the Preparation, they become an Extreme, which
Nature in her simplicity hates, and for this Cause such Liquors cannot
Administer any Proper or Agreeable Nourishment to the Body, or to the pure
Spirits; it cannot give what it has not, it has only Power to awaken the
Central Heat or Fire, which ought not to have been kindled; and this it does by
a Sympathetical Operation, for all Meats and Drinks have power in the Body to
awaken and strengthen their likeness; for this reason all Wise Men Skilled in
the Mysteries of Nature, have commended simple Meats and Drinks, because most
such things are as it were equal in their Parts, having no manifest Quality
that does predominate violently over the other, but yet contains a sufficient
Noarishment for the Body, and also for the Spirit; for Meats and Drinks ought
to be equal in their parts, the Spirit ought not to be separated from the Body,
nor the Body from the Spirit, but both ought to be Administered together; for
the Body without the Spirit is of a gross heavy dull or dead Nature, and the
Spirit without the Body is too violent and fiery, but the Health of Man's Body
and Mind, does chiefly consist in the equality of both; do not all Meats and
Drinks wherein any Quality or Property of Nature is ^xtream (whether it be in
Virtue, or Harmfulness) if not sparingly taken, certainly discompose the
Harmony both of the Body and Mind? For every Quality begets its likeness, and
so on the contrary* Concord and Harmony are tain'd by their likenesses; if
there be not a Sympathetical agreement between the Stomach and the Meats and
Drinks, both in Quality and Quantity, the Unity and Concord of the Properties
of Nature are immediately broken, whence proceeds various Diseases according to
the degrees of the Disorder.

This every one ought to understand, or else they may unadvisedly lay heavier
Burdens than Nature can bear; for most Diseases are generated through
surplusage of Nourishment. For unto weak Heats there ought to be Administered a
proportionable Food, but stronger Heats will admit of stronger Foods and
greater quantity, which all Persons might know, if they would but observe the
Operation of their own Natures; for no Health nor Harmony can be continued
where the parts do disagree aniong themselves. What Harmony can the most
skilful Master of Music make, if the strings of his Instruments be some too
sharp, and others too flat; even so it is in the Elements of the Body, and also
in the Mind.

4. For Man is the most Beautiful and Perfectest of all God's Creation, and ^is
Image, called by the Ancients, the lesser World; for in him is contained the
true Nature and Properties of all Elements; Numbers, Weights, and Measures,
therefore Man is both capable of and and ^lable to receive all all Impressions,
and to be influenced by all things he communicates with, or joins himself unto,
as all sorts of Meats, Drinks, Employments, Communications, and whatever else
he suffers his Will or Desires to enter into, the same things have power
respectively to awaken their Similes, therefore all extremes are perilous to
the Health: If Men and women were but sensible of the danger, and terrible
Diseases that are contracted by the frequent eating and drinking of those
things that are unequal in themselves, as Brandy, Rumm and other Spirituous
Drinks and high prepared Foods, they would not so eagerly desire them. Do not
all or most that do accustom themselves to such things, quickly spoil their
their Healths? Nature is Simple and Innocent, and the Simplicity thereof cannot
be continued, but by Sobriety and Temperance in Meats and Drinks that are
simple and harmless, which will not only gratify Nature, but contribute both
due and moist Nourishment, for beyond all lushious fat, compounded Dishes of
the Richest Food, and Spirituous Drinks, as it appears by many hundreds of poor
People, who are constrained by pure necessity, not by Wisdom, to live for the
most part on simple Food and mean Drinks, their Labor hard, Clothing thin,
open Air, cold Houses, small Fires, hard Beds, standing on Earthen Floors; by
all which means, they are not only preserved in better Health, but also enabled
to endure Labor with more ease and pleasure, than the Intemperately Supet
fl^ous can lie a Bed, or sit by the Fire. O then how excellent are the ways of
Temperance and Sobriety! They free the Body from pain, and the Mind from
perturbations, sweetening all God's Blessings, and giving the opportunity of
time, which being well employed, affords many benefits both to the Body and
Mind; for what advantage is it if a Man possess the whole World, if his Body be
full of pain through Intemperance, which for the most part, no less affects
and indisposeth the Mind.

5. Brandy, Rumm, and all strong Spirituous Drinks are far more dangerous in
hot Climates and Countries than they are in cold, and do sooner there destroy
the Health, though they be bad in both, except taken in a Physical way; I know
this is contrary to the Vulgar Notion, but it is agreeable to Truth, Experience
and Reason; for in hot Climates the Natural Heat is not so strong by reason of
the forcible Influences of the Sun, which do powerfully exhale the Radical
Moistrue, open the Pores, and too violently evaporate the Spirits by continual
Sweatings, which dulls the edge of the Appetite, weakening the Digestive
Faculty of the ^tomach, whereby the inclination to drink is increased, for
which reason many desire hot Spiritual Drinks, because they find a present
Refreshment, for all such Drinks do powerfully awaken the Internal Spirit by
simile, and make Men quick, lively and brisk, during the time of their
Operation; which is but for a moment, but after wards they find themselves
heavy, dull, and indispesed, and their Stomach seeble, cold, and raw, which
does in^^ce ^^dd that do acc^sto^^ themselves to such Drinks, To take a Hare of
the same Dog, (as their Phrase is) and so they drink more, and are continually
the more weakened, for all such fiery strong Drinks do not only Prey on the
Natural Spirits, but also too violently do evaporate them. The very same
Operation have all strong Drinks, as Wine and the like, if Temperance be
wanting, but not so violently as the former. Therefore in hot Climates there
ought to be double the Care and Temperance in Meats, Drinks and Exercises, as
in Cold, of which the Natives of most hot Countries might be our Examples; for
they do for the most part live very temperately, their Drink being generally
Water, or Wineallay'd with Water, their Food mean, or more simple than ours,
whereby they are better preserved in Health; for the Constitutions of all
People in hot Climates are weaker, or at leastwise not so able to endure great
Meals of Food, and superfluous drinking of strong Drinks, as they are in cold.
For cold Countries make Men hardy, strong, and able to endure Intemperance, for
which cause it is observed that most of the Northern Climates are very
Intemperate in drinking and eating, and in hot they are the contrary. And
therefore our English are much Distempered, and many die when they Travel into
the West and East Indies, because they take wrong measures, continuing the same
disorder and intemperance as they did in their own Country, or rather
increasing it, which Nature cannot bear without manisest prejudice.

6. It is to be noted, that those that do accustom themselves to the frequent
drinking of the forementioned fiery Spiritual Drinks in all the Plantations in
the West Indies, and also the common-eating of Salt-Fish and Flesh, which are
all great Extr^ams, do thereby become very obnoxious to the dry Belly-ach, or
Griping of the Guts, Dropsies and the Gout, for all such Food and Drink does
violently stir up and consume the Natural Heat and Moisture, wherethe digestive
Faculty of the Stomach is rendered unable to Concoct or make any perfect
Separation, either of the Food or Drink, which oppresses the whole Body, whence
are generated Evil Iui^es that fall into the Joints, infeebling and torturing
them, and this is the Original of the Gout in other Complexions, these
Disorders consume the Airy Flesh of the Bones, taking away their Natural
Strength and Vigor, so that they languish away by degrees, and these you call
Consumptions, in others for want of Heat and Moisture, the Excrement in the
Bowels is contracted into so hard a Substance, that it cannot pass, and there
is hardly a Medicine found that will cure it, this is that which the Learned
call the Illiacal Passion, and the Vulgar, The Plague in the Guts, being one of
the most tormenting Diseases in the World. And in other Bodies the Central Heat
being wasted by such unfit Meats and Drinks, so that great part of the Food
turns into a Flux of Humors, both Windy and Watery, which swell the lower parts
of the Body, and this is the Generation of your Dropsies; but as God is always
good, and his Handmaid Nature, an indulgent Mother, so they have as it were,
chalked out the Means, and prescribed a Diet whereby these Diseases may be
prevented, would Men but be so wise as to observe and follow it; for all hot
Climates do furnish the Natives with wonderful Variety and Plenty of Herbs and
Fruits, far exceeding cold Countries therein, both in quantity and quality; for
in those hot Regions, the Sun has greater power to prepare all such things:
And if our English would but accustom themselves to such harmless natural
simple Foods and moderate Drinks, the forementioned Distempers would hardly be
known.

7. It is also to be noted, and much to be pitied, that of late years many
English Women have betaken themselves to the drinking of Brandy and other
Spirits, and have invented the Black-Cherry-Brandy which is in great esteem, so
that she is no body that has not a Bottle of it stand at her Elbow, or if ever
so little Qualm or Disorder be on the Stomach, or perhaps merely fancied, then
away to the Brandy-Bottle; so that when such People come to be sick, which most
of them are very subject unto, the Physiciaus do not know what to Adninister,
they having in their Health used themselves to such high fiery drinks, that
their Cordials seem like Water to them: Besides, there are many fatal
inconveniences attend the Female Sex, more than than the Male, in drinking
such Drinks; most of which are not so proper to be publicly mentioned in this
place, and therefore I shall forbear, but some I cannot but instance in; and
though perhaps some Women too much addicted to the Delights of the Bottle, may
be offended with me for telling them the Truth, and endeavoring to wean them
from the Beloved Dram, yet to do them good, I shall venture the Hail-shot of
their Tongues, and hope they will in time grow so wise, as not to indulge a
foolish sottish humor, when it tends apparently to destroy, not only their own
Healths, and shortning of their Lives, but likewise entails Diseases and
Destruction on their poor Innocent Children; for it is not only against the
Feminine Nature to drink strong Drinks, but also Destructive to the Generation
of Mankind; it makes them Masculine and Robustick, filling them with Fury and
Madness, and many other Indecencies, which are no less pernicious than shameful
in a Woman. lt also Distempers them by causing Fumes and Vapors to fly into
the Head, generating Wind in abundance. Therefore the Wise Ancients did account
it a Crime for Women to drink strong Drink or Wine, though their Countries did
afford Wine in abundance; and good reason they had, for the whole preservation
of Mankind resides chiefly in the Temperance and Government of the Women; if
they are Intemperate, the Radix of Men is corrupted; are we not like to have
very Fine, Hopeful, Healthy Children, when the Mother by excessive Pampering
her unweildy Carcass, has contracted more Diseases than an Hospital? Or when
they are put out to some Drunken Nurse, that instead of affording them wholesome
Natural Milk, Suckles them up with the unconcocted Dregs of that Brandy with
which she daily overcharges her filthy Stomach?

The Nature of Women will not bear Excess in Meats and Drinks, as Men's will,
without manifest danger to their Healths, and also to the Health of their
Children; most Windy Diseases both in Women and Children, being caused by their
Intemperance both in quantity and quality, They overcharging their Nature with
Food containing too much Nourishment, and Drinks that are too strong. This is
chiefly observable amongst Wanton Citizens and the Richer sort of People, who
pay dearly for the Lickerishness of their Palats, by the Diseases that thence
arise, they being much more Distempered than the Ordinary pains-taking People.
I confess their are hardly any Women in the World so Intemperate and such great
Lovers of there Bellies as the English, nor is there any Nation more subject to
Variety of Diseases; and therefore they are afflicted with diverse Distempers,
which Women in other Countries know nothing of. And as our Children are
generally weak, Peuling, Rickety, and Sickly, so the occasion thereof is too
evident, since they are almost made Gluttons from the very Cradle, their
Mothers gorging and feeding them till they loath their Victuals, and often cast
it up again; and when they have been Cramming all day, the good Woman
entertains her Gossips with Stories, what a little Stomach her Child has, and
that she can get it to eat nothing, and She wonders how it lives, and indeed so
she may, but for a quite contrary reason, for this oppressing Nature with
Excess in Youth, is not only the cause of the Death of many, but in others it
sows such Seeds, and lays foundations for Distempers, that they can scarce
out-grow them, also many Women out of the like foolish fondness, give their
Children strong Drink, which is very destructive to their Health.

Nor is it become unfrequent, for Women not only to drink Brandy, but also to
smoke Tobacco; which two things have a great affinity, Tobacco being an Herb of
Mars, and its Poisonous fulsome attractive Nature from Saturn; the common use
of it in Pipes is very injurious to all sorts of People, but more especially to
the Female bex, except it be taken very sparingly in a Physical way, for some
watery and windy Diseases, but the usual taking of it destroys the Physical
Virtues and Operation thereof; only the daily Smoking it may be profitable to
Gluttons, and those that Eat and Drink to Superfluity of Rich Food and strong
Drink, and live idle lives, for such want Evacuations, but Exercise and
Temperance were much better for their Health.

Tobacco and Brandy are certainly utter Enemies to Women, and also to their
Children, for their Spirits and Balsamic Body, whence their true Life shines,
is more volatile and tender than Men's, and their Natural Heat is not so strong,
for this cause Women cannot bear or endure any extremes, either in Meats,
Drinks, or Exercises, without manifest danger to their Healths, they being
generally more sanguine than Men, and their Central Heat weaker, therefare all
kind of inequality makes deeper Impression on them, and they are sooner moved
to all kinds of Passions: for Women in their Radix are compounded more of the
sweet Friendly Sanguine Nature, their Dignifica^ion being chiefly from the
Element of Water, but the Root of Men's Nature is from the strong might of the
Fire. And for the same cause Women are more Chaste than Men, and of colder
Natures, though many Men do believe the contrary, but they are greatly mistaken
in this particular, having no true understanding of Nature; they have judged
thus hardly of Women, because many of them are so easily drawn into
inconveniences by the pretended Friendship of Men, but I do affirm, that their
being so easily overcome, is not from their unchaste desires, but chiefly from
their Friendly Courteous Efleminate Natures, being of a yielding Temper, which
is essentially in the Root of their Lives, and when a Man has once awakened in
them the Love-string, which is quickly done, he may command them as he pleases;
now finding them comply, they imagine that of them which they find in
themselves: Not but that some Women are as unchaste as Men; but then such,
through the Power of their depraved Free-Wills and Wanton Imaginations, have
forced Nature out of her simple Innocent ways, compelling her often to do that
which she perfectly loathes.

The wise Ancients understanding this Nature and Constitution of Women, and
considering that the whole welfare and health of Mankind depended chiefly on
their Temperance and Discreet Conduct, did therefore direct them to an higher
degree of Temperance, and thought it requisite, and so absolutely necessary,
that both the drink allotted for Women in most Countries, was, and is to this
day pure Water, and their Food as Innocent and Natural; they eat Flesh
sparingly, living much on raw and boiled Herbs, Fruits and Greens, which is a
most sublime Diet. And by this means their Women and Children are not afflicted
with such a number of cruel Diseases. There is no Country in the World where
their Children and young People are so generally subject to the Small Pox,
King's Evil, Joynt-Aches, and many Leperous and languishing Diseases; how many
of them yearly die with Convulsions and Windy Distempers, which generally they
receive from their Mothers? How many Miseries and aching Hearts do Women endure
with their sickly Children? And what Women are free from Vapors and Windy
Diseases, Fainting Fits, weak Joints and Backs, their Blood corrupted, breaking
out in small spots in the Flesh of several colors, their Stomach cold, and
their Natural heat not able to digest their Food without a Dram, etc? For all
which Evils, there is no Remedy so long as our Women do continue the frequent
Eating of fat gross Flesh (without Herbs) and other sweet high prepared Food,
and drinking strong Liquors, as Brandy, etc. and taking Tobacco; for these
things do continually heat the whole Body, thereby awakening the Central heat,
which is very injurious to Women, for it presently sends Fumes and Vapors into
the Head, and the fierce Fires with venomous Particles do penetrate the whole
Body, drying up, and consuming the pleasant, moist, cool, airy Vapors,
suffocating the pure Spirits, which otherwise would replenish the whole Body
and sharpen the Appetite; it also dulls the Senses, and possesses the Blood
with a sharp fretting humor, and hinders its free Circulation, causing the
pure natural Spirits, whose habitation is in the Blood, to become impure,
whence arises a general indisposition over the whole Body. Therefore all that
love their own Health, or the good of their Children, ought to refrain such
hurtful Food, and learn to know, that Brandy, Tobacco, and all such things, are
to be taken sparingly, and no otherwise than as People take Physic.

CAAP. II.
Of Flesh, and its Operation in the Body, and also on the Senses. That the
continual eating thereof, without the due distinction of proper Times and
Seasons, does darken the Spirits, and distempers Nature. Likewise of the
Exellency of Herbs, Fruits, and their inward Operation on the Body and Mind.
THE eating of Flesh was not allowed or practiced in the first and purer Ages,
when Men gave themselves to the Study of Wisdom, viz. To the Knowledge of
themselves, and were partakers of God's Secrets in Divine and Humane things,
and enjoyed Health and long Life, drawn out to the Age of many hundred years.
For thus the Holy Scripiure tells us, Genesis 1. The Lord said, Behold! I have
given to you every Herb bearing Seed, which is upon the Face of all the Earth,
and every Tree in which it the Fruit of a Tree yielding Seed, to you it shall
be for Meat. And in another place it is said, Flesh with the Blood thereof, you
shall not eat. It is not said, That the Lord made all Creatures for Man to eat,
as I have heard many affirm, but he made them for his own Glory and Eternal
Honor, and for the manifestation of his Wonders, and that Men should have
Dominion over all Creatures and Created things, which Man has lost by
suffering his desires and imaginations to enter into the Bestial Nature, which
does by degrees captivate the Noble parts in Men. But the Wise Ancients for
diverse Ages of the World, did know but little of the variety of Flesh and
strong Drinks, or of compounded Dishes of twenty sorts of things, most of them
of disagreeing Natures: No, their Food was simple and natural, easy to be
procured without oppression to themselves, or to any of God's Creatures, as
Herbs, Fruits and Grains, and pure Water for drink, which things are endued
with a most simple Nature and Operation, which neither dulleth the Head by
Fumes, nor stupifies the Senses by Surplusage of Nourishment, but being well
prepared, and eaten moderately, do nourish by way of Simile its like qualities
in the Body, being of lighter digestion, and of a more Airy Operation than
Flesh, being also void of all Inclinations, Senses, or Passions of Love or
Hate, whose Original is more clean and nearer the Unity in Nature; therefore
the Philosophical Ancients in former Ages, encouraged the eating of Herbs,
Fruits and Grains, but on the contrary, made Laws against the common eating of
Flesh without distinction. The Great and most Illuminated Prophet Moses did not
admit the Children of Israel to eat any Flesh during their forty years March
through the Wilderness: It Is true, when the People did Murmur, the Lord being
provoked, gave them Flesh in his Wrath, and afterward when they were admitted
to eat Flesh, it was with such distinctions, and with so many circumstances as
could not be performed, but by abundance of labor and trouble, and other
inconveniences, by which Laws and Observations many of God's Creatures became
of little or no use in the Creation, as Swine and the like, if indeed they had
only been made for Men to eat. But the Lord never commanded his People in any
Age to abstain from any thing, but it was always for their preservation; for
Abstinence, Cleanness, and Sobriety in Meats, Drinks, Exercises, and
Communications, do work wonderful Effects, and have a Sympathetical Operation
both in the Body and Senses, rendering the Observers thereof Healthful, with
brisk powerful Spirits, watchful, prndent, of good forecast, able to give
Council, and for matters of Learning, they do easily grow to an Excellency in
the knowledge of themselves, and in all other things whereunto they do apply
themselves. And as for Prayers, Meditations and Contemplations, they do perform
them with great Facility, Pleasure and Spiritual delight, being always fresh in
their Minds, and free from Diseases in their Bodies.

By this way of Sobriety, Cleanness and Temeperance, many of the Ancients
became admirable both in Divine and Humane Wisdom; it is well known how
Scrupulously the Pythagoreans (one of the most Learned and Mysterious of all
the Sects of Gentile Philosophers) abstained from Flesh. The Divine Writer and
great Prophet Moses, testifies that God made Man in his own Image; and that he
should have Dominion over all things or Creatures, not that he should eat all
things, or hurt himself by devouring them, nor suffer his desires to enter into
them, nor theirs into him, for Man is a Prince in this World, and in him is
contained the true Nature of all the inferior Creatures; for it it were not so,
he could not be their Prince, nor be sustained by them. And though Man was made
greater than other Creature that is visible, and to be Lord over all, yet
nevertheless he having a Simile with the Nature of all things, is thereby
rendered capable to be wrought on by every inferior thing he shall suffer his
desires to enter into, and by degrees he is liable to become captivated unto
that thing, be it either good or or evil; for every like (as I told you before)
works on and awakens its likeness; This was the reason why Moses commanded that
unclean Beasts should not be eaten, that the Humane Nature might not mix or
incorporate in it self the Beastial qualities; for every indvidual Man has
essentially in him the true Natures and Essences of all the Beasts of the
Field, and Fishes of the Sea, as also of all Herbs and Fruits, Stones and
Minerals, and whasoever else can be thought of; for it this were not so, then
Man would not be subject to be wrought on by all, neitheir would the various
sorts of food agree with him or nourish him.

The wise Ancients understanding this, and that every thing had power to
attract unto it self such matter out of all things, as is capable to nourish
its own Body, therefore in those days the eating of Flesh was not in such
Reputation as of late years it has been; especially as it is in England, who
do make it their chief Food; all Vegetables and Fruits being in themselves of a
clean simple Nature and Operation, which being well prepared and temperately
eaten, have only power to waken their Similies in the Body and Senses as
foresaid. But on the contrary, all Beasts, especially unclean Beasts, are
endu^d with all kind of Beastial Passions, as Anger, Revenge, Covetousness,
Love and Hate, which Dispositions and Passions of the Flesh, but especially the
Blood, does retain after such Animals are killed; and for that reason it was,
that the Blood of all sorts of Beasts was so strictly forbidden, for the
essential Spirits dwell in the Blood, and in the Blood and Spirits lie hid all
the Dispositions and Inclinations the Creature was endued withal, and therefore
all sorts of Flesh that were permitted to be eaten, were to be well purged from
the Blood. And also this same Blood was either to be consumed by Fire, or an
hole made in the Earth and the Blood cast into it and covered, that the
wrathful Spirits and Vapors thereof might not defile the Air, which is
continually breathed into our Bodies; for when any Creature is killed, the
great pain and agony they endure, does so powerfully awaken the Center of the
wrathful Fire, and also the internal Poisons which are the Root of every Life,
that the said fierce Poisonous Spirits seize the Blood on their right Fountain
of Preservation, so that the Blood does not only contain all the Natural
Dispositions, Passions and Inclinations, but also the awakened Poisons and
irritated Spirits which were violently stirred up by Death's stroke. For when
the Natural Life is in danger (the continuation of which is so sweet unto all
Creatures, and they do so unwillingly part with it, especially when the
Creature is in perfect health, and strength) what a strange fear and dread must
needs attend the Creature in this condition? And how strongly and violently are
all the Centers and Powers of Nature stirred up? And then are awakened the
revengful Spirits, which do contain the Blood, for that is their Habitation,
which in this Agonous condition does often spread it self through the whole
Body, and makes the Flesh look red, but this is generally drawn back again by
the drawing away of the Blood where the wound is made. Now if this Blood be
exposed to the open Air, these fiery dark wrathful Spirits do by degrees
evaporate and incorporate themselves with the Air, and so defiles it, and
renders it pernicious.

The very same is to be understood in all other Uncleanness; and these are
the chief Reasons why the Prophet Moses commanded the Blood either to be burnt
on the Altar, or buried in the Earth, though there does remain somewhat more to
be said, why he commanded the Blood to be consumed on the Altar by Fire, which
I shall forbear, and speak of it in its proper place; for those fiery wrathful
Spirits that do evaporate themselves into the Air, being continually breathed
into the Body by such People as do communicate near such places, as
Slaughter-Houses, and the like, and more especially those that are of killing
Employments, those awakened wrathful Spirits do enter them, and powerfully
incorporate themselves with their Similies; for this cause all Butchers and
others, that do use such Trades, are more fierce and cruel, sooner moved to
Wrath than others; killing is as easy and familar to them as Plowing the Land
is to the Husbandman; and in a word, they are far more inclined to violence
than Men of other Employments are.

The same is to be understood in all other Trades, and also in Communications,
as those that are brought up and have their Conversasions amongst Horses, are
not most of them Robustick, Proud, Bold and Surly, like the Creatures they
Communicate with; the same is likewise to be understood in many other hard
working rough Trades and Employments; are not most of them rash, headstrong,
scarce endued with common Humanity? There is nothing so good, or so bad, but
Man is capable of being captivated to it; from this ground it is that weak
Inclinations, that a Man in himself is hardly sensible of, may either by
Employments or Communications be made strong, which is one Reason why Men's
Inclinations and their Love and Hate alters and changes, according to time,
place, business, and communication, as some Men have declared, that they did
not fear being overcome with Drink, Women, or the like Evils, becaue at that
time they found no Inclinations to such things, nevertheless, Time,
Opportunity, Communications, and other Circumstances concurring, many of them
have been overcome by those Vices they so little stood in fear of, though also
Astrologick Configurations, and Influences have a share in altering and
changing Men's Inclinations, and more especially when other causes concur: For
this cause the most prudent in all Ages have advised all Men to avoid evil
occasions, and the Apostle Paul says, That Evil Communication corrupts good
Manners, the truth of which no Man will or can deny. Now if Employments,
Communications, Labors, Words, and all kind of outward business, have so great
power of changing and altering Dispositions and Inclinations, increasing them,
and the contrary, how can we imagine but Meats and Drinks received into the
Body, will have the same or greater Power and Operation, as those that feed
much on unclean Elesh, as on Swine, and that have their Conversation amongst
Animals, are not many of them much like those Creatures, of sottish, dull,
heavy, sordid Dispositions, yet subtle and cunning in a Bestial way? And on the
contrary, those that drink Wine, and feed on the highest Food, have not they
Spirits accordingly? Also those whose Conversation is amongst Men, as Citizens
and Merchants; have they not higher and greater Spirits, being more tractable
and humane, fair and ingenious in all their Dealings, and Conversations? For
all things have sympatheticil Operation, whether it be Employments, Meats,
Drinks or Communications, every thing does secretly awaken its like property,
which do often captivate the Spirit of a Man before he is sensible of it, being
ignorant of the Nature and sympathetical Operation all things have with his own
Nature. It Is true, most Men believe that evil Company corrupts Manner, and will
acknowledge that some sorts of Employments do by degrees dispose People to
Inhumanity, Violence and Cruelty; but if you tell them there is the same
possibility and greater in Meats, to vary not only Men's Bodies, but also their
Inclinations and Minds, they shall laugh at it as a ridiculous Dream, though in
Truth it is a most certain Truth, and daily Experience (if we would but ^ear
her Voice) bears Witness unto it. Why did Moses prohibit his People the eating
of Swines Flesh, seeing Swine are not serviceable unto Mankind any other way,
but by being killed and eaten; and besides, a Swine is a Creature, that being
well ordered, becomes as wholesome Nourishment, as some other Animals that are
counted clean, though there is somewhat to be said against the grossness of
that sort of Flesh; but the chief thing the Spirit of God in that great Prophet
regarded, was, no doubt, the Spirit of that Creature whose original and
predominant quality stands in the dark wrath of Nature, which is manisested by
their shapes, cri^s, and tones, which Spirit the humane Nature ought not to
join it self unto, lest it partakes of its Nature, Every thing having power to
join its self with its likeness, and to strengthen its own property, Does not
Wine and strong Drink precipitate Men into Fury and Madness by Simile? That is,
the Spirits in Wine do incorporate themselves with the natural Spirits, and
violently awaken them, making them burn too fierce, which sets Nature into a
Rage, awakening the Central Spirits till all parts of the Body burn like Fire,
till the Oil be consumed, and Nature begins to languish, becoming dull, heavy,
and stupid. The very same Operation have all Food in the Body, and on the
Spirits and Senses, but more slowly and hidden; for great meals of Food makes
dull when first eaten, for all the time Nature is a digesting, and making
separation, (which is four, five, or six hours a doing) and then Nature begins
to be brisk and lightsome; for what the Stomach and Natural Heat do perform, as
to Fermentation and Separation with the Food, is done to Natures Hand by Art in
all sorts of strong Drinks; therefore all such fermented strong Drinks have a
present Operation, but let Drink be ever so strong, if it have not passed
through Fermentation and Separation, it will lie heavy on the Stomach, and send
dark and dulling fumes into the Head, if a quantity be drunk: Therefore great
Meals of strong rich Food, do endanger the Health more than proportionable
drinking of strong Drinks, especially in hot Countries, and in Summer time in
colder Climates. That Dispositions and Inclinations are changed and altered by
Food, may further appear in all or most unclean Creatures, are they not made
much fiercer, if raw flesh and blood be given them, their wrathful unclean
Nature being thereby enraged and made stronger? And is not the very flesh of
those Creatures Men feed on, altered either for the better or worse, according
to the nature of their Food; what a vast difference shall there be as to the
goodness or badness, wholesomness, or unwholesomeness of the Milk of the very
same Cow, when she feeds upon fresh delicate Grass, Herbs, and Flowers, and
when she is kept on course Brewers Grains, or the like? The Elements of Man's
Body and natural Spirits are compounded of the same matter as other Creatures,
are, and in respects, subject to the same or like alterations; only the Holy
Light and Grace of God, which enlighteneth every Man that comes into the
World, if obeyed, is sufficient to subdue most natural Inclinations, and to
keep them within the bounds of Temperance; indeed this Gift is the only power
by which a Man may overcome the Evil and deny himself.

2. Flesh is not so clean a Food as Herbs, Seeds and Fruits, for all forts of
Animals are subject to various Passions, but on the contrary, all or most
Vegetables have a more simple and innocent Original, therefore their Operation
on the Body and Senses is as simple, having no power to awaken any property in
the Body, but what is like themselves. Furthermore we see that no Creatures
that are clean will eat Flesh, except they be taught it, and brought to it by
degrees; on the other side, all such Animals as naturally will eat Flesh, are
by all means counted unclean, as Dogs, Cats, Bears, Wolves, Foxes, and many
others, both in the Sea and Land, and most Men will avoid the eating of such
Creatures, as being unclean in the Root of their Natures. Therefore they desire
such Food as has affinity with them, for every Creature rejoices in its
likeness. The Prophet Moses well understood this, when he commanded that
unclean Creatures and Blood should not be eaten, because the Blood (as is
mentioned before) does not only contain the Spirits, but the very Humor,
Dispositions and Inclinations of the Creature, therefore it was to be killed
and dressed after such a manner, by which the Blood and superfluous matter was
extinguished, and if Flesh should now be prepared after their way, we should
not account it to have half the Virtue as it has in our way of preparation.
Indeed the way of killing and preparing of Flesh and Fish, that the Lawgiver
prescribed to his People, was to cleanse the Flesh from all Blood in which
stand the Spirits, and all the Dispositions and Inclinations of the Creature
lie hid. By this means the Uniting of the Bestial Nature with the Human, was in
a great measure prevented; and for no other reason all unclean Beasts, Fowls
and Fishes were so severely forbidden. All Created things have but one only
Ground and Original. Every particular Creature contains the true Nature and
Properties of the whole, only the qualities are in several degrees, one having
one quality strong, and another the Center, For in every Creature one of the
forms or properties do carry the upward Dominion, and other qualities lie as it
were hid, but some times do manifest themselves, but that property which is
weakest may be awakened and made strong by its Simile, as often comes to pass.

From this very ground proceeds all Sympathy and Antipathy, Concord and Discord
in this World. For all those whose predominate qualities stand nearest, and
have affinity to each other, such are friendly one to another, but those whose
predominate Properties have Antipathy each to other, such slight one another,
and if the Grace and Holy Light of God do not restrain them, they are very apt
to speak Evil and Backbite one another. The same is to be understood in the
Divine Principle of God's Love, those that through the Blessing and Favor of
the Lord have, obtained the Holy Gifts of the Spirit, be it more or less, all
such People have affinity and bear good will each to other; except the false
Prophet's Opinion get in amongst them, which is a Ravening Wolf. Every thing
rejoices in its likeness, and the contrary in its death, therefore it is
highly convenient, for every man to consider the Variety and the Possibility of
its own Nature, and that in himself is contained the true Nature of every thing
in the visible and invisible World, and that he bears a Simile with all things,
and is both capable and liable to be drawn either to Vice or Virtue by every
thing he joins himself to, whether Meats, Drinks, Communications, or whatever
else a Man suffers his Will or Desires to run out after, or enter into, the
same thing has power to awaken its likeness, and for this cause all the Wise
Men and Prophets have advised to Cleanness and Sobriety, and to the reading of
Good Men's Books, which do stir up the good Faculties in the Soul, for all Books
do bear the Image and Spirits of him that wrote them, and so by Simile do
awaken the like Spirit and Desire; and so on the contrary, if young or old give
themselves to the reading of Plays or Books of Romances, they will powerfully
awaken by Simile the vain wanton Nature, which before lay as it were hid:
Therefore it was said in the Revelations, Come out from amongst them, and be ye
separated, lest you partake of their Evils.

3. The Reason why most People love and so much desire Flesh more than either
Herbs, Fruits or Grains, is not because it does afford either better
Nourishment, or is pleasanter to the Palate or Stomach, but it chiefly is
because Man is departed in his Mind and desires from the innocent ways of God
and Nature, and through his Free Will has awakened the dark wrathful powers in
himself, which have more Affinity with the Beastial Nature, than with Herbs or
Fruits: For the Beasts are endued with the very same Passions in all respects
as Men; if it had not been so, the Commandment had not been so strict against
eating of Flesh; for the Radix of Beasts and Men have a greater Affinity: And
the more ignorant and sottish People are, the more they desire to eat Flesh,
and the more Flesh they eat, the more Sottish, Ignorant, and Brutish they
become. Also, the more the dark poisonous Wrath of God and Nature is stir^ed
up, and the more it does predominate in Man, the more does Man desire Food that
has a proportionable Nature. From this very ground it is that some sorts of
Creatures esteemed Unclean (whose predominant quality stands in the Wrath of
Nature) do so much desire unclean Food, because it has unity with their
Natures; the very same is to be understood of those Creatures which we call
clean, they do as much on the contrary desire clean Food, viz. Fruits and Herb,
because such things have the nearest Affinity with their Natures; and if Men
had not departed from the Innocent ways of God and Nature, and suffer their
Wills to enter into the Wrath and Beastial Nature, they would not so much
desire Flesh; for Flesh cannot be eaten without violence done to Nature, for
the Lives of all Beasts are as sweet to them, and they as much desire to
continue them, as Men do, and as unwillingly part with them. And the Groanings
of these Creatures that suffer Oppression and Pain, do awaken the Wrath in them
that do it, which is a certain Retaliation or Reward; for all kind of Cruelty
does stir up and awaken the Wrath of God in Nature, and so on the contrary, all
Love and Concord does powerfully beget its likeness.

Does not every evil word, which does proceed and is formed from the Principle
of Wrath and P^ssio^, carry the power of its Principle with it, and awaken its
Simile in those to whom such words are directed? On the contrary, do not soft
and pleasant words pacify Wrath by awakening their Simile? Every Principle and
Property in Nature must have its own Food, or else it loses its Power and
Strength. Men's coveting to eat so much Flesh, is too plain a sign, that they
are departed from that Innocent and Simple Life for which they were made, and
entered into the contrary; for if the Wrath of God in Nature were not awakened
beyond its proper degree, and did not predominate over the Simple Innocent
Life, then People would no more desire Flesh than our Holy Ancestors in the
first Ages of the World. It is a token we are in Egypt, when we hanker so much
after the Flesh pots. As long as Men were partakers of, and followers of the
true knowledge of God's Works, and lived in the simple path of Nature, which
led to Health and long Life, Herbs and Fruits were in as great esteem as Flesh
is now: It was a shame in former Ages; for a Man to be seen to buy Flesh, or to
have carried it openly in the Streets of Cities, but now the best Citizens
count it the contrary, and make nothing to go openly to the Flesh-Markets in
their Plush-Coats, and load a Porter two or three time a Week, with the Spoils
of their Slaughtered Fellow Creatures; and if a Man comes to their Houses after
Dinner, there he may behold a very unpleasant sight, viz. Greasy-Platters,
Bloody-Bones, and pieces of fat flesh lie up and down the Kitchen, thereby
rendered next door to a Slaughterhouse. And this Trade is drove every day in
the Week, but more ^specially on the day they call their Sabbath, tho'in truth
they do not make it so, but rather a day of Feasting, a day wherein they bury
the dead Bodies of Slaughtered Beasts, and a day on which our English
Belly-Slaves and Gluttons, make their Servants do more work than any other day
of the Week, as to dressing of Food. And day likewise whereon most People
Cloth themselves in all their Bravery, and the Women go to Church to take
notice who has the finest Clothes and the newest fashions, etc. but why do I
blame the Women, the Men have been the occasion of all this and much more.

If those of each Sex did hearken to the Voice of God and Nature, they would
forsake such sinful Vanities, and not thus seek Death in the Error of their
Lives; I have drawn the Curtain, and given them a brief view of Natures School,
wherein the Sons of Wisdom learn to obey her Dictates, and by their prudent
Conduct and Temperance, avoid those many torturing Diseases of Body, and
distracting perturbations of Mind, to which the rest of the World necessarily
enslave themselves (...) their perverse folly. What I have delivered, is the
very Doctrine of Nature, approved by Religion, justified by Reason, and
confirmed by Experience: Those that wilfully slight so many Monitors, will
scarce deserve Pity in their Misery.

CHAP. III.
I. Of Cleanness in Food.
WHat is more profitable for all Lovers of Health and Wisdom, than Food that is
Radically Clean? And as Bread has deservedly the first place, together with
Herbs, and various sorts of excellent Fruits; so the next is Milk, which of it
self is a brave, mild, and most friendly Food to Nature, very fit and
profitable for all Ages and Complexions; and if it do not agree with some
People, it is because their Stomachs are made sharp and sowred by superfluity
of dainty Food, and the continual use of strong Drink. Also Milk being altered,
it makes many sorts of wholesome healthy Food. Next to these, are various sorts
of Flesh, which being killed in their proper Times and Seasons, and when they
are free from their Uncleanness, Surfeits, and other Inconveniences, which
most Beasts are subject to; and if care be taken also that they be well and
moderately seasoned with Salt, and boiled in plenty of River of Spring Water
(which is the best of all Waters, except Rainwater) they become wholesome
Nourish^^nt. For, River-water has the advantage of running through various
sorts of Earth, by which it sucks into it self a fat, oily, and saline Quality,
which the Surface of the Earth does plentifully afford; which also is the cause
of all Vegitation, and the lovely Green Color, which all Vegetables are
clothed with, does arise from this Saline Quality. For these Reasons,
River-water will Brew, Boil, and Wash, and it is more profitable in all Uses in
Houswifery, than Spring or Pump-water, and far wholesomer for Men and Beasts to
drink. Also your Vessel in which your Food is boiled, ought to be uncovered all
the time it boils; for if the Air have not its free egress and regress, the
pure Spirits in the Food become as it were suffocated, and then the Food so
prepared becomes dull and heavy; for the Air is the Essential Life of the
Spirit; and all Food that has not plenty of Water, and the free Influences of
the Air, in its Preparation, does certainly lose its natural Color, with the
pure Smell and Taste: For if those three Qualities be not preserved in all
Preparations of Food, then the genuine Virtue and lively Tinctutes are in part
lost. The same is to be observed in all Physical Operations. And if the
abovementioned Order be not observed, then the Food is not so pleasant to the
Palate, nor so easy of Concoction; it lies heavy in the Stomach, dulling and
stupifying the Senses; it generates a gross Nourishment, and bad Blood, whence
does proceed many Diseases: Whereas if the abovementioned Rules be observed,
and your Fire quick, that your Food do not stand still, or cease from boiling,
till it be sufficiently done, the Effects are contrary. It is also much better
the Food should be a little under-prepared, than too much: For when the gross
phlegmatic Body of any Food is by Preparation digested, then presently the
lively spirituous Quality is set at liberty, whence does proceed a most
pleasant Smell and Taste; which pleasant Quality, before the Preparation, lay
hid or captivated in the Body of Phlegm; but so soon as this Phlegmatic Body
is in part d^troye^, the Spirit becomes Volatile; and then, if the Preparation
be continued, those pure Spirits do either become suffocated, or evaporate; and
then the sweet Balsamic Body turns as it were sour. For these Reasons, all
sorts of Food, either over-prepared, or twice prepared, are of a strong fulsome
taste and smell; as all Meats heat again, and also Pottages, and all such
things, do obstruct Nature, and generate many Diseases. But if the
forementioned Rules be observed, the Food so prepared is not only more pleasant
to the Palate, but far lighter of Digestion, and breeds better Blood. For that
Universal Distemper (the Scurvy) which reigns so much in England, is chiefly
caused by Food ill prepared, and the eating of too much Flesh, and Fat things,
especially in the improper Seasons of the Year, viz. from July to the last of
November. In this Season the Sun, which is the true Life and Power of all
things, declines; and all sorts of Herbage* which is the Food of all Beasts
that are generally eaten, does the same: The Grass all this Season is fraught
with a gross Phlegmatic Matter; besides, it is a fainty hot time; the Air,
which is the Cherishing Life of all things, is more gross, and full of
Humidity, than all other times of the Year; the Spirits of all sorts of
Creatures are also weak, and on any Accidents are quickly wounded, or
evaporated, more especially those Beasts that come from remote Parts to great
Cities. Besides, it is then the principal time of their Generating, which
renders them unclean. Are not the People tenfold as sickly in this Season, and
double the number die, than they do at other times? Also you may observe, That
the Rots amongst Sheep, and Murrains that attend other Beasts, are all or most
of them in this Season: Therefore all sorts of People ought to be more careful
of their Health, both in Exercises, Meats, and Drink, that they do not exceed
either in quantity, nor eat things that are improper in quality. This is the
time that all Shepherds, and also those that are Drivers of Horses, and indeed
all that have the Government of Cattle, ought to have and use double the
Prudence in the Management of them, than at other Seasons of the Year, as I
have more largely discoursed in a small Treatise, of the ^^^servation of Sheep
from the Rot, and Horses from Surfeits.

There are three Marks by which every one may know whether the Flesh be good.
The first is by its pure White and brisk Red Color, when Raw. The second is by
its continuing its firmness, being plump or swelled when boiled, having a brisk
and lively Taste, and that after eating it feels easy and pleasant in the
Stomach. The third is, by its taking Salt well; for if your Flesh be free from
Heat and Surfeits, and not over-fed, which charge^ the body with gross Phlegm;
as also, if it be not kept longer after it is killed (as indeed it ought not)
than it be thought to be cold, before it is salted; all such Flesh will take
Salt greedily, and it will not only keep longer from Putrefaction, but it will
eat much sweeter, and breed better Nourishment. For, if any sort of Cattle be
over-fed, surfeited, or any other Inconveniency attends them, and they be
killed before they have recovered themselves of those Injuries; or if it le in
August, September, or October, this Flesh will not take Salt so well as the
former, neither will the Saltpreserve it half so long from Corruption. Also as
it is beforementioned, if Flesh (...) kept too long after it be killed, such
Flesh will not receive Salt into it, as other will, which is salted as soon as
it is cold: For by keeping it does certainly lose its pure Spirituous Quality,
so that the Body becomes heavy, gross, and dull. Does not the Life and Spirits
of most sorts of Food waste and evapor^te by keeping, if there be not a proper
way of Preservation used? If Flesh, by any Inconveniences, have lost its pure
lively Spirits and Virtue, Salt then has no power to preserve such Flesh from
Putrefaction: For Salt cannot preserve the Body from Corruption, but by virtue
of the pure subtle Spirits, which are a pleasant Habitation for the Salt to
incorporate it self with: For Salt will not preserve Flesh from Putrefaction,
any longer than the Virtue and Power of the Spirit does continue, as it does
appear by all salted Flesh and Fish: For through length of time the Spirits
become either suffocated, or evaporated, and then it presently falls into
Purtifaction: And yet this same Flesh does still contine Salt; for Salt does
not destroy and p^^ge the Flesh from its Corruption, but incorporates it self
with the Essential Spirits, and those two do as it were tie or hold the corrupt
part Captive, till the Spirit and Life of the Flesh be spent or wasted, and
then the Flesh falls into Putrefaction, which cannot be recovered, either by
salting, or any other Art, to its first state: But if the Salt had purged or
destroyed the Humidity and gross part, then there would have been no Room nor
Matter for Putrefaction, and then it would have continued firm and found, as
many other things do, which are freed from that gross humid Matter from which
Putrefaction does proceed. Therefore Flesh is naturally the most unclean of all
Food, is being of a gross Phlegmatic Nature; and if Care be (...) taken, Order
and Temperance observed in the Eater, it generates ab^ndance of crude and
noxious Humors.

2. Cleanness in Houses, especially in Beds, is a great Preserver of Health.
Now Beds for the most part stand in Corners of Chambers, and being ponderous
close Substances, the refreshing Influences of the Air have no power to
penetrate or destroy the gross Humidity that all such Places contract, where
the Air has not its free egress and regress. In these shady dull Places Beds
are continued for many Years, and hardly see the Sun or Elements. Besides, Beds
suck in and receive all sorts of pernicious Exc^ements that are breathed forth
by the Sweating of various sorts of People, which have Leprous and Languishing
Diseases, which lie and die on them: The Beds, I say, receive all these several
Vapors and Spirits, and the same Beds are often continued for several
Generations, without changing the Feathers, until the Ticks be rotten. Besides,
we have many Feathers that are Imported from several Countries, which are the
Drivings of old Beds, the Uncleanness whereof is not considered. As to the
Nature of Feathers, they are of a strong, hot, fulsom Quality: For, Fowls, of
all Creatures, are for the most part the hottest; and their Feathers contain
the fame Nature: Therefore the constant lying on soft Feather-beds, does not
only over-heat the Back and Reins, weakening the Joints and Nerves; but they
have power also not only to receive but retain all evil Vapors and Excrements
that proceed from, and are breathed forth by various Diseased People. Hence it
comes to pass, that sundry Distempers are transferred from one to another, by
lying upon or in such Beds, which Distempers do secretly steal on a Man by
Degrees, so that he cannot imagine whence the disorder proceeds, or what the
Cause thereof should be. But I would not have the Reader mistake me; all People
are not subject to get Diseases this way; There are some whose Constitutions
are strong, and their Natural Heat and Spirits are vigorous and lively, by the
Power and Virtue whereof they withstand and repel all such evil Vapors and
Scents as do proceed from such Beds when a Man is hot and sweats in them, that
they have no power to seize the Spirit: But, on the contrary, when such People
shall lie on such Beds, whose Natural Heat is weak, their Spirits few, and
whose Central Heat is not able to withstand or repel those Vapors and Scents
which such Beds send forth when a Man is hot in them, this last sort of People
are subject to receive Injuries, and contract Diseases: For those evil Vapors
do powerfully penetrate the whole Body; and if they are not withstood by the
Central Heat and Power of the Spirits, then these evil Vapors do seize the
Spirits, and incorporate themselves with their Likenesses: For every particular
thing does sensibly and powerfully seek out its Likeness, and wheresoever it
find, its Simile, it has power to incorporate, and become essential. These are
the chief Reasons why one Man gets Diseases by lying with Diseased Persons, and
in unclean Beds, and others not. It is a general Custom, when Men go abroad or
travel, to desire clean Sheets, imagining them to be a sufficient Bulwark to
defend them from the pernicious Fumes and Vapors of old stale Beds; but it is
too short. For, it is certain, that most or all Beds do perfectly stink, not
only those in Inns and Houses of Entertainment, but others: Not but that every
ones Bed does smell indifferent well to himself; but when he lies in a strange
Bed, let a Man but put his Nose into the Bed when he is thoroughly hot, and
hardly any Common Vault is like it.

Now this sort of Uncleanness, which does proceed from old Beds, is not only
the greatest, but also the most injurious to the Health and Preservation of
Mankind, and the least Care is taken to prevent it: Every one that can, will
have plentiful Changes both of Linne^ and Woollen Garments; for if they have
not, Experience does shaw, that the Excrements and Breathings of the Body will
generate Vermin. Also do not most People take Care that their Furnitures are
daily br^shed and rubbed, and their very Floors washed, as though they were to
eat their Food on them* But all this while they lie on Beds that have not been
changed, or hardly aired, in several Years. Let any indifferent Person judge,
which is most pleasu^able and healthful, to have a clean Floor to tread on,
which c^sts many hard days Labor to keep so, and is dirtied in a Moments time;
or to have a clean sweet Bed to lie on. There is no Comparison to be made, the
difference is so great; the one being essential either to Health or Sickness,
the other an indifferent thing. If there was but the tenth part of the Care
taken to keep Beds clean and sweet, as there is of Clothing and Furniture,
then there would be no matter for the getting of Diseases, nor for the
Generation of Bugs. I would have all Housewifes, and others, consider the
Reasons of these things. Are not Lice, that troublesome Vermin, bred from the
breathings of the Body, for want of often Change both of Linen and Woolen? and
will not Fleas breed from the very Dust of Chambers where People lie? Also any
Woollen that has been used about Beds, although the cold Winter has destroyed
them, yet if these Clothes lie in any close place, where the Air has not its
free egress and regress, these very Garments will generate Fleas the Summer
following: But if these Clothes had been used about Men and Women, they would
never have bred Fleas: for there is no matter of Element in Wool or Cloth for
the Generation of such Creatures; but Wool, Cloth, Furs, and Hair, are chiefly
the Element of Moths, and sometimes of small Worms; that is, if such things are
kept in places where the refreshing Influences of the Air have not their free
egress: For all such places do contract great store of Moisture, which, when
hot Weather comes, causes Putrefaction, whence all such Vermin do proceed. But
if those things be in daily use, and exposed to the open Element, they never
breed any Vermin: So that the Generation of those things are generally caused
by Acciden^s; not but that there is matter in the Radixes of such things for
the Generation of such Vermin.

3. From the pernicous Smells and putrified Vapors that do proceed from old
Beds, are generated the Vermin called Bugs, (of which, neither the Ancients,
nor the Modern Writers of this Age, have taken any Notice) according to the
Degrees of Uncleanness, Nature of the Excrements, and the Closeness of places
where Beds stand: for some Peoples Excrements are not so unclean as others:
Also in all close places, especially in Cities and great Towns, the Spirits and
thin Vapors of the Air are suffocated, which makes the same Air Sulphurous and
Humid, whence does pro^^ed Putrefaction. Therefore it is not to be thought a
general Rule, That all old Beds should breed Bugs, as some (who are ignorant of
the Operations of Nature) will be apt to say, If one Bed do breed them, why not
all? No, it is according to the Nature of the Uncleanness, and other Accidents
that do happen; for where (as is said before) the thin pure Air, with the
refreshing Influences of the Sun and Elements, have their free egress and
regress, all such Matter is destroyed whence such Vermin is produced. The
Original of these Creatures called Bugs is from Putrefaction, occasioned by
stinking Scents and Vapors which do proceed from the Bodies and Nature of Men
and Women, and the mixing or incorporating of these Vapors with moist and
sulphurous Airs: For where there is no Heat nor Humidity, there can begin no
Putrefaction. Therefore all that have attributed the Generation of this Vermin
to Wood, as Bedsteads, and the like, are grossly mistaken in the Productions of
Nature; for there is no Matter in Wood that can generate such a Vermin, it
being productive only, or chiefly of two Creatures in England, viz. of
Wood-Lice and a small Worm. These Wood-Lice, are never generated but in places
where the Sun and Air have not their free Influences, so that there is store of
Humidity contracted; and when the Sun comes to such Degrees of the Zodiac,
this Creature is generated, which is of as different a Nature from Bugs, as
sweet Wood is from a stinking Bed. Also Wood does breed a certain small Worm,
but never till, the Salts Nature and Power is decayed through length of time;
then the Air enters it, which does presently cause it to contract a h^mid
Quality, from whence proceeds Putrefaction, whereof, when the Sun is Powerful,
this Worm is bred, But so long as Wood continues sound, and is kept dry, the
Air having its free Influences on it, I affirm, That no sort of Wood ever
breeds any kind of Vermin.

4. There are many also that attribute the Generation of this Creature to Hogs
Hair, which being mixed with Lime, and Houses Plaistered with it, does occasion
(say they) the Generation of Bugs. Now it is most certain, that there is no
possibility in Nature for this Production; for no kind of Hair ever breeds any
living Creature, except it be put into Water or Mud when the Sun is powerful,
and then this Creature, thus generated, retains its first Species, viz. a Hair,
with a live Head, which was its Element from whence it proceeded; but if you
take it out of the Water, it presently dies: so also it does when the Sun
declines in heat, as most ^orts of Vermin that are bred through Heat and
Moisture do. But Hair being mixed with Lime, all Matter of Generation is
thereby totally destroyed: For Lime does chiefly contain a harsh, fiery, keen,
sharp, coroding quality; it is so sharp, that it does destroy all Life, and is
as contrary to it, as Light is to Darkness; the predominant quality in it is
the Salts Nature, from which no living Creature can be produced. Besides, if
there were never so much Matter in Hair for the Generation of such Vermin, Lime
would destroy it; for in Lime there is only a Sal-nitral fiery Virtue.

5. If the Reasons beforementioned be not sufficient to convince the Ignorant
of their erroneous Opinions in this particular, then I hope the following one
will, which is more familiar to every one. It has never been krown, that this
troublesome Vermin was ever seen in Warehouses, Kitchins, Parlors, Dining
rooms, or any places were Beds have never been, except they have by accident
been brought into such Rooms or Warehouses, by Furniture of Chambers that have
been troubled with them, though all such places have the same Funiture as
Chambers, except Beds.

6. From the same Substance or Matter whence Bugs are bred, is also occasioned
the Generation of many nasty Diseases in the Blood; so that the destruction of
the Matter that breeds them, is of greater consequence than most People are
sensible of; And if these following Rules be observed, I dare affirm, That the
Generation of Bugs will cease, and also many other Inconveniences and
Distempers, that are got by this sort of Uncleanness, will be avoided.

First, You are to destroy all Press-Bedsteads which stand in corners of Rooms,
being made up with Boards so close, that the Air cannot penctrate or dry up and
consume the moist sulphurous Vapors that are contracted. These sorts of Beds
that stand so, are apt to have them more than others. Also you are to set your
other sorts of Beds as near as you can in the most Airy places of your Rooms,
exposing them to the Air the most part of the day, with your Chamber-Windows
open, that the Air may freely pass, which is the most excellent Element, that
does sweeten all things, and prevents Putrefaction. In the Night also you ought
not to have your Window-Curtains drawn, nor your Curtains that are about your
Beds; for it hinders the sweet refreshing Influences of the Air, so that the
Air of all close places becomes of a hot sulphurous Nature and Operation; the
thin pure Vapors, which do wonderfully refesh Nature, are as it were
suffocated: And this preventing the Influences of the Air, is in an especial
manner observable, when People are sick, or out of order; as though the sweet
pleasant Air had been the cause of their Disease; such Rooms being so very
close, with great fires in them, that if a healthy Person do but continue three
or four hours in them, the fulsom Steams and thick Vapors will much disorder
him, and take away the edge of his Appetite: And if so, what will the Operation
be on those Spirits who are weak and disordered with Distempers.

What is more pleasant and healthful than good Air? It chears and comforts the
Spirits, it opens the Passages of the Joints and Nerves; it purifies the Blood,
creates an Appetite, increasing Strength and Vigor: But, on the contrary, hot,
thick, sulphurous Airs do not only obstruct the passages of the Spirits, but
suffocate them, loading the Joints and Nerves with evil Juices, whereby the
Limbs and Members become full of pain, causing a general tenderness to possess
the whole Body, and destroying the Appetite, and the power of the Digestive
Faculty in the Stomach. Also, do not all Houses and Places grow musty, and
contract too great store of Moisture, if the Air be any way prevented, by
Window-shutters, or the like, that it cannot have its free egress and regress?
Therefore moderate Clothing, hard Beds, Houses that stand so as that the
pleasant B^iezes of Wind may air and refresh them, and also Houses that are
full of Windows, are to be preferred; for where the Air has not its free
Influences, the Spirit becomes dull and heav^, this being the true Life of the
Spirit in everything.

7. Now the certain Means and Way not only to prevent the Generation of this
Vermin, but also to preserve Health and Strength, are Straw, or rather
Chaff-Beds, with Ticks of Canvas, and Quilts made of Wool or Flocks, to lay on
them; which certainly is the most easy and pleasant Lodging that can be
invented: and a little Custom will make it appear friendly to Nature, and in
every respect far beyond the softest Feather-Beds, on which, when a Man lies
down, he sinks into them, as into an hole, with Banks rising on each side of
him; especially if two lie together, when first they go to Bed they lie close,
and after a little time, when they begin to be hot or sweat, they are generally
willing to lie a little further off, that they may cool themselves, but cannot
do it without great difficulty and trouble, by reason of the softness of the
Bed, and those Banks that rise on each side. Besides, such soft Fea^her-Beds do
over-heat the Reins and Back, making all the parts tender, and causing
sweatings and many other Inconveniences to attend the Body. Feather-Beds also
are nothing so easy as Quil^s, after a little time being accustomed to them;
they are also extreme fulsom, and by their heat they do powerfully dry up the
Radical Moisture, causing a general faintness to attend the whole Body. But, on
the contrary, hard, even Beds that lie smooth, are not only easy through
custom, as is mentioned before; but a Man may turn freely, both sleeping and
waking: They harden and strengthen the whole Body, especially the Back and
Reins, make the Nerves and Sinews strong, preventing the immoderate Evacuat^ons
by Sweating, and keeping the Body in a temperate Heat. Besides, such Beds may
be often changed, with but little Trouble, and less Cost, they send forth no
stinking fumes or steams, as Feather-Beds do; but are sweet and clean.
Certainly nothing is more healthy, nex^ to Temperance in Meat and Drink, than
clean hard Beds.

8. All sorts of Beds, especially Feather-Beds, ought to be changed, driven, or
washed, at the least three or four times in a Year; or else it is impossible to
keep them sweet and clean, and to prevent the Generation of Vermin, or the
other Inconveniences before mentioned. Would not every one condemn a Man, if he
should wear a Shirt a Year, and lie in Sheets seven Years? Which if any should
do, it would not either endanger his Heal^h, or bring half the Inconveniences
on his Body, as old stinking Feather-Beds do; which possibly stunk before ever
they were lain on, by reason of the fulsom Excrements that the Quills of the
Feathers co^^ain. Also Feathers do c^^tainly contain an unclean putrified
Matter, that has a near Affinity with the Nature of Bugs; and therefore
Feather-Beds are more apt to bre^d them, than Wool, or Flocks; though both will
do it, if the forementioned Rules be not observed. But if you are not willing,
or so lowly-minded, to have Straw or Chaff-Beds under your Quilts, then you may
have Flock- Beds, with Canvas-Tickings, which may be both aired and washed as
often as you please, with little Trouble and Charge. If any shall question the
Truth of what I have alleged concerning Beds, I desire they would please but
to try the Experiment, by filling a Bed with the freshess and cleanest Straw or
Chas^, which will smell very pleasant; and having so done, let them lie on it
half a year, in a corner of a Room, as Beds generally stand, and then smell to
it; and instead of sending forth a pleasant, Scent, as it did at first, it will
send sorth a strong, fulsom, musty Steam or Fume. And if this will do so, what
will Feathers do, that in the Root of Nature are unclean fulfom Excrements, of
a hot strong quality? Therefore they have the greater power not only to attract
and suck in to themselves the fulsom Excrements that are breathed forth of the
Body by Sweatings, and the like; but they have also power to retain such evil
Vapors: And when others come to lie on them, and are thoroughly hot, it awakens
those p^^^icious Steams, which often b^ing many Inconveniences on the Body.
Besides, it is very unpleasant to lie in such Beds; a Man must always be forced
to keep his Nose above-board. Indeed each Man's own Bed does not stink or smell
strong to himself, because he is accustomed to it; neither does a
Tallow-Chandler smell those horrible Scents and pernicious Fumes that old
Tallow sends forth when it is melted: But let any other Person, that is not
accustomed to it, be near such things, and it will be very offensive to him.
Even so it is in all other stinking Trades, and things of this Nature: so that
the greatest Slut in the World does hardly smell her own House or Bed stin^:
For in Man is contained the true Nature and Property of all things, both of
Good and Evil; therefore he is both liable and also apt to receive all
Impressio^s, and to be wrought on by all things he shall either communicate
with, or join himself to, whether it be Cleanness, or the contrary. Also by
Meats, Drinks, and communication, all things have power, by a Sympathetical
Operation, to work on Man, because he is like unto all, bearing a
proportionable Nature unto all things. If People did understand this, they
would prefer, Sobriety and Temperance, with Cleanness, far beyond what they do;
and then Men would not be subject to so many Diseases as now they are.

9. Heat and Moisture is the Root of all Putrefaction; and therefore Bugs are
bred in Summer; but they live all the Winter, though they are not then so
troublesome. They harbor in Bedsteads, Holes, and Hangings, Nitting and
Breeding as Lice do in Clothes: But all Men know, that Woollen and Linen are
not the Element of ^ice, but they are bred from the fulsom Scents and Exrements
that are breathed forth from the Body. The very same Radix have Bugs; and if
there be any difference, they are from a higher Putrefaction, and therefore
they are a more noisome stinking Creature.

10. The whole Preservation, of Men's Health and Strength does chiefly reside in
the Wisdom and Temperance of Women. Therefore the Ancient Wise Men in former
Ages, did direct and accustom their Women to a higher degree of Temperance than
the Men. Which Customs of Sobriety the Women of several Countries do maintain
to this day, as in Spain, great part of France, Italy, and many great Countries
under the Dominion of the Grand Seignior. Their Women do always drink Water,
their Food being for the most part of a mean and simple quality; and for this
reason neither they nor their Children are subject to several Diseases, which
our Women and Children are. Wine and Strong Drink should be sparingly drunk by
Women, till they are past Childbearing; because the frequent and common
drinking of strong Drinks, does generate various Distempers in the Female Sex,
such as are notfit^o be discoursed of in this place, which their Children often
bring with them into the World. If the Seed be good, yet if the Ground be bad,
it seldom brings forth good Fruit. Also Women are our Nurses for fifteen or
sixteen years; and they do not only suffer us to be Gluttons, by letting us eat
and drink often, of their ill-prepared Food, beyond the power of the Digestive
Faculty, and more than the Stomach can bear; but many of them will entice us to
Gluttony, and some will force their Children to eat even against their
Stomachs, till they cast it up again. Now if it be a difficult point for a Man
of Age and Experience to observe the necessary Rules of Temperance, how careful
then ought Mothers and Nurses to be in ordering their Children? A great part of
the Children that die, especially in Towns and Cities, is occasioned either by
the Intemperance of their Mothers, during the time they go with Child, or
afterward by their unnatural and badly prepared Food, and suffering them to
eat to excess; also by their keeping of them too warm, and too close from the
Air, and lapping of them up in several Double Clothes and Swathes, so tight,
that a Man may write on them, and then putting them into warm Beds, and covering
them up close. If a strong Man was so bound up, he could not endure it, without
great injury unto his Health. Besides, the Window-Curtains are drawn, and also
the Curtains about the Bed; by which means the Air becomes so hot, and
sulphurous, that it causes great Disorders to attend both the Mothers and the
Children. This ill Kind of Management does also cause such a Tenderness both in
the Mother and the Child, that on every small occasion they are liable and apt
to get Colds, and diverse other Distempers.

Also Women have the entire Management of all things that concern our Healths,
during the whole time of our Lives; they prepare and dress our Food, and order
all things in our Houses, both for Bed and Board. There is not one Man of a
hundred that understands or takes any notice whether his Food be well prepared
or not; and if his Bed stinks, he is used to it, and so counts it all well.
Men's Time and Study is chiefly taken up about getting a Livelihood, and
providing things necessary for themselves and Families; so that there is not
one among a thousand that understands any thing what belongs to the
Preservation of his Health: Whatever the Women do and say touching the
Preparation of Food, and other ordering of Families for Health, most Men
believe, not making the least scruple or question of the truth thereof. And
well they may: For the chiefest Doctors of our Times do bow before them, and
are altogether as subject to the Rules and Directions of Women, as other Men.
Where are your Doctors that teach Men Sobriety in their Lives, or the proper
and natural way of preparing Meats fit for the Stomach? Which of them advises
against the evil Custom of keeping their Chambers so over hot, when People are
sick, and in the time of Women's lying in Childbed? Why do they not advise them
not to have their Curtains so close drawn, both before their Windows an^ Beds,
insomuch that they are often times in a manner suffocated for want of the fresh
Air? For, I affirm, That all sorts of People that do keep their Beds, let the
occasion be what it will, have ten-fold more need of the refreshing Influences
of the Air, than others that are up: For, the Bed being much hotter than a
Man's Garments are when he is up, the thin, refreshing, moist Vap^urs, that do
penetrate the whole Body more powerfully when a Man is up, are thereby
hindered. This is one chief Reason why a Man cannot digest a Supper so well in
Bed, as if he sits up. All Men know, that the Bed destroys App^tice, If a Man
go to Bed a^ Eight a Clock, and lies till Eight in the Morning, he shall not be
hungry; but it he goes to Bed at the same time, and rises at Four in the
Morning, though he s^s still without Action, yet by Eight he shall have a good
Stomach to eat and drink; so great is the power of the Air: For when a Man is
up, his Body is cool, and the pure Spir^s and thin moist Vapors of the Air
have power to penetrate the Body; which Element the Body sucks in like a Sponge
through the Pores; and this do not only cool and refresh ^he Spirits and the
whole Body, but also powerfully strengthens the Action of the Stomach.

But I pity the young Children most, who are so tender, and of so delicate a
Nature, both in their Body and Spirits, that every Disorder does wound them to
the very Heart. Nothing is more grateful and refreshing to them, than the
pleasant Air: It comforts their Spirits, and cau^eth a free Circulation of the
Blood and Radical Moisture, begets Appetite, and makes them grow in Strength:
But, on the contrary, hot sulphurous Airs, with great Fires, and warm Clothing,
do not only hinder the Circulation of the Blood, but suffocate the Spirits, and
destroy the Appetite, causing an unnatural Heat to possess the whole Body;
whence does proceed various Disorders and Diseases, making them to cry, and be
very froward. Also close Bindings, and over-warm Clothings, and thick hot Airs,
do often in weak-spirited Children cause Convulsions, Vapors, and Fumes to fly
into the Head, sometimes occasioning Vomitting, which People call Windy
Diseases.

Again, the Food of most Children, of late years, is so enriched with West and
East India Ingredients, that is, with Sugar and Spices, that thereby their Food
becomes so hot in Operation, that it does not only breed too much Nourishment,
which generates Obstructions and Stoppages, but it heats the Body, drying up
and consuming the Radical Moisture, and infecting the Blood with a sharp
fretting Humor, which in some Complexions and Constitutions causes
languishing Diseases, contracting the Breast and Vessels of the Stomach, and
hindering the Passages of the Spirits, so that the Joints and Nerves become
weak and feeble; In others, with the help of bad Diet, and other Uncleanliness,
does cause Botches, Boils, and various sorts of Leprous Diseases. Also many
that have wherewithal, will frequently give their Children Sack, strong Drinks,
and fat Meats, as long as they will eat, which is abominable, and absolutely
contrary to the Nature of Children.

There are a hundred other Disorders and Intemperances that many Mothers and
ignorant Nurses affect their Children with, which I have no room in this place
to discourse of: Therefore I commend unto the Women Milk that is raw, only made
so hot as the Mothers or Nurses Milk is when the Child socks it; and sometimes
Milk and Flower boiled together, giving it the Ch^ld about the warmness of
Breast-milk; and indeed, neither Children nor others others ought to eat any
Food hotter. Also no Children ought to drink any kind of strong Drink: I could
commend Water, as the most wholesome; but it being contrary to our Custom,
ordinary Beer may do well, or rather small Ale. If Women did understand but the
hundredth part of the Evils and Diseases those indulging and intemperate Ways
do bring both to themselves and Children, they would quickly be of my mind;
which I never expect; They are too wise.

CHAP. III.
A short Discourse of the Pain in the TEETH, Showing from what Cause it does
chiefly proceed, and also how to pr^v^nt it.
THE terrible Pains and Diseases of the Teeth do chiefly proceed from two
Causes. The first is from certain filthy Phlegmy Matter which the Stomach and
Vessels do continually breathe and send forth, which does lodge or center in
the Mouth, especially b^tween the Teeth, and on the Gums, and some People
having fouler Stomachs than others, such do breathe forth very sour, stinky,
phlegmy Matter, which does not only increase the Pain, but causes the Teeth to
b^come loose and rotten: And for what of continual cleansing and washing, those
breathings and this phlegmy Matter turns to Purifaction, which does eat away
the Gums, as though Worms had eaten them: And this De^ect is generally
attributed to the Disease called the Scurvey: but it is a mistake: The Cause is
chiefly, as is mentioned before, from the Stomach, or for want of Cleansings.

2. This Distemper of the Teeth and Gums does also proceed from the various
sorts of Meats and Drinks, and more especially from the continual eating of
Flesh, and fat sweet things, compounded of various things of disagreeing
Natures, which do not only obstruct the Stomach, but fur and fo^l the Mouth,
part thereof remaining upon the Gums, and between the Teeth. For all such
things do quickly turn to Putrefaction, which does by degrees corrupt both the
Teeth and Gums. Besides, our Beds take up near half the time of our Lives,
which time the Body is not only without motion, butt he Bed and Coverings do
keep it much hotter than the Day-Garments, especially of those that draw the
Curtains of their Windows and Beds so close, that the pure Spirits and thin
refreshing Vapors of the Air, are hindered of having their free egress and
regress, which does dull and flatten the action of the Stomach; and this is the
chief Cause why suppers lie hard in the Stomach, and require more than double
the time for perfect Concoction, than the same Food does when a Man is up, and
in the open Air: For this Element, if it has its free Influences, is sucked
in, as by Spunges, through all the Pores of the Body, and does wonderfully
refresh, comfort, open, and cleanse all the parts, having power to assist and
help Concoction: But hot, dull, thick Airs do destroy the Action of the
Stomach, and as it were suffocate the pure Spirits, drying up and consuming the
Radical Moisture. Therefore the Night does foul the Mouth more than the Day,
furring it with a gross slimy Matter, especially those that have foul Stomachs,
are in Years, which ought to be well cleansed every morning.

3. Whatsoever are the Disorders in the Body, the Mouth does always partake of
them, besides the Evils that the variety of Food, and the improper mixtures of
Flesh and Fish, and many other things, which do foul and hurt both the Teeth
and Gums. When any Person is disordered with inward Diseases, does not the
Mouth quickly complain of the Evils thereof? This very few do consider in time.

4. It is to be noted, that most People do attribute the Diseases of the Teeth
to Colds, and Rheumes, and other outward Accidents. It is true, outward
Accidents will further thi^Disease, but then there must be Matter before hand,
otherwise outward Colds can have no power to cause this pain. The same is to be
understood in all Stoppages of the Breast, and other Obstructions, as Coughs,
and the like. For, if any part be obstructed, or there be Matter for Distemper,
then, on every small occasion of outward Colds, or the like Accidents, Nature
complains. If your Teeth and Gums be sound, and free from this Ma^ter, take
what Colds you will, and your Teeth will never complain, as daily Experience
does show. For all outward Colds, and other Accidents of the like Nature, have
no power to seize any part of the Body, except first there be some inward
Defect or I^fi^mity: Suppose the Teeth be defective, then the Disease falls on
that part; or if it be the Head, Eyes, Breast, Back, or any other Part or
Member of the Body, that is obstructed, the Evil is felt in that Part.
Therefore if the Mouth be kept clean by continual Washings, it will prevent all
Matter which may cause Putrefaction; and then Colds, and the like Accidents,
will have no power to seize this Part, or cause this terrible pain. Even so it
is in all other parts of the B^dy. If Temperance and Sobriety be observed in
Meats, Drinks, and Exercises, with other Circumstances belonging to Health,
then Stoppages, Coughs, Colds, and other Obstructions, would not be so frequent
on every small occasion: For Temperance has an inward Power and Operation, and
does as it were cut off Diseases in the very Bud, preventing the Generation of
Matter whence Distempers do proceed, increasing the Radical Moisture, and
making the Spirits lively, brisk and powerful, able to withstand all outward
Colds, and other Casualties of the like Nature.

5. There are many various things, of diverse Natures, prescribed by Physicians,
and others, as Washes to preserve the Teeth and Gums; but most of them, if not
all, to little or no purpose, as daily Experience teaches: For all high, sharp
Salts, and things of a sour or keen Nature, do rather cause the Teeth to
perish, than the contrary; as do all hot Spirits, be they what they will: Many
have destroyed their Teeth by the frequent use of such things, and it has
hardly ever been known that any such things have ever cured or prevented the
aching Pains of the Teeth, but Water only. Many Examples I could mention, if it
were convenient. Physicians, and other, do daily prescribe such things for the
Cure and Prevention of this Disease of the Teeth, which most of them do know by
Experience can do no good, but rather the contrary: But when People come to
them, they must give them something for their Money; for Interest and Ignorance
have more affinity with this sort of People, than Virtue and the true Knowledge
of the Nature of things. Most certain it is, that the Shepherd and Husbandman
do know far better how to prepare their Meat for their Cattle, and also how to
preserve them from Disorders, than many Physicians do their Food or Physic:
and a Man shall understand more by conversing with some of this sort of People,
than with the Learned: For the Shepherd and Husbandman understand something of
Nature; but most of the Learned are departed from the simple ways of God in
Nature, putting out their own Eyes, and then boasting what Wonders they can see
with other Men's: They have invented many words to hide the Truth for the
Unearned, that they may get the greater esteem. This has chiefly been done to
advance Pride and Interest; so that the Divine Eye is departed from many of
them, who never make any Inspection into the true Nature of things, being
contented to take other Men's words, let it be right or wrong, as long as they
have Authority and Law on their sides, wherefore should they trouble their weak
Heads?

6. The best and most sure way to prevent the Diseases and Pains in the Teeth
and Gums, is every Morning to wash your Mouth with a^ the least ten or twelve
Mouthfuls of pure Water, cold from the Spring or River, and so again after
Dinner and Supper, swallowing down a Mouthful of Water after each Washing: for
there is no sort of Liquor in the World to pure and clean as Water; and nothing
does cleanse and free the Teeth and Gums from that foul Matter which does
proceed from the Breathings and Purgings of the Stomach, and from the various
sorts of Food, so well as Water: The use of other Washes is to little or no
purpose; but whosoever do constantly wash their Mouths wi^h Water, as is before
mentioned, shall find an essential Remedy. All hard Rubbing and Picking of the
Teeth ought by any means to be avoided, for that is injurious to them. Also
whenever you find your Mouth foul, or subject to be slimy, as sometimes it
will more than an at others, according to the good or evil state of the
Stomach, though it be not after eating; at all such times you ought to wash
your Mouth. This Rule all Mothers and Nurses ought to observe, washing the
Mouths of their C^ildren two or three times a day; and also to cause their
Children to swallow down a little Water, which will be very refreshing to their
Stomachs: For Milk does Naturally foul and ^ur the Mouth and Teeth; and if they
be not kept clean by continual Washing, it causes the breeding of Childrens
Teeth to be the more painful to t^em.

7. To keep your Teeth white, one of the best things is a iece of a China Dish,
or a piece of a fine Dutch Earthen Dish, made into fine Power, and the Teeth
rubbed with it.

8. Few there be that understand or consider the excellent Virtues of Water, it
being an E^ement of a mild and cleansing Nature and Operation Friendly unto all
things, and of Universal Use: But because it is so common, and so easily
procured, I am afraid that many People will be like Naaman the Syrian, when the
Prophet Elisha advised him to wash seven times in the River of Jordan to cure
his Leprosy; it being the Ignorance and folly of most People, to admire those
things they do not know; and, on the other side, to despise and trample under
foot thos^ Things and Mysteries they do know; which the Learned in all Ages
have taken notice of: For, should some People know what Apothecaries and other
give them, they would depise the Physic, and have but little respect for their
Doctor.

All Housewives do know, that no sort of Liquor, be it what it will, will
cleanse and sweeten their Vessels, but only Water; all other Liquors leaving a
sour stinking Quality bekind them, which will quickly cause Putrefaction: But
Water in its own Nature is clean and pure, not only for all Uses in
Housewifery, and the Preservation of Health; but the Saints and Holy Men of God
have highly esteemed this Element, by using it in the Exterior Acts of Divine
Worship, as having a Simile with the Eternal Water of Life, that does puri^i^s
and cleanse the Soul from sin.

CHAP. IV.
Observations on the Frost, An. 1683.
THE present Wonderful Frost, which is the General Theme of Discourse, and
under the ^ad Effects whereof so many Thousands of Poor Creatures Shiver and
Pine, and ^anguish; began about the midst of December, 1683. at first by mean
and ordinary Degrees, but toward Christmas became very sharp; The Week of
January, the River of Thames was so frozen, that People began to Walk over; On
Monday January the 7th, on the Change of the Moon in Aquary, there were
Expectations, and some likelihood of a Thaw; but presently after it Froze more
violently, and on the 10th and 11th in the Morning, a Coach Plied between the
Temple and the Old Barge-House; yet toward Night the 11th (the Moon having
been in Opposition to Jupiter) it Thawed a little; and the 12th and 13th was
fine Gentle Weather, yet not much Thawing; the Wind continuing still at North
East: On the 13th it Froze again briskly, till the 17th, when a great Snow
fell; the 18th high, most sharp, and piercing Winds, and on 23d the Air was
more severely piercing than ever, and more Snow fell; and being the first day
of the Term, Coaches plied at the Temple-stairs, and carried the Lawyers to
Westminster on the Ice; and thence forwards the same continued, and whole
Streets of Sheds every where built on the Thames, Thousands Passing, Buying,
Selling, Drinking, and Revelling, (I wish I could not say on the Lord's Day
too) and most sorts of Trades-shops on the Ice, (and amongst the rest a
Printing House there Erected) Balls Baited, and Thousands of Spectators; all
which still continues at the Writing hereof, being January the 29th 168^^.

Nay, below the Bridge, Hundreds dal^y pass; The River Humber (as I am credibly
informed) where it is several Miles broad, is Frozen over, and vast Flakes of
Ice are seen floating in the Downs, of diverse Miles in length, and
proportionable breadth.

As for Celestial Causes of this Unusual Coldness, though undoubtedly they
were not wanting (for God generally Governs Inferiors by Superiors) yet I find
not that any of our Common Pretenders had the least Apprehension, or gave any
Hints thereof. Not that I wholly Explode Astrology; I b^lieve there is
something in it, and that it may not be unfit for a Wi^e and Modest. Man to
S^udy: But our Annual Prognosticators are generally Men of little Learning, and
less Philosophy, and (what is worse) many times very irregular in their Lives;
the God of Purity, who Communicates his Secrets to those that fear him,
Illuminates not Debauchees, Sordid Flatterers, and Time-servers, (whose whole
end is to make a Noise, and Cheat People of their Money) with the knowledge of
Supernal Mysteries; nor can it be expected, That those who neither know things
past, by History, nor take notice of things Present, by any steady Judicious
Observation, should yet fore^ee things to come.

Whether from any of the late Tripple Conjunctions of the two Superior Planets,
Saturn and Jupiter, or from some of the late unusual frequent Comets,
particularly the last in August, 1682. which in twenty days with a Rapid
motion, making its appearance in Leo, hurried through all the Signs Virgo and
Libra, and disappeared in Scorpio. A Sagacious Artist might not have given some
Items of this strange Weather, I will not determine: But if Comets be only
(according to Aristotle's Notion, which I question) hot and dry Exhalations
drawn up from the Earth, it would not be difficult to Judge that severe Colds
should ensue here below: For Extremes in Nature, if they are not Causes, are at
least Forerunners of their Contraries; Nor have there wanted grand
Configurations of the Superior Bodies; during the time of this violent Frost,
as a Trine of the Sun and Jupiter, an Opposition of Saturn and Mars. But
leaving the Disquisition of these to the Curious, having not room to enlarge
here, upon them; I hasten to satisfy the Common Reader with an Historical
Review of former Occurrences of this kind; which may check that Vulgar Cry of
Ignorance, That Never, O never was known the like.

Livy in his fifth Book tells us of a Winter so hard, That the River Tyber was
frozen over, a matter very strange in such a Climate as Italy. In the Year
1234. the Adriatic Sea was so frozen, that the Venetians went over the Ice
thereof with Carts. Zon^rus assures us that in the Reign of that Emperor
Constantine (who for a nasty Reason in his Christning, was called Copronimus)
about the Year 750. the Pontick Sea was so Congealed, that People for many
Miles traveled it on foot: And Horses and Carts laden, passed over the
Fretum, or narrow part of it; but withal he adds, that the Summer following was
so excessive hot and dry, that great Rivers and most Fountains were wholly
dried up, and People and Cattle perished for want of Water. In the Year 821.
the greatest Rivers of Europe, as the Rhine, the Danubius, the Elb, and the
Sein, were so incrusted with Ice, that for the space of above 30 days,
Carriages freely passed along on them, as on the Land.

But to look nearer home -- In the Year of our Lord 1365. and 49th year of K.
Edward the 3d, A Frost lasted from the midst of September to the Month of
April; but though so tedious, the Cold was nothing so intense or violent as
now. In the 15th Year of the Reign of K. Henry the Eighth, after great Rains
and Winds, there followed so sore a Frost, that many died for cold, and some
lost Fingers, some Toes, and many their Nails: (I follow the very words of Sir
R. Baker, fol. 297.) The same Author tells us. That in the Seventh Year of Q.
Elizabeth, on the 21. of December, began a Frost so extreme, that on
New-Years-Day Even, People passed over the Thames on foot, some played at
Football, some shot at Pricks, as if it had been firm ground; yet this great
Frost, the third of January at Night, began to Thaw; and by the fifth day,
there was no Ice to be seen, but great Inundations followed.

In the Year 1609. (which it is not impossible, but some living might remember,
being but 74 Years ago) a Frost began in December, which continued till April
following, with such violence, that the Thames was so frozen, that Carts laden
were frequently driven over it, most Fowls and Birds were destroyed. In the
Year 1637. was another Frost, which rendered the Thames passable; so in the Year
1664. immediately followed by the Great Sickness; and the like toward the
latter end of the Year, 1676.

Some of the Consequences of these Extreme Frosts, I have mentioned, more I
might, all are not convenient; those that consult Chronology, may ea^ily
satisfy themselves,; a Man may soon err in assigning Effects to such or such
particular Causes, or adapting Events to Signnificators; Modesty is the first
Lesson in Wisdoms School. Therefore as we have been studious in matter of Fact,
past; but sparing as to Sequels; so we shall retain the same becoming
tenderness as to Futures; wherein we shall steer our Course rather by the
Guidance of Nature in her usual Operations here below, than by curious
Researches into remoter Influential Causes above; though not neglecting them
neither, for the Universe is Entire, Harmonical, and Sympath^tical; and he that
does not competently understand the right Tone of the whole, and the true Key
of every part, will make but bad Music wherever he lays his Clumsy Fingers.

First then I say, This Extremity of Cold Presages many Calamities and Evils to
attend Mankind, and the rest of their Fellow Creatures; for as the Innocent
Inhabitants of the Air, or expanded Suburbs of Heaven, viz. Birds and Fowls,
are endangered by the Elements denying their usual Benefits and Provisions
(wherein another fourth part of the Creation, viz. Fishes, are somewhat
concerned) so degraded Man, taking advantage of this Cruel Weather, does for
Profit, or Pleasure, or Vanity, destroy many thousands of them: Now this great
Destruction of them, is but a Forerunner of Mortality amongst Creatures of
greater value, and even of Men themselves. Would you know the reason? I told
you but now, Universal Nature is Sympathetical.

2dly. This Immoderate Cold locks up the Pores of Men's Bodies, and drives the
Natural Heat more Central, which occasions great Appetite and Draught, whence
follows much and excessive Eating and Drinking of Gross, Fat, Succulent Foods,
and strong Drinks; in all that have wherewithal to procure them; which the
voracious desires do at present seem able to bear and digest, yet really Nature
is not able to do it, and so by degrees there are Seeds sown and Foundations
laid for Diseases. On the other hand, amongst the Poor, necessity of Feeding on
unfit and unusual Viands, for their support at present, or defect of due
Nourishment, must to them do as much mischief; For want is as great (though I
think not so common) an Enemy to Nature, as Superfluity; the way to prevent
these mischiefs, is, for the Rich to observe Sobriety and Temperance, and for
the Poor to use Discretion in their Diet, for a pint of Milk with a quarter of
a pint of Water, thickened with one Spoonful of Flower, and heated just to
Boiling, and then putting into it a few Crumbs of Bread, (all which will not
cost above a Penny) shall give any Person as Nourishing a Meal as the best
Surloyn of Beef or Capon. I mention not this to prevent Benevolences toward
the Poor, which all that are able are bound to afford, but only to Advise them
how to supply themselves when they meet not with other Accomodations, but find
Rich Men's Charity more frozen than the Thames.

3dly. This Excessive Frost condenses the Air, and renders it Sulphurous and
Unhealthy, especially in such Cities as London, where Sea-Coals are generally
used for Firing, and most People (especially Women) creep close to those fulsom
Fires, without using themselves to proper Exercises, whereby their Blood
stagnates, and becomes thick and foul, whence are Generated the Scurvey,
stoppages of the Breast, Coughs and Shortness of Breath; the ill effects
whereof will more manifest themselves next Spring and Summer.

4thly. This Disharmony and Inequality of the Elements, portends a dry hot
Summer to ensue, for all Extremes (as before observed) produce their
Contraries, which will not only increase Distempers, but I fear some Epidemical
Disease, and it is also a Forerunner of Dearth and Scarcity, and the latter, is
the more to be apprehended, because we have had several Plentiful and Fruit.
full Years, and very few of us (scarce any) have improved them to that end, for
which they were given us by the Lord, and his Handmaid Nature; but most that
abound in Plenty, have gratified their Lusts and Passions, and such as have not
had wherewith to commit the same Intemperances in Act, have done it in their
Wills and Desires; and shall not our God visit us for these and other crying
Abominations, daily exhaled from our polluted Streets and Dwellings? I will not
take upon me to aver a Plague or Scarcity shall be the next Year, Iehov^h the
All-Wise, is the Limiter of Times and Seasons for extraordinary Judgments: But
I may say, that probably, according to the Prospect of Natural Causes, such
Calamities seem not far off, and 'twill concern every Man living to prepare for
it.

Qui sapit Ille animum Fortunae preparat omni,
-- Praevisumque potest, Art*
Levare malum Iuvare Bonum.
A Wise Man sits his Mind for every Chance,
And whilst he does in Virtues Paths Advance,
Each promised Good increases by his Skill,
And kindly lessens every threatened Ill,
But to proceed. Great and no less Just are the Cries of the Poor, in such a
sharp and pinching Season as this; for few of them have the Opportnity, or at
least the Prudence and Foresight, to lay up any thing to support them in
Necessitous Times, How many thousands of very many Trades about this Populous
Cities, and elsewhere, cannot now possibly follow their Callings, or get any
thing whereby to sustain themselves and Perishing Families with Bread? And can
you, whom God has but entrusted with Plentiful Estates, gorge your selves with
overcharged Tables even to a Surfeit, and Riot with Excessive Bottles of Wine,
whilst your Brethren thus languish and die for want of Necessaries? Can you but
think that God at such a Juncture calls upon you for his Quit-Rent, out of
those vast Revenu^s which you hold merely by the Tenure of his free and
undeserved Gift?

Great and truly Royal has our Gracious Sovereigns Bounty and Charity showed it
self on this occasion, as well by bestowing a Considerable Sum Himself, as
Commanding the Officers of every Parish to importune the Charity of all able
Inhabitants.

Pursuant to this Great and Generous Example, Methinks all you that are Loyal
Subjects, and would be thought good Christians, should be forward to Contribute
to the Common Necessities; and what if you should resolve for one Day in a
Week, (at least during such a hard time) to restrain your selves from large
Eating and Set Meals, and wholly on that Day forbear Bibbing of Wine and Strong
Liquors (I dare promise you, it shall be never the worse for your Health, but
the better, as also for your Business) and Employ what you so Save, in
Charitable Uses to the Relief of the Poor? Such a thing has been done on a
worse occasion within our Memory, and therefore is not impracticable. By this
only means within Londons Bills of Mortality, might easily be raised Twenty
Thousand Pounds a Week for the Poor; and no Man a Farthing the worse, but even
in his Estate the better (and much more in his Health, which is more Valuable
than the greatest Estate in Christendom) for without dispute there are within
that Circuit more than an Hundred Thousand Families, whose Dinners each day
cost them (one with another) more than Three Shillings each, I mean
E^tra^agantly, in Flesh, Fowls or Fish, when a little Bread and Cheese, Milk or
the like, might as well (nay I am sure would better) for once at least in a
Week, supply Nature: Now One Hundred Thousand Three Shillings is Fifteen
Thousand Pound; and then it is not to be doubted (since in this Age generally
more is spent in Drink, than Victuals) but that there are above One Hundred
Thousand Persons that daily lavish away above Twelve Pence a day in Wine,
Brandy, Ale, or some strong Liquors, which they forbearing but for one day in a
week, and bestowing as aforesaid, thereby might be raised (...) Thousand Pounds
more, and so in the whole Twenty Thousand Pounds a week, which justly
distributed, would bravely supply Fourscore Thousand Families, at Five
Shillings a week a piece, or afford an Hundred and Threescore Thousand Poor
People Half a Crown a piece every week. And will you suffer such a number of
Souls to Perish, for want, rather than abridge your Wanton Palates, and
Insatia^e Paunches of unnecessary, nay pernicious Danties, one only day in a
week? Look up, thou So^tish Epicure, that Denyest it; and call thy self
Christian hence forward, if thou Dare.

CHAP. V.
Christmas-Contemplations: Or, some Considerations touching the due keeping of
that Solemn Festival. As likewise of several Irregularities therein too
frequently Practiced.
AT this time when most People supersede themselves from the common Drudgery of
Business; and yet too many are far worse employed than in the ordinary Duties
of their Callings; I thought I could scarce better spend a few (...) hours,
than in serious (...) on that Subject, and drawing up some (...) Remarks that
may (...) of such (...) them to Repentance and Amendment, who have already
(perhaps rather through Inadvertency, and Compliance with vain Custom, than any
wilful depravity) been guilty thereof.

In this Disquisition my thoughts have chiefly Centered on three Particulars.

1. The Grounds and Proper End of keeping this Festival.

2. The Abuses and Prophanations thereof.

3. Some Directions how better to observe it for the future.

Though I do not find any express Precept in the Evangelical or Apostol^^^l
Writings, for the Observation of this, or any other stated Festivals; yet since
in the Old Testament, the like were Instituted by God himself, and since great
Deliverances require expressions of more than ordinary Gratitude, and signal
Mercies deserve to be Celebrated with perpetual Commemorations, I am far from
that narrow morose humor of condemning simply, the setting apart this time to
the happy Remembrance of the most unspeakable Loving Kindness that God ever
did, or indeed could do the sinful World; but since it is required that all
things be done to Edification, and that he that keeps a day, should keep it
to the Lord, I would wish it might be kept in some Respect suitable to the
Dignity of the Occasion.

It is taken for granted by most professing the Christian Name, that at, or
about this Season of the Year, the ever Blessed Creator of all things, of his
Infinite Goodness and Clemency, in pursuance of that Gracious Promise, That the
Seed of the Woman should^break the Serpents Head, was Pleased to send his Well
Beloved Son, the Principle of Light and Love, into the World, to be manifested
in the Humane Nature; that thereby, and by his Excellent Doctrine and Perfect
Example, and especially his most Meritorious Passion, that he might put the
Sons and Daughters of Men into a Capacity of escaping that fierce Wrath and
Condemnation, which they had justly rendered themselves obnoxious unto.

Now if we would rightly Commemorate this mighty Mercy and glorious Work, (so
profound and abstruse, that the very Angels are said to be desirous to pry and
penetrate thereinto, as a matter of the greatest Wisdom and Wonder, how can it
be more fitly done, than by serious Reflections on the Woeful D^genera^y of Man,
whereby he that was made little lower than the Angels, had by Transgression
depressed himself far below the Beasts that perish? How better, than by
admiring Infinite Divine Love in sending of Christ, and his exceeding readiness
for the loss of Man, to undertake that Blessed Work; so as to descend from the
Regions of Glory, and Cloth himself in our vile Flesh, and suffer all kind of
Indignities? And particularly should not we be affected with the mean and lowly
manner of his Appearance, the Meekness, Temperance, Purity, and Patience of his
whole Life and Death; and heartily endeavor to imitate him therein. For,

Though he was the Maker, and consequently the Owner and Sovereign Lord of the
World, yet he came into it in the form of a Servant. Not according to the vain
Expectations of the Jews, or Fashions of Haughty Princes. His Blessed Mother
and Reputed Father were Persons but of mean Condition, as to outward Splendour;
nor could they, after a weary Journey, get room in the Inn. The Grandeur of
this Apostumated World did not agree with the Humble Regenerating Power and Son
of God; for Man had much more Estranged himself from his Ancient State, than
the Beasts had done from theirs; for they continued still under the Guidance of
their Original Law, and therefore void of Offense; but Man, who was made to
live in and under the Son's Holy Innocent Power, entered with his harsh Will
into Wrath, Fierceness, Oppression, Cruelty, Violence, and all kinds of
Intemperance and Devilishness, far beyond any thing of Beastiality; therefore
Divine Goodness was pleased to be as it were at first an Inmate with, or
Companion to the Innocent Bruits; and that the poor Carpenter's Spouse, his
Blessed Virgin Mother, should be Delivered of the King of Glory in a Stall or
Stable, where she had no stately Rooms Hung with Arras, or Cloth of Tissue; No
Damask Curtains, nor Gaudy Quilts, nor Down Beds, nor Delicate Fine Linen; nor
a Confectioners Shop of Variety of Sweet Meats; nor was she Accommodated with a
multitude of Nurses, Rockers, or Tenders; or furnished with Wines or costly
Cordials, the Inventions of Splendid Luxury, rather than Assistants of Natural
Necessity.

This Blessed amongst Women, had in all probability, no better Bed than might
be made of Hay or Straw, since her Sacred Babe was contented with a Manger for
his Cradle; how mean and poor and despicable does this appear to Eyes merely
Humane, when compared with the Gallantry, Magnificence, vast Preparations,
numerous Attendants, and all kind of Excess, now commonly practiced on such
occasions! Yet will all or most Men confess with their Mouths, That this Meek
and Humble President was used by the Lord to draw Man back out of Pride, Wrath
and Vanity, into Regeneration, Self denial, and his Ancient Innocent Estate;
But notwithstanding all such Verbal acknowledgments, I must, (if we may judge
of Trees by their Fruits) take leave to tell them, That they do utter Lies in
Hypocrisy; and that they do not in their Hearts believe it, because all their
Practices are Diametrically opposite thereunto; as was manifest by King Herod,
who was a Prince in the Wrath, and all such ever did, do, and will use all
their utmost Subtilty and Diligence to destroy and kill the Humble, Lowly, Meek
Child of Love and Light, which is the true Regenerating Power of God.

Again, The Declaration or Manifestation of this Blessed Birth was made by
Troops of Angels to certain Shepherds, as they were tending their Flocks in the
Field; who are a sort of People regarded by the Pride and Grandeur of the
World, as mean, base and contemptible, unmeet for the Conversation of Persons
of Quality. And why to such is the happy News first Communicated? Was it not
because such Persons do live nearer to, and more under the Government of the
Holy Power and Divine Light? For have not all the Great and Wonderful Overt res
and gled Tidings of Salvation been principally made to, and in poor lowly
minded Men and Women? Therefore our Lord gives his Father thanks, that he had
hid the Holy Mysteries from the High and the Learned, and had revealed them
unto Babes. And suitable to such Objects, all the Manifestations of God, and
Teachings of good Men, have been in an humble Child-like way, both their
Doctrine and Practice being to lead People into Humility, Temperance,
Cleanness, Self-denial, and Resignation, which are true Paths of Regeneration.
Consider these things, O all you that vainly live in the outward Observation of
days and times, and yet neglect and despite the true Ends and Offices of such
Celebrations, lest you be ^ound like those Hypocrites of old, who pretended to
honor the Sepulchers of the Holy Ancients, but were ready to stone all such as
lived in the Spirit and Practice of their Virtues.

For in the second place, Let us consider after what sort this Solemnity is
kept now a days by the generallity of those that profess themselves Christians:
Is it not become a matter of mere Formality amongst such as would be countted
the Best, and of Debanchery amongst the most of them? Rather as a Feast to
B^^chus, or some Gluttonous Pagan Idol; than as a Sober Religious Commemoration
of the Incarnation of the Holy and Blessed Jesus? As if to Honor Christ's
Birth, were to Renounce all the Fundamental Rules of Christianity? For what
Exc^ss of Riot, Un^leanness, Profaneness, Intemperancies in Meats, Drinks,
Words and Works, with all kind of Superfluity of Naughtiness, do the greater
number of People not commit in these days* which yet they call Holy) to the
Ruin of their Souls, Bodies and Estates, without so much as giving themselves
the leisure once to think or consider why the Pious Ant^ents thought it
convenient they should be Celebrated? Since no doubt it was, in the beginning,
performed with great Devotion, Sobriety, Prayer, and Works of Mercy, not of
Riot and Superfluity. Whereas now how few are there amongst us, who esteem our
selves good Christians, yet do not at this very Season, more than any other
time, let loose the Reins to all Licentiousness? Pampering our Bodies to the
S^arving of our Souls, ^ating to superfluity, if not to Sur^eit; and drinking
to Ex^ess, if not downright Drunkenness? Entaining our selves (like the rich
Glutton in the Gospel) with Tables not only full-spread, but over-charg'd with
heaps of high rich compounded Foods, and variety of strong Cordial Drinks;
whilst multitudes of our poor Neighbors want Bread, and almost all the
Necessaries of Humane Life.

We may flatter our selves with Hospitality and Charity, but generally it is
either misplaced or ill measured; bestowed on Objects that need it not, or in
such a vast Profusion at once, as altogether abates its value, and renders it
much more a Crime than a Virtue, and rather a Temptation than a Relief.

Is it not a frequent Custom to Invite the Rich, and such as can Invite you
again; which He for whose sake you keep this time, does expressly forbid? And if
a Great Man, or one you hope to get by, comes to your House to trifle away
precious time in vain Discourses, Play, or lewd Games, will you not Treat him
in a Courteous manner, with the choifest Foods and Liquors you can get, and
think you have not made him Welcome, or discharged the part of a free
House^keeper, if you do not persuade him to Eat and Drink beyond the Power, as
well as Necessities of Nature? But when the Poor Neighbors, (whom Christ came
to save as well as the others) knock at the Door, you either pretend you have
nothing for them, or else assign them the worst and coursest Fare; (a sorry
pittance of Bull-Beef, or a little Parboiled Meat, out of which you have
extracted all the Nutritive Virtue to enrich your Plum Pottage) even such as
the Proud Wives and Miniking Daughters would scarce offer to their Negro Nosed
Dogs, that are their Table and Lap Companions, though one of the most Ravenous
and Uncleanest Creatures in Nature. And indeed since Man's Degeneration, he
delights much in the Converse and Company of the worst and vilest of Animals,
especially of such as are capable of being made, by his wicked Industry, his
Butchers to hunt, tear, worry and torment the other Creatures of greater Value
and Innocence; which is accasioned by Simile, because himself is departed from
Innocence into Wrath and Fierceness.

For the same Reason, the Rich and Proud cannot endure the Cries, or
Conversation of the Poor and Humble, and therefore rarely Visit, or willingly
admit them into their Presence; and when they crave an Alms, will presently,
like Churlish Nabals, reproach them as Idle Persons, that spend their Money and
time in Alehouses or drinking of Brandy; when in truth this Reproof is not so
much for Admonishment, as to excuse your felves from giving them Relief, and so
at once saveboth your Mon^y and your Credit, as the Proverb has it; though at
the same time you your selves set them the worst Examples, by wallowing in all
kind of Excess, Intemperance, and waste of the good Creatures of God; And what
is all this but vile Hypocrisy? If idle expense of time, and unnecessary
Tippling be so great a Crime as renders men unworthy of common Mercies, why do
you practice it? If you Indulge your selves therein, why do you upbraid these
poor Creatures, that have far greater Temptations thereunto?

It may reasonably be supposed, That scarce less than an Hundred Thousand
Pounds has excused the City of London and Suburhs, in unjustifiable Expenses
and Superfluity this very Christmas; and if so, what vast Sums may have been
consumed in the Nation? How common is it at such times, especially, for a Man
to be almost jostled down, or otherwise abused by Drunken Men and Boys, and to
have his Ears bored, and the Air infected, and the Streets polluted, with
Vollies of horrid Oaths Curses, Execrations and Blasphemies.

O foolish People! Bethink your selves, and turn from these and the like
Ungodly Vanities and Abominations, and observe this time, and all other the
short Moments of your fleeting Lives, to the Ends for which the one was
Instituted, and the other lent you; consider how uneasy and dreadfully
prejudicial these courses will prove both to Soul and Body at the last Audit;
how incapable they render you of Answering the great Ends for which you were
Created and sent into the World. Let every one remember that he is but a
Steward here, and if God has given him a Benjamin's Portion, more than is
needful for himself and Family (as many thousands have) then it is his Duty to
Improve the same by showing Mercy ^o all, and to distribute to the Needy, the
Fatherless, and the Widow in special manner, for with such Sacrifices is our
heavenly Father well pleased; nothing being capable of rendering us so like our
Maker as mercifulness, and Deeds of Charity; for he makes his Sun to shine on
the Just and Unjust, and the fructifying Dews of his upper Chambers to fall
with equality; and affords his great and noble Elements, viz, the Earth, the
Water, and the Air, with all their numberless productions, to all Creatures,
without respect of Persons or Things.

Therefore we are not to think our selves excused from doing good, and
relieving necessitous Persons, though pehhaps they have not improved their Time
and Talents to the best advantage; but rather from thence reflect what vain and
unprofitable Servants we have been our selves, and how unworthy of any of those
Mercies we enjoy.

And the better to accomplish and render us capable of discharging these
necessary Duties, let all that would be good Christians in earnest, betake
themselves to the good and wholesome Rules of Sobri^ty, Temperance, Cleanness
and Order, in Meats and Drinks, which will not only make them more able to
contribute to the necessities of their Poor Neighbors, but preserve their
Bodies and Spirits sound, vigorous, healthful, and prompt to all good actions;
a sober, or irregular Diet, having far greater power, not only on the corporeal
parts, but also on the Mind it self, to improve or weaken it, than most in our
days imagine. Did not our Forefathers live to wonderful Ages in perfect
Health, whilst their Foods were simple and innocent, consisting chiefly (if not
wholly, as before the Flood) of Herbs, Fruits and Grains, with pure Water for
Drink, which of a^l other is most natural; those Holy Patriarchs did not live
by Slaughter and Violence, nor make their Stomachs the Burial Places of dead
Bodies; nor did they ransack the furthest corners of the Earth for Dainties.
Their Provision was Innocent and simple, cheap and ready at hand, whereby they
became able (as fire is quenched by withdrawing of Fuel) to check and regulate
the extravagant motions of the Mind and Insurrections of the Flesh. Hence some
of the Ancients have delivered it as a Maxim, That none could understand God
and his wonderful Works, or enjoy Health and long Life, but those that abstain
from Flesh, Wine, and Vices; bounding their desires according to the Ends and
Necessities of Nature; not for insatiate Appetite, or vain Customs; for were
Uncleanness and Intemperance reigns, the Soul is so subjected to a gross
unweildy and polluted Body, that it cannot discern things Celestial; but
Sobriety and Purity renders it the Temple of God, wherein his blessed Spirit
delights to dwell and communicate his Gifts and Graces, so that where we see
Temperance and Abstinence, we may justly expect a Concatenation of all other
Virtues; because there no Superfluous matter is bred that may clog the Organs
of the Body, or render them indisposed for the Operations of the Soul; nor can
the manifold Benefits and Advantages thereby acrewing, be conceived or
understood by any but those only, that have abandoned Riot and Superfluity; for
nothing but Personal Practice and Perseverance therein, can make a Man a
competent Judge in this matter, which I seriously recommended to all that would
enjoy Health of Body or Mind.

For the Power of Temperance and Sobriety proceeds from an inward Principle,
and they endow their Observers with the Riches both of Time and Eternity,
making us truly sensible of God's Blessings. The full Stomach loathes Ho-
(Figuratively put for the choicest and most delicate Foods) but to the hungry
every bitter* thing is sweet, says the wise King. How pleasant, how relishing,
how refreshing is every Man's dish of Food, to the sober Mind, and well
prepared Stomach! And how ready are such Men to give the Lord thanks and humble
acknowledgments for the least of his Mercies, because they see, feel, and taste
the most pleasant Operation of the Divine Hand in all things; their Bodies are
both sustained and delighted with the coursest Fare, their Minds satisfied,
their Beds easy, their Sleep sound; they are not tortured with Gouts, nor
drowned with Dropsies, nor burnt up with Fevers; their Heads are not dulled
with Fumes, nor their Stomachs oppressed with fainting fits, nor windy griping
humors; but they rise fresh as the Morning-Sun, and cheerful as the early
Lark, soaring aloft toward Heaven; and on the Wings of Love and Gratitude,
chaunt forth Anthems of Praise to their adorable Creator.

For they are equally fit for Exercises either Corporeal or Spiritual; their
Fountain of Life, Natures Balsamic Oil, the Radical Moisture flows freely
through every part, like a pleasant breeze of Wind that moderates the Central
Fires, that they burn not too violently. For these reasons the Wise and Prudent
in all Ages have zealously courted Temperance, Abstinence, and Cleanness, as
their best Guides and Companions; they abate extravagant desires, because a
small matter will suffice a regular Appetite; they resist Pride, Covetousness,
and Vainglory, and are the only Friends or proper Nurses to Charity. They
punish not the Body with excessive Labor, and at the same time ease the Mind
of distracting Cares; for what need they scrape, contend, or take thought for
much, when they know how little will fully and comfortably supply all their
real wants?

To do good and Communicate of those Gifts which God has entrusted us with, is
one of the most fundamental Precepts in the Gospel, since nothing renders us
more like our Maker; for he gives all things freely, and receives nothing, And
likewise the same does naturally and by simpathy attract the sweet Influences
of the Celestial Bodies, the Virtues all Elements, with the wellwishes and
hearty Prayers not only of the Poor and Needy, but of all good Men; which have
a Secret yet powerful Influence on the Souls and Spirits of People so well
disposed, and to obtain Blessing on their Persons and Families.

3. Therefore, let all that would observe Solemn Times, or Feasts, observe them
to the Lord, viz. with serious pious Meditations, Holy Conferences, Humility,
Temperance, and Almsdeeds; and at such Seasons especially, to avoid Gluttony,
Riot, Drunkenness, Excess, Superfluity, and Profaneness; and not to sacrifice
so many thousands of innocent Creatures to their inordinate Lusts, or ravenous
Desires, as now commonly they do; which perhaps ought the rather to be regarded
and avoided, since God's Manifestation of his Holy Son of Light, seems to have
been in Love and Mercy to the whole World; not only unto Man, but likewise in
some respects, to the rest of the under-graduated Creatures; for the
Everlasting Gospel (or Divine Power of God in his Son) was and is to be
Preached unto every Creature under Heaven, as the Angel has it in the
Revelations; for this Act of Grace, though some obtain greater Privileges by
it than others, was Universal; and though the Creatures were become subject
unto Vanity by Man's Degeneration and Fall, yet they shall again receive that
State of Unity and Pleasure, which they should have enjoyed, if Man had
continued in his first Estate; and therefore the Apostle aith, The whole
Creation groans to be delivered into the Glorious Liberty of the Sons of God.
That is, to be freed from those Oppressions, Violences and Miseries, they now
suffer under Man's fierceness and Tyranny; for so far as Man is truly Redeemed
from the wrathful fierce Spirit, so far he freeth all Creatures under his
Government. And therefore the Scripture says, The Righterous Man is merciful
to his Beast. And let us flatter our selves as we please, these Extravagancies
and Violences to innocent Creatures* the spilling of their Blood, and eating so
continually of their Carcasses; does both awaken and strengthen the Fountain of
Wrath within us, and will certainly in due time draw down a Retaliation of
Vengeance.

This we see every day in part fulfilled; for are not our Helioga^alus's, our
mighty Devourers, that continually gorge their Paunches with the Flesh of their
fellow Animals, severely punished for their Gluttony and Cruelty, by a multitude
of torturing Diseases, as Gouts, Dropsies, Consumptions, etc. And not only so,
but when the Evil grows generally predominant, it is Chastized by some
Epidemical Judgment, or Pestilence. I pretend not to Prophecy, nor would amuse
People with vain Threats; but this I may modestly say, That if we look back
into History, we shall rarely find but the Plague has visited the City of
London, more or less in the Circle of every twenty years. And if it has now
been free twenty two years, we may perhaps assign the Nature Causs thereof to
the great Fire, which purged its stench and pollutions, and that noble open way
of Rebuilding, whereby the whole City is become much more sweet and
delightsome, and the particular Houses more Airy and Pleasant, rendering the
whole much more wholesome to the Inhabitants; this may defer, but will not I
fear, be able altogether to prevent the returns of sweeping Sicknesses; and if
we regard the Course of Nature, and especially the Sins and Provocations of
People stirring up the Divine Wrath, I am very apt to fear some such terrible
Visitation within these two, three, or four years next at farthest; but in this
I am not positive, for God draws his destroying Sword at his own appointed
times; however the Caution can do no hurt, to admonish all Persons of each Sex,
Age, and Condition, to Repent and amend their Lives, lest they be snatched away
suddenly, and there be none to deliver.

Which that they may do, and lay up Treasures in Heaven, by being liberal to
the Poor on Earth; I do again with all earnestness exhort them to Sobriety,
Temperance, and Works of Mercy: And that this may be the more regularly
performed, I shall propose an easy Method, which each Person may increase or
diminish as to the proportion of Alms set down, according to their respective
Circumstances, provided they bestow freely, as in the Presence of God, what
they can spare, without any real Injury to their Family.

Since it is a custom amongst most Men, especially Traders in Cities and Towns,
at this time to cast up their Stocks, to see how God has blessed them for the
year past, as to their Profits or Losses, it would be highly convenient, if for
every Pound, it shall upon the Balance appear that they have gained, to give
at least Six Pence to the Poor, or other good Uses (as toward the Education of
poor Children, which is the Foundation of good Government and Order) and as for
Gentlemen and Persons of great Estates, whose Revenues come in without Labor
of their own, to allow, for every Hundred Pounds per Annum, one Shilling in the
Pound; and Farmers or Renters of Land, to give Three Pence for every Pound they
have gained in the foregoing Year. And other Men of great Real or Personal
Estates, which have been partly gotten by Oppression or Violence, or after
great hazards at Sea, where others have deeply suffered, but more especially in
cases of Estates acquired by Manslaughter (though priviledg'd by Worldly
Custom and Laws) for every Hundred Pounds per Annum, or its equivalent in Money
or Goods, to give Fifteen Pounds per Cent, that is, Three Shillings in the
Pound. For though I cannot allow that uncharitable Proverb, That every very
Rich Man is either an unjust Man himself, or the Son of one. Yet I must join
with that other, Estates that evil gotten are,
Seldom Descends to the third Heir.


And I know no better Conveyance or Security to Intail them, than by Works of
Mercy, and Alms^ giving, which are the likeliest Expedients to Antidote against
the secret Canker, and give your Posterity a lasting Title, and obtain a
Blessing thereon, and upon all other your Lawful Endeavors, for want of which,
how often do we see vast Estates blasted, and suddenly transferred to new
Owners, and the most moyling Industry defeated.

Nor would it be of small Advantage both to the Health of the Body, and the
good of the Soul, for Persons of Estates, at least such whose Callings are not
Laborious, to set apart a Fasting-Day once a Weeek, or at least to eat meaner
Foods then, than ordinary; and to appropriate the Expenses thereby saved, to
Charitable uses, viz. To the Relief of the Poor (to whom he that gives,
lends to the Lord, a Debtor that will never prove Bankrupt) as likewise
toward the maintaining of useful^ Schools, Hospitals for the Aged, Lame, or
Diseased; for the amendment of public Bridges, or Highways; or the Planting
of Common Walks of Fruit, or other Trees; and many other Accommodations
(especially in the Country) that would be both Ornamental, Delightful, and
Profitable; and of far more Advantage and Honor, than what is now profusely
squandred away in wanton superfluity, that opposes all Christianity and Moral
Virtue.

This is somewhat of that which I thought fit to remind the stupid World of, on
this occasion; wherein let my Good Will at least be accepted, though some of my
Notions should happen not to be approved; for he that contradicts inveterate
Customs, though never so unreasonable or impious, may justly expect to meet
with Censure, Opposition, and perhaps Derision. But I am long since Armed
against such rude Attacques, being conscious of no other Aim than the discharge
of my Duty, and to persuade Men to be really, what they nominally profess
themselves, viz. Disciples and Followers of JESUS CHRIST; in whose Service I am,

Your well-wishing Friend, T. T.
January 2, 1687/8.
CHAP. VI.
Good News for the Poor, and better for the Rich, etc.
WAR is ever at the best, even to those that are most successful, a very
disastrous Calamity. And what through the Judgment of God, the misfortune of
our Public Affairs, and the present Discouragement of Trade, the Cries of the
Poor are exceedingly raised in this Nation, and are like to be a great deal
more, without the the Interposition of some preventing Relief. I would not say
any thing that should give Offense; but it cannot be unknown that many hundred
of Families in and about this City, suffer extremely upon that account. It Is
therefore that I propose this easy and convenient Method of raising Fifteen or
Twenty Thousand Pounds per Week toward the supplying those that really want:
Retrenching the Luxurious Superstuities of those that abound: And teaching
those whose Extravagance would carry their Inclinations beyond their Ability,
the Art of good Husbandry. Which things effectually pursued and practiced,
would be unconceivably beneficial as well to the Rich as the Poor, and in a
great measure engage a Blessing from God Almighty upon our Public and Private
Undertakings. It Is the best use we can make of Heavens Liberality, and will
assuredly stand us instead, if Providence should be pleased to turn up the
Reverse of our Condition. It Is making the Lord of the whole Earth our Debtor,
and laying an Obligation upon him of seeing us repaid, since he that gives to
the Poor, lends to the Lord. This indeed is laying up for a Wet Day, and
securing a Treasure that no Body can rob us of. No Man alive is exempt from
accidents and Casualties, whereby it becomes of important Concernment to be
prepared for them.

A Wise Man fits his Mind for every Chance,
And whilst he does in Virtues paths advance,
Each promised Good increases by his Skill,
And kindly lessens every threatened Ill.
There are at this time thousands of very many Trades in and about this
Populous City, that have little or no Work at their Callings, whereby to
support themselves, and supply their perishing Families with Bread. And can
those whom God has entrusted with plentiful Estates, gorge themselves with
overcharged Tables, even to a Surfeit, and Riot in Excess of Wine, forgetting
the Afflictions of Joseph, whilst their Brethren languish, and almost die for
want of Necessaries? Do they not think that God at such a time calls upon them
for his Quit-Rent, out of those vast Revenues that they hold merely by the
Tenure of his Bounty? Shall the Heavenly Magnificence be so extensive toward
them, and theirs Contracted toward their Brethren? His Majesty has already
shown us the way, and as I am informed, given large Demonstrations of his
Charity and Compassion. How Honorable would it be then for such who would be
esteemed good Christians and Loyal Subjects, to follow a Generous and Royal
Example? One would think this should Encourage them to be willing to Contribute
freely to the Relieving the Common Necessity, and Succouring those who labor
under the Burden of insupportable Distress and Want. Which they might do with
the greatest Ease and least Damage imaginable. As for Example,

Let us resolve, one Day in the Week at least, during the deadness of Trade,
and dearness of Corn, to refrain from large Eating, retrench the Superfluous
Exorbitance of our Tables, abstain from our Customary Excess, of Wine and
strong Drinks (I dare promise it would be never the worse for our Health, but
much the better, and likewise for our Business) and what we so save, Employ in
Charitable Uses for the Service of the Poor. By this only means, within the
Bills of Mortality, might easily be raised Twenty Thousand Pounds per Week, and
no Man a Farthing the worse, but infinitely the better both in his Estate and
his Health, which is more valuable than the greatest Estate in Christendom.

There are without Dispute, within the abovementioned Circuit, near an Hundred
Thousand Families, whose Dinners one with another cost them Three Shillings a
day, I mean extravagantly in Fish, Flesh, Fowl, strong Beer, Ale, Wine, etc.
when a little Pap, Pulp or Grewel would do much better. Or if they like not
that, Bread, Butter, Cheese, Milk, etc. I am sure will supply Natures wants in
all things needful, if People would be so wise as not suffer false Opinion, and
that grand Tyrant Custom, to Enslave both their Souls and Bodies.

Now an Hundred Thousand Shillings is Fifteen Thousand Pounds: And then it is
not to be doubted, but generally more is spent in Drink than Victuals. There
are more than an Hundred Thousand Persons that lavish away daily above Twelve
Pence in Wine, Brandy, and other strong Liquors; which Expense if forborne but
one day in a Week, and bestowed as aforesaid, would amount to Five Thousand
Pounds more, which makes in the whole, Twenty Thousand Pounds per Week, and
this justly distributed, would supply Eighty Thousand Families at Five
Shillings per Week a piece.

Or otherwise the one half might be employed in the Maintenance of Threescore
Thousand Families, and the other half to build Schools and Hospitals for the
Education of the poor Children and Orphans, and other Miserable People,
Thousands being destroyed yearly for want of Food and other Conveniences of
Life.

And can we now suffer such a number of poor Souls to perish for want, rather
than abridge and deny our Palates and insatiate Paunches, some unnecessary, nay
pernicious Danties, only one day in a Week? Let us then no longer make a God of
our Bellies, but endeavor to deserve our Savior's Eulogy, I was an hungry,
and you gave me Meat.

Now considering the great Scarcity and Dearness of Corn, and other Provisions,
whereby the Families of Poor People, especially those out of Employment, are
become very pressing and deplorable: I count it no worthless Service to the
Public, to inform the World of the Benefit and Cheapness of Dressing and
Eating of Corn Food, with the Variety of their Preparations, as they are very
wholesome and salutiferously used in many Countries, where they they have very
little of any sort of other Diet.

For this is to be noted, that the Flower of Wheat, Bar^ey, Oats, or any other
Grain, made into Paps or Gruels, by a little boiling, does not only advance
them in quantity and strength, but it renders them more agreeable to the
Stomach, their Digestion is more easy and more nutrimental. And a Man may live
as well, if not better, with a half, or third quantity of Flower so prepared,
than even with baked Bread: that is, with half a Pound of Wheat or Oa^meal
Flower made into Pap with Water, than with a pound of like Flower made into
Bread. And this Pap will support both Health and Strength to a higher degree,
making a Man more brisk and lively, free from Drought and Heat, or any other
Obstructions, eating a small quantity of Bread with the Pap, or between whiles.

For the first Invention of Bread was not intended to be ea^en alone, but with
fat Foods as a good Sauce or Ingredient to mix with, drink up, or allay the
Oyliness of such things, and to render them more apt for Separation and
Digestion. For all Fat or Oily Bodies furr the Passages, and obstruct the
Stomach, and are extreme heavy and hard to be divided. By which means, in all
Countries where People feed much on fat succulent Foods, the common Distempers
are Fevers, Gout, Stone, Gravel and Wind, all which are occasioned by the
Oyliness and Greasiness of their Foods, and too great a quantity, which
naturally generates thick cloddy Blood, dull and impure Spirits, which hinder
the Circulation of them both: And Experience teaches that in the Eastern
Country, where People live much on Corn Food, those cruel Distempers are hardly
known.

Now it is to be observed, that all Flowe^s in their own Nature, if eaten ^ry
are very stopping, but when they are diluted and prepared with a proper
quantity of Water, they become of ano^ther Operation and Nature, as is manifest
in all Gruels, Paps and Spoonmea^s made thereof.

When the Flower of any Corn is made into a strong Paste or Dough, wi^h a small
quan^ity of Water, and baked in the sulphurous fierce heat of the Oven, the
moisture being too small in quantity for the Sal-nitral Virtues or Oily
Spirituous qualities to soak or imbib^ themselves in, the strong nutritive
Powers, or gellius glewy qualities, which is the band of Nature, are by the
predominancy of the Heat broken as a Man would break a Stick in sunder.

Therefore Bread will not thicken when put into Milk, Water, etc. and boiled,
but easily separate, and not at all incorporate and become one Body with the
Water, as Flower will, before it is baked. So that the making Flower into
Bread, by baking of it, does not consume the quantity, but the natural quality
of Corn also: and too frequently eaten alone will obstruct the Stomach and all
the subservient Vessels.

It Is true indeed, Bread as it is generally eaten, is a very good thing, and of
great use, though in it self but of little Nourishment, however being eaten with
fat Food it mightily helps Concoction: But Flower when dressed after the
forementioned method, affords the most Nourishment, especially if there be good
Pot Herbs added. But if you would divert and gratify the Stomach with a dryer
and harder sort of Food, which Nature sometimes loves, make the Flower into
small Dumplins, so called, but little bigger than Crown pieces, put them into
boiling Water, and let them boil quick; they will presently be done.

This sort of boiled Bread does not only afford more and better Nourishment,
but is pleasanter to the Palate, and more satisfactory to the Stomach. This may
be called boiled Bread, and is best without Salt, or any other Ingredient.
Therefore Flower properly diluted and prepared, best agrees with the Eaters; if
it be the most part of your Food, then thick is best: However thin is very
healthful between whiles. But such as live upon solid fat Food, their Gruels
ought to be thin, which will better cleanse the Vessels of the Stomach and
Ureters, preserve Nature, and prevent the Generation of the Stone, etc. and
Rickets in Children.

Now Fish, Flesh, etc. are loaded with a gross Phlegmatic Body, and the
frequent eating thereof cannot but affect the Eater with the like Qualities. As
is manifest from those Cattle that feed on green Food, as Grass, etc. Are not
such Beasts less able to travel and labor, and is not their Flesh more gross,
apter to putrify, and Salt it self will not preserve it from Corruption? On
the contrary, such Beasts as feed on Corn, Hay, etc. which are dry, they are
not only strong and able to endure Labor and Travel, but their Flesh is more
firm and substantial, and durable when salted, than the former.

We deceive our selves if we judge that Flesh has much Nourishment, because it
has much Juice or Matter: By the same reason, Grass would have more good
Nourishment and Strength in it than Corn: But the more gross Matter and
Phlegmatic Juices any thing is loaded with, the weaker and fainter that thing
is, and consequently more subject to decay, and distemper the Spirits, being
but few, and those that are dull, Cloudy and impure. So that upon the whole
matter, Flesh, Fish, and Fowl, etc. cannot have the Pre-eminence of Foods:
Neither are they endued with so much, nor so good Nourishment as Corn Foods.
But here we must give way to the prevailing Tyrant Custom, which is the
Champion I am to make War against; and as the Foods of Beasts are better or
worse^ clean or substantial, their Health, Strength and Ability are according.
The like is to be understood of the Food Men live on, for it is not, as is said
before, the gross Juices that affords the true Nourishment, but the fine,
light, volatile Spirituous Virtues; for this cause most are greatly mistaken,
that attribute so great and good Nourishment to Flesh and Fish. Indeed they are
full of gross Matters and Juices, which do serve chiefly to cloud the finer
Virtues and true Life, which do also add Weight and not Spirit, so that the
great Eaters thereof, become dull and heavy, loading Nature with too great
quantities of Phlegmatic Juices and Humors, which do not only oppress Nature
in all her Operations, but is the Root of many Diseases both of the Body and
Mind. Green Corn and Grass are endued with more Substance and Juices than
either Hay or Corn; but it is Earthly and Gross, and affords a Nourishment of a
like Nature: The more any thing is loaded or endued with Gross or Corrupt
Matter, the sooner it falls into Putrefaction. But on the contrary, the dryer,
firmer, and more Spirituous any thing is, the longer it will endure and be
preserved from Corruption. But of all things Men eat, Flesh and Fish do s^oner
decay, because of the abundance of gross Matter it does contain, which does as
it were in a moments time cloud and suffocate the fine Sal-nitral Virtues.

I am sure that a Man may make a better Meal with half a Pennyworth of
Wheat Flour made into Pap, and half a Pennyworth of Bread to eat with it, and
a little Salt, and be as strong, brisk, and able to perform any Labor, as he
that makes the best Meal he can with either Flesh or Fish. So great is the
Ignorance, Folly, Blindness, false Opinion and Custom, of those that call
themselves the Learned. Pray tell me what kind of Ignorance and Madness does
possess the Poor Laboring Man that has but Six Pence, or One Shilling to buy
Food for his whole Family, and to lay it out in a Sheeps Head and Gethers, or
an Oxes Liver, which is his whole Stock; and the best Food that can be expected
from it, is a little Corrupt Broth or Putrified Pottage; when with five times
less charge in Flower, he might have procured a far better Meal, being made
into Pap or Gruel, with a little Bread and Salt.

It is also to be noted, that those that live on Corn Food, have not occasion
to drink Strong or Cordial Drinks, as those that eat Flesh and Fish; the first
being more spiri^uous and warming, the last Cold, Phlegmatic and Gross, and
harder of Concoction.

It Is likewise observable, that half the quantity of Wine or strong Drink will
exhillerate a Man that lives on CornFood to as high a degree as double the
quantity will those that feed on Flesh, etc. which is a good Argument that Corn
Food affords the cleanest and finest Nourishment, and breeds the best Blood and
Humors, the Spirits being as it were always upon the Wing, and consequently
apter to be moved. The Complexion of Fish and Flesh is Cold and Phlegmatic,
(but whilst living) they are for the most part of a hot, lively-brisk
Temperament, each according to its Nature and the Food they live on. But when
the great Powers of Life are destroyed by the baneful stroke of the Butcher,
all the airy brisk Virtues bid the Corp^ adue, and the whole Mass becomes a
lump of a sad Melancholic Nature and Operation; what Notions soever some have
to the contrary.

The True and most Natural Method of Preparing the forementioned Pottage,
Gruels and Paps, made of Flower, Pease, etc.
TAke one Ounce of Wheat^ flower, which is a small Spoonful, make a Point of
Water near boiling hot, temper your Flower with 3 or 4 Spoonfuls of cold Water,
then stir it into your hot Water, keep it stirring on your Fire till it boyls
up, then it is at the thickest, and is completely prepared, add some Salt, and
a few crumbs of Bread, letting it stand till it be almost cold, this makes an
excellent Meal for any Child, from five or six years of Age to ten or twelve.
Or you may make it thus; Take an Onion, cut it (...) boil it in your Water a
few minutes, then add your tempered Flower as before, seasoning it with Salt
and some Crumbs of Bread; this eats very pleasant, and is very satisfactory to
the Stomach. Onions are very wholesome in Pottages and Gruels, they naturally
warm and open the Obstructions of the Breast and Ureters, and are not
prejudicial to the Head nor Eyes, when temperately used.

Another.
TAke two Ounces of Flower beaten or mixed with cold Water, stir this into one
Pint and a half of hot Water till it boyls up, adding Salt and a little Bread,
and those that have no Bread may boil an Onion, in the Water before the Flower
is put in, this eaten, makes a brave noble Exhillerating Meal for a Man, which
costs little more than one Farthing, notwithstanding Corn is at such a high
Price; after this manner you may make what quantity you please thicker or
thinner, as it agrees best with you, thick is best for strong Healthy People,
and for such as Labor; thin is more advantageous for sick People, or such as
are troubled with foul Stomachs, and obstructed Ureters; a mean or middle sort
is most proper for those that are of a soft Employment, or live a Sedentary
Life.

Oatmeal Pottage.
TAke a Quart of Water, make it boiling hot, then take a large Spoonful of
small, or ground Oatmeal, or somewhat better than a Spoonful, temper it with
cold Water, then set it on your Fire till it begins to boil up, then brew it
again and it is done, add Salt and a little Bread, letting of it stand till it
be almost cold; with this alone a Man may make as good a Meal as with all the
Varities the four Elements afford, for it renders the common Eater thereof
strong, lively and healthful. Or you make it thus, if it be for a Meal without
other things, make your Water boiling hot, then take an Onion and some
Pot Herbs, let your Herbs and Onions boil a little time in your Water before
you brew or stir the tempered Oatmeal, after which you must stir your Oatmeal
in till it boil up, or begins to boil, then it is done, adding Salt and Bread;
this a most pleasant and wholesome Pottage, and very nourishing; but such as
loves it plain, may have it so, and others that will have it with Pot Herbs,
without an Onion, may please themselves, it is a brave Food, whether with or
without Herbs. But give me leave to tell you, that for such as live only on
such Flowered or Corn Foods, Onions and Pot Herbs are best and most pleasing
both to the Palate and Stomach; for Variety of Preparations are most acceptable
to Nature.

Of Pease Pottage.
TAke one Pint of Pease, put them in three or four Quarts of Water, on a very
gentle Fire, where they may heat gradually, let them stand simpering or near a
boiling heat for three or four hours, then let them boil very gently, and when
they are soft and incorporated into Pottage, then take either dried Sage that
is well preserved in its proper Season, give it a little drying by the Fire,
and then rub it into Powder, add this and an Onion, let it boil a little, and
then it is done: But if you have not dried Sage, then take green and cut it
small, and use it as you would the dried, with an Onion or without. But it is
further to be observed, that after your Onion and Sage have boiled a little,
then you must take a large Spoonful of Wheat Flour made into Batter with cold
Water, and stir it into your Pottage, and so soon as it boyls up it is done.
This Pint of Pease will make near two Quarts of brave pleasant Pottage, which
will serve a working Man a day, and all the cost thereof will not be much more
than one Penny. If the Poor were so Prudent to observe the forementioned
Methods, they might live most happy and healthful, and would not be compelled
to undergo so many troubles and great necessities as they are. Besides, Want is
the Mother of many great Evils.

CHAP. VI.
A Humble Proposal to the Honorable Sir Thomas Lane, Lord Major, the Court of
Aldermen, Merchants, Citizens, etc. of the City of London, for the Erecting of
Twenty Free Schools in the Poor Parishes in and about the said City, for the
Education of Poor Children, whose Parents are not able to pay for their
Schooling.
MAY it please your Lordship, and the rest of the Honorable Gentlemen, to whom
this Proposal is Addressed, to take into your Serious Consideration, the
Deplorable* Estate and Condition of many Poor Children, that for want of Means
to give them timely and proper Education, in order to their being Instructed in
the Methods of Virtue and true Religion, are suffered to play away about the
Streets the only Seasons of their Lives for Knowledge and Improvement, in Idle,
Vain, and Sinful Sports and Pastimes. In vain do your Lordship, and the other
Magistates, so strenuously and commendably labor to Reform Mankind, by
suppressing and correcting grown and addult Wickedness, while by the Connivance
and Toleration of this ungodly Practice, the Seeds of Vice, like so many
Hydra's Heads, grow upon your Hands, still furnishing you with new Matters of
hopeless and unsuccessful Toil and Vexation: For by this Idle squandering away
their time, they learn all kind of Lewdness, Swearing, Lying, Stealing,
Impudence, and Dissimulation, which being then so timely and deeply Imprinted
upon their Souls, all the Punishment in the World can hardly ever return them
afterward: Good Manners, Temperance, Order, and proper Learning, are the Stays
and Supports of all good Government, which (if due care were taken) might as
easily and cheaply be Planted, as the forementioned Vices; whereby in short
time the World would be much better in general, and the Magistracy in
particular be discharged of abundance of ungratefulness and trouble. Now since
the laying a sure and lasting Foundation of Virtue and Honesty is the Noblest
and most Extensive Charity imaginable, we cannot allow our selves to doubt of
your Lordships Concurrence with the encouragement of so Lawful and Beneficial a
Proposal: And we are bold to affirm, that your Lordship cannot begin your
Government, from whence the whole City justly expects so much Happiness and
Advantage, under the Influences of a more Blessed and Auspicious Omen.

It is therefore Humbly Proposed, That Twenty Schools, viz. Ten for Boys and
Ten for Girls, be erected, which will require a Hundred and Twenty Pound per
Annum one with another, for their Maintenance, with their proper Tutors,
Masters, etc. each Parish or P^ecinct, building their School-Houses at their
own proper Charge, low Houses, all one Floor, fifty Foot in length, and twenty
five in breadth, with Chimneys, and other necessary Convenienc^es. Now twenty
Schools at a Hundred and Twenty Pound per Annum each, must have a Settlement of
Land of Two Thousand Five Hundred Pound per Annum, which might easily be raised
by a voluntary Contribution; for it is not to be doubted, but there are within
the Circuit of the Bills of Mortality, more than a Hundred Thousand Persons
that are able, without prejudice, to give Ten Shillings each (that is) one with
another, which would amount to Fifty Thousand Pound Sterling, which being well
laid out, would Purchase in Land Two Thousand Five Hundred Pound per Annum, and
better; but if any allege they cannot conveniently spare such a Sum as Ten
Shillings it is proposed that there be a general Fasting Day for Six Weeks,
from all sorts of Costly Foods, and strong Drinks, one Day only in each Week,
which by a modest Computation, would raise Ten Thousand Pound per Week; that
is, in the whole Sixty Thousand Pound, and no particular Person or Family one
Penny the worse, which also without doubt would be mightily increased every
Year by the Gifts and Liberality of Charitable People, that d^op off the Stage
of this World into Eternity.

As an Enforcement of what is Proposed, give me leave to tell you, That this
Charity is not given to Strangers, but to preserve and maintain our own
Posterity or Off spring, even our own Children, two thirds whereof, if no^
more, within the Compass and Revolution of Thirty or Forty Years, by some
private Misfortunes, or public Calamities and Alterations of State, come to
extreme Poverty and Straits. For it is reasonably supposed, That Thirty Years
since there were then in and about London, Forty Thousand Gentlemen, Merchants,
Shopkeepers and Tradesmen, worth in Estates from Five Hundred to Ten Thousand
Pounds, and these might possibly have three Children each, one with another,
which is a Hundred and Twenty Thousand, so that at this time it is not to be
questioned, if an exact scrutiny be made, and account given of each Man's
Offspring, but that there are now half, or two thirds of these that really
want such a piece of Charity as is here preposed.

Now if we will but look forward, we may rationally conclude, That Thirty or
Forty Years hence, our Children or Grandchildren may be in the like poor
Condition; so that Money thus disposed of, as we have proposed, is a far better
Security to our Posterity than the Free Land of any particular Person can
purchase for them: Besides, you have the Great God's Word, and our Savior
Christ's Promise, to Indempnifie and save you harmless; for he that gives to
the poor, lends to the Lord, and there shall be manifold Restitutions made,
with the Blessings of this World, and with Life Eternal in the World to come,
which is both personal and Real Security. Neither do I believe there is any
firmer or better way of Conveying or Intailing Estates on our Children and
Posterity, than by Works of Mercy and Almsgiving, being assured according to
the Word of God, that they are the likeliest Expedients and Antidotes against
the secret Canker, and give our Children a sure and lasting Title to their
Inheritance: For Retaliation of Rewards and Punishments is the Indispensible
Law of God, which will have its Execution either in this World or that which is
to come. This our Savior further exemplifies in the Parable between the Sheep
and the Goats, when he says to the Sheep on his Right Hand, Come, ye blessed,
into the Kingdom prepared for you; for I was hungry, and you fed me; naked, and
ye clothed me; sick, and in Prison, and ye administered unto me: But to the
Goats he says, Go ye cursed into everlasting Darkness, prepared for the Devil
and his Angles; for you have neither fed, clothed, nor administered to me. And
further, when they expostulated with him, saying, Lord, when did we see thee
hungry, naked, sick, or in Prison? His Answer was, Insomuch as ye did it not to
one of these little ones, ye did it not to me. Hence it is Evident, in so many
plain words, what Christ's Sheep were justified for; and for what the Goats
were condemned; the first had Charity, the latter not; therefore to do good,
and communicate those Gifts the Lord has entrusted us with, is one of the most
Binding and Fundamental Precepts in the Christian Religion. Charity being
therefore the first true step to all Virtue; that we may obtain the Blessing of
the Almighty upon the Public Undertakings, and all our Private Lawful
Endeavors, let us resolve to go on cheerfully, and lay up a Treasure in
Heaven, by being Liberal to the Poor and Needy upon Earth. And for the better
and more singular performance of these Duties, our Holy Religion and Interests
obliges every one in his Station, avoiding Covetousness and Expensive
Sensuality, to betake our selves to Sobriety and Temperance, which are the
great Promoters and Encouragers of Charity, with proper and due Fasting, which
is none of the least Virtues, for they all proceed from the Fountain of God's
Grace, and an inward Ground or Divine Principle in the Soul.

This is what I have given my Mind to think of, and do believe it my Duty to
Recommend the same to my Fellow Citizens, wherein I humbly Pray, That my good
Will, at least, may be accepted, though it should happen that some of my
Notions are not altogether approved of; for I am conscious to my self of no
other aim than the discharge of my Duty, to persuade Men to be really what they
profess themselves nominally, viz. Disciples and Followers of Jesus Christ, in
whose Service I am,

Gentlemen, Your Well wishing Friend, Thomas Tryon.

The Use and Virtues of several Sorts of Gruels and Pottages; viz.
Water Gruel and Milk-pottage, have the first place, not only for their
Excellent Qualities, and Friendly Agreement they have with the Stomach, but
also they are easy Come at able by the Poor and Meanest of People; next in Rank
do follow many other sorts of Brave Exhilerating Pottages; viz. Pap, made with
Wheat Flour and Water, or with Milk, Water, and Flower; Barley-gruel,
Herb-pottage, Pease-pottage, Furmity, Buttered Wheat, Possets, Bonny-clabber,
Flummery, Caudles made of Beer, Wine, Cider, or other Liquors, with Oat-meal,
also with Eggs, and Chocolate; all which are the most agreeable, friendly Foods
to Nature; being easy of Concoction, and do afford greater Strength, and
generates better Blood and finer Spirits, than most do imagine, which are the
Sinews of Health; and they may be eaten freely, without any danger of Surfeits,
either with Bread or without; for these Liquid Regions, do as it were contain
the Sominary Virtues, both of dry and moist Aliment, contributing a more
Sublime Nourishment than strong, hard, salt Foods, being tempered with such
equality of Parts, whence do proceed such an Innocent Power, and Ravishing
Balsamic Virtue, that the frequent Eating thereof, do fortify, strengthen, and
refresh Nature to the highest degree, being endued with a certain innate Power
and Virtue, not only to help to digest harder Foods, but they cleanse and open
all the Passages, and are a Powerful prevention of Obstructions, and gross
Phlegmy Humors, and at the same time supplying Nature with a substantial, brisk
Nourishment, and sweet, friendly Moisture, provided they are mixed and prepared
with Judgment; and all that Love their Health, ought to Eat them, at all times
of the Year, but more especially in Summer, and hot Seasons; they make no
noise, nor cause any insurrection in the Body, so that after a Meal of such
Foods, there is felt no inequality or indisposition, the Body does not Burn
with an unatural Flame, nor the Crown is not pestered with Fumes and Vapors;
in a word, they are endued with all the good united Virtues, both of the
Vegetable and Animals Kingdoms; besides these Pottages have such a
Sympathetical Agreement with the digesting Liquor of the Stomach, called the
Menstruum, Whose Office is to fit, qualify, and prepare the Food for
separation and digestion, being of a mild, gentle Nature and Operation,
imitating the Dew of Heaven, which does bow, apply* and incorporate, its sweet
Dews and moist Vapors to all its Offspring, whence all things become
impregnated with Life, Power and Virtue: For this cause all Pottages do not
only strengthen the Appetite, and the A^tractive Facultie^ and Powers of
Nature, but they are easily melted into Chyle, without any manifest trouble or
molestation to the Stomach; for the nearer affinity the Foods have to the
Menstruum, the easier they are digested, and sharper is the Appetite, because
the sweet Virtues of such things are drawn forth into all the Members and Parts
of the Body, gently and mildly supplying them with a fit and proper
Nourishment, with far more ease and pleasure to Nature, than from hard, strong,
salt Foods; neither does our Friendly, Homogenial Pottages heat, consume, or
dry up the Menstruum, or Radical Moisture, as gross Flesh, Fish, and Cheese do,
from whence do proceed, after the eating thereof, Indisposition, and an
unatural Drought, which renders the whole uneasy, and unfit, either for the
Business of the Body or Mind; therefore it is observable, that in the Eastern
and Southern Parts of the World, where the Natives drink Water, their Foods
being most, or all, made into Pottages, where they never, or very seldom, eat
any Flesh, Fish, old Cheese, salt Butter, and but little Bread in gross, as the
Custom is in the Northern Parts of the World, therefore the Gout, Stone,
Scurvy, and many other Cruel Diseases are not known; which Distempers do for
the most part proceed, and are generated by the constant feeding on strong,
hard, salt, crude Foods, and the drinking of strong, harsh, sharp Drinks, being
all of a disagreeing Nature to the Menstruum of the Stomach; and therefore they
do mightily obstruct Nature, stop the Passages, begetting sharp, windy Humors,
thick Blood, dull and heavy Spirits, which are the Original Causes of the Gout,
Wind, Stone, Scurvy, and many other Diseases: For this Cause when any Languish
under those forementioned Distempers, the Learned advise them to live on some
of the abovementioned Gruels and Pottages; for if such Foods recover lost
Health, pars ratione, consequently it must maintain and promote it.

Thomas Tryon.

FINIS.

