A NEW ART OF BREWING Beer, Ale, and other sorts of Liquors, so as to render
them more healthful to the Body, and agreeable to Nature, and to keep them
longer from souring, with less Trouble and Charge then generally practiced,
which will be a means to prevent those torturing Distempers of the Stone,
Gravel, Gout and Dropsy. Together with easy Experiments for making excellent
Drinks with Apples, Currants, Goosberries, Cherries, Herbs, Seeds, and Hay, etc.
And the way to preserve Eggs five or six Months from being Musty or Rotten.
With an Appendix how to make Fruit Trees constantly fruitful. Also a way how
every one may purge themthemselves with common Salad Herbs and Roots. And a
Method how to prevent Costiveness in the Body. Recommended to all Brewers,
Gentlemen, and others that brew their own Drink. By the Author of the Way to
long Life, Health, and Happiness, etc.

Licensed, and Entered according to Order.

London, Printed for Tho. Salusbury at the Sign of the Temple near Temple Bar
in Fleetstreet, 1690.

The CONTENTS of this BOOK.
THe Design of the Author in publishing this Treatise. Page 1 The Office of the
Stomach, and several digestions described. 4 The evil Effects of Excess in
Eating and Drinking, as to Quantity and Quality. 7 Concerning the generating
the Stone and Gravel, Gout, Consumption, etc. 13 The Boiling of Hops, Wort,
Bear, etc. very injurious. 15 Firmented Drinks much better new than Stale. 18
Rules for the well-brewing and making good wholesome Bear and Ale. 21 An
Experiment demonstrating the Prejudice that Water receives by Boiling. 24 The
Mischief of making Drink by a third Infusion of the Malt with hot Liquor. 25
The Quantity of Hops proposed for Brewing. 29 About Ordering your Brewing
Vessels. 30 Circumstances to be observed in Cooling and Firmenting your Beer or
Ale 34 Of the Nature of Hops. 38 An Objection against unboiled Bear and Ale,
answered. 40 Many Herbs and Vegitations that will serve in B^ewing, as well or
better than Hops. 48 The best Drinks to prevent the Generation of the Stone. 55
Of cold Gruel. 57 The way of infusing Herbs or Seeds, etc. to the best
advantage. 62 Cautions against certain Foods that generate the Stone and
Gravel, etc. 67 A good Drink against the Stone and other Stoppages. 74 A good,
profitable, and wholesome way to make Wine of Cherries, Goosberries, etc. 79 An
Appendix showing the Natural Causes why Fruit Trees do so frequently fail
Bearing, and offering Expedients to make Orchards almost constantly fruitful.
88, 105 With a new Experiment of preserving Eggs sweet and good for several
Months. 131 The Natural way how every one may in the Spring and Fall purge
themselves, with Ease and Pleasure, to considerable Advantage 135
A NEW ART OF Brewing, etc.
THOUGH I have no other Design, in respect of Brewers, then only to save them a
great deal of Pains, and no small part of their daily Charge, and toward the
rest of Mankind, but an honest and most charitable Intention of Advertizing
them what may conduce, both to the Health of their Bodies, Tranquillity of their
Minds, and Advantage of their Estates; yet I am not so Ignorant of the Worlds
common usage, as not to expect, that offering to Dissuade from certain
inveteral (but mischievous) Customs, I am like to meet with no less than Hate
or Reproach, or at least Scorn and Contempt, from the greatest part of those,
whose welfare I would gladly promote. However, as the Conscience of my own
Innocence, and certain Experience and Knowledge of the Truth, of what I
Recommend will be a sufficient Buckler against all the Darts of Envy,
Ingratitude, Noise and Folly: So I do not Despair, but this small Treatise may
have the happiness to meet with some few, so little wedded to Tradition and
their own Humors, as to be willing to hearken to the Dictates of Wisdom,
Reason, and Nature, wherever they meet them, or though communicated in an
homely manner, by a very weak and imperfect Instrument. Methinks there should
scarce be any man that has ever entertained his Thoughts for one half hour, in
a serious Consideration of his own Structure, and how and by what Natural means
he does subsist in this World, but must have taken notice, that as the
Substance of our Bodies suffers a daily Expense, Decay, or Wasting, as well by
the action of our own innate (or inbread heat) prespiration of Spirits, and the
more pure parts of the Humors through the pores of the Skin, impressions of the
Ambient Air, as by the common and more gross Evacuations; so there is required
a daily supply of Nourishment to repair and make good whatsoever is thus spent
of the Store which is provided to support and preserve the Microcosm.

To this End, as outwardly the All-wise and most Bountiful Creator has prepared
variety of excellent Foods and Liquors; so inwardly he has both given us
Reason, Wisdom, and Knowledge (if we will hearken to and exert it) to
distinguish which of them are at all times best and most requisite for us; as
also fixed the Members and Organs of our Bodies, in their several places and
offices, to be assisting and subservient to each other, in order to the
effecting of this admirable Work.

Of these the Stomach is the first and principal Agent, which as it were a
Kitchen, serves to dress and prepare all Meats that are brought into it, and by
its Concocting Faculty reduses them into a white milky Substance, which is
called Chyle, which passing thence throughout the lower Orifice of the Stomach
into the Intrails, having there but a slow passage (by reason of many turnings
and windings, by which the Guts are mutually enclosed and united to the
Mesentery) it is further digested and separated, and the purer part by the
Mesoraick Veins (called the Hands of the Liver) is thorough the Veins (from the
Office called Vena Porta) carried into the hollow parts of the Liver, whereby a
higher and more elaborate Concoction is turned into that admirable Balsamic
Liquor, called Blood.

This Blood passes from thence into the Vena Cava, or great hollow Vein, whose
Trunk divides it self into two large Branches, the one tending downwards to
carry blood to the lower parts; the other upwards, and mounteth even to the
Throat, dividing again by the way into other Branches, one of which fasteneth
it self to the right Ventricle of the Heart, by which the blood is brought
thither from the Liver, where being yet higher elaborated and enriched, it is
transmuted or carried over to the left Ventricle, where the Arteries takes
their original, which contains the Vital Blood and Spirits, whose Office it is
to enliven and exercise the Faculties of the Body.

By other Branches it arises into the Brain, where the Animal Spirits are
made, being the Seat of Fancy, Reason, Judgment, and Memory (which noble
Faculties by those Spirits are exercised) as also of all Sense and Motion; for
from the Brain are all the Nerves (or Sinews) divided into all the parts, which
cause a voluntary Motion in the Body, by which it walks, stands, lies down,
labors, rises, or uses any other Exercise, according to the Dictates of the
Will, which cannot be done without the ministry of the Nerves.

Thus you see the whole economy of Nature, how, what is received at the Mouth
is turned into Chyle by the Stomach, that Chyle into Blood by the Liver. Of the
purer parts of the Blood are made Vital Spirits by the Heart, and Animal
Spirits by the Brain, all which being through the Veins and Arteries (like so
many Channels or Conduict Pipes) conveyed to the principal Member, and from
thence by abundance of smaller Vessels into every part of the Body, Growth and
Vigor at least, a continual and suitable Supply ought to be thereby
communicated to the whole.

But if what is taken into the Body, that is, our Meats and Drinks, be either
improper in quality, or too great in quantity, it does in either case disturb
this curious economy, and frustrate Natures Intentions and Operations; for as
unwholsom Meats and Drinks must needs give an unwholsom Nourishment (the
Effects always precipitating quality consentaneous to its Causes) and every
thing delights to produce its Simile's, so if the Errors be only in quantity
(which though too frequent, yet rarely happens without the other) the Consequence
is still worse, Excess in Eating and Drinking laying the Foundations of almost
all Diseases; for scarce could the Starry Influences, Injuries of Insalubrious
Air, various Seasons of the Year, and the like External Accidents, have power
to beget Diseases, unless the Body were predisposed to receive their Effects by
ill Humors, is the Result of Indigestions, and originally caused from the
Faculties of the Stomach being abased and perverted; for when the Stomach is
nautiated with disagreable Food or Drink, or overcharged with Excess, it
cannot conceal and turn such Matters into good Chyle (but not being able to
contain it long) through ill Crude, as it is into the Intrails, which being also
oppressed, cannot so speedily conveigh through them the indigested load, but it
receives there an imperfect alteration, and so is by the Veins of the
Mesentery drawn away to the Liver, which being likewise indisposed at the
receipt of such unprepared Matter, is as unable to convert the unequal Mass
into good Blood, but thrusts it out into the larger Veins, mixed and infected
with evil Humors, and from thence to the Heart the Seat of Life, (which like a
Lamp almost drowned with Oil) is even stifled and overcome; thence also it is
carried to the Brain (the Fountain of Sense and Motion) which being clouded
with Vapors and superfluous Humors, its Faculties are interrupted, the brisk
and active Fancy clogged and dulled, Reason mudled, and Judgment vitiated,
and all the admirable Storehouse of Memory oppressed and confounded; from these
nobler Parts and larger Vessels, it is throghout the small ones spread all over
the Body, every part taking its unhappy share, and by reason of the want of its
due Concoction in the principal Members, cannot give due Nourishment to those
parts remote; but by these Errors often repeated, the Harmony of Nature is
every where disturbed, and the whole Body made a Magazin of corrupt Humors,
which (like homebred Traitors in a City) are continually ready to let in
fierce and cruel Diseases upon the least External Attack, or (if that be
wanting) will from their own Malignity (as Domestic Rebellions and
Insurrections are caused in ill governed States) creates Disturbances within,
endangering the Peace both of Body and Mind, and even threatening Subversion to
the Throne of Life. By what has been said, it appears of what vast Importance,
due Consideration, and Caution in our Meats and Drinks is, not only for the
Securing Health of Body, Prevention of Diseases, but also in order to the
obtaining Serenity of Mind and Calm Affections, and the improving all our
Intellectual Faculties, it is an old Rule, The Passions of the Mind follow the
Temperatement of the Body; for such Diet as you use, such will be your Blood;
and as your Blood is pure, or impure, such will be your Spirits, Natural,
Vital, and Animal, and consequently all Functions and Operations of Body and
Mind shall suitably be altered. Take a man never so modest, just and peaceble,
let him over-charge himself with strong Liquor, what a strange Metamorphize,
altogether incredible, did not the lamentable frequency convince us, shall it
make, as if some Body had stolen away the Man, and left a Beast, or rather a
Devil in his shape; so do we not daily fee, that those who addict themselves to
Gluttony (though not so soon, yet in time as certainly as the other) lose their
Parts, and of sharp, witty, judicious Persons, become Fools and stupid Sots:
But of the Inconveniences of improper Foods, and Excess even in the most
Innocent, I have even at large Treated in other of my Writings; not omitting,
as occasionally, to say something thereof here; but the main Scope of this
present Treatise shall relate to Drink, and some particular Foods, that may be
proper for such as are afflicted with the Stone and Gravel, and also the Sorts
they ought to forbear (not so much to show the odiousness of that Swinish sin,
Drunkenness, nor in admonishing those who think themselves, and are by others
numbered amongst the most sober, that even they are guilty of great Excess in
the quantity of Liquor, as well as in the quality, which through ill Customs
they swallow down beyond the necessity of Nature) but especially to take notice
of the ill quality of those Liquors that are used by most People, arising from
their undue Preparations, and to show both the Reasons how and why the same do
breed Diseases in Human Bodies; as also to offer Remedies whereby the same may
be prevented, and Drink truly refreshing, exhilerated, and friendly to Nature,
made and accommodated to General Use.

The first step toward the Generation of the Stone and Gravel, as also the
Gout, Consumption, and various other Diseases of the like Nature, is the
frequent drinking of strong, hot, sharp, intoxicating stale Liquors, and fiery
prepared Drinks, as Beer high boiled with Hops, Brandy, Rum, old Wines,
especially Claret and Whitewine, which for the most part tend toward a Spirit,
( viz.) Heat and Sharpness, becoming its predominating quality, all such Drinks
do, in such Constitutions by Simile, contract and generate in the Passages and
Ureters a hard gretty Substance, and of a mixed Saturnine Martial Nature, which
is the first principle and beginning of the Disease called the Stone, and all
its Symptoms and Attendances. Nor is that the only Evil thereby occasioned in
the Human Nature, for such Liquors do too violently stir up and evaporate the
pure essential Spirits, and as it were burn up the sweet Oil or Humor
Radicallis, the Balsom of Life, whereby the Blood becomes Infected with a sharp
hot quality, and its free Circulation is obstructed, which Causes unnatural or
burdensome heat in all the External Parts, and lays the Seeds of various
Distempers, according to the Nature of each Constitution, Country, and Clymate,
as Consumptions, Palsies, Fevers, Gout, Stone, and the like.

Secondly, It is also to be noted and considered, the boiling of Hops two,
three, or four hours in Beer, is a thing of a pernicious Consequence, though it
be unadvised, and ignorantly practiced, they falsely imagine that there Drink
will become the better thereby, whereas indeed they do by that Error, in a
great measure, evaporate or suffocate the pure Spirits, which are the
Preservers of the sweet friendly Balsamic Body, in all things whence the
amiable, meek, or mild opening quality do exist, which whilst any thing remain
entire or unviolated, is the Moderater and Qualifier, or the harsh, bitter,
astringent Nature; therefore Hops and Beer so boiled do prove very injurious to
several Constitutions; for after Drink is thus prepared, the predominant
quality in it is, hot, fulsom, strong, and bitter, and of a restringent Nature
and Operation, prejudicial to Health, especially to all such persons, who by
their Constitutions are subject or inclinable unto the Stone or Gravel.

Thirdly, It is further to be considered, That the boiling of Wort, or any
Spirituous Liquor that is drawn or extracted from things, whose Body is opened
by Firmentation, as Malt is in a very high degree, does not only destroy and
evaporate the fine, thin, subtle Spirits and Quality, which are only capable of
Penetration, but it does, as it were, fix or stagnate the whole, by which it
becomes of a grosser, fuller, or stronger taste in the Mouth, which through
Use, Custom, and Ignorance is esteemed a Virtue or Strength; but the contrary
is to be understood; for thereby it becomes of a heavier Operation, lies longer
in the Stomach, sending gross Fumes and Vapors, into the Crown, and Seldom
fails to obstruct the Passages, because it has lost great part of those fine
penetrating properties, which is easily demonstrated to your Senses; ( viz.)
Unboyled Wort has a fine pleasant sweetness in taste, and it is of an opening,
cleansing quality and operation; and then taste or drink some of the same Wort
boiled with or without Hops, and you will find that this last has not only
lost its pleasant taste and sweetness, but also its opening penetrating
Virtues, by which it becomes of another Nature and Operation; which
Fermentation does in some degree help, but it cannot regain those fine, thin,
penetrating Virtues and Spirits, that it has lost in the boiling, the fierce
heat of the fire, being an utter Enemy to all spirituous Drinks, Liquors, or
Cordials. It is also to be noted, that unboyled Beer or Ale do generally drink
smaller in the Mouth then that which is boiled, because its spirituous, sweet
qualities are not so much destroyed, suffocated, or stagnated by the fiery heat
of the fire, as the other, but it most naturally warms the Stomach, and not so
subject to send Fumes into the Head, and runs quicker through the Body, purges
more powerfully by Urine, which are naturally Testimonies of its Virtues, and
that the better Parts are preserved in the preparation. Also it is further to
be considered, That all sorts of Drinks made without fire, although with raw,
crude Fruits, Apples, Grapes, and the like, as Wine, Syder, and many other
sorts, are not only more spirituous and brisker in operation, but also more
cleansing and penetrating, if order and temperance be observed. But note that
all sorts of fermented Drinks are much better and greater preservers of Health
when new, then old or stale, for Age does naturally consume and turn the mild,
soft, sweet, opening, healing Virtues, into a hard, keen property; for this
cause all stale Beer, old Wine, and Sider, are far hotter in operation than
new, and consequently more prejudicial to Health, especially to all such as are
naturally subject to the Stone, Gravel, Gout, or Consumption, for it over-heats
the Blood, and consumes the Radical Moisture; not but that the new Wine, Syder,
Beer or Ale, are endued with as great a quantity of Spirits as the old, as is
manifest in Distillation: But so long as the mild, sweet, opening Virtues
remain entire, strong, and powerful, this harsh fire, keen or sharp Spirit, is
thereby moderated, qualified, or allayed by the sweet Embraces of those
friendly Virtues; which friendly quality, Age turns into heat, sharpness, and
keneness, as is most clearly manifested in the firmenting of all sweet Bodies,
which no Art can cure or bring back, it being easy by the help of the fiery
Art to destroy all the mild, opening, friendly Properties of each thing, and
turn or transmute them into their Original, viz. into a hot, strong Spirit, but
when this is done, there is no further Progress to be made, for it then stands
in its original Qualities, and will admit of no cure; therefore it is easy to
destroy, but hard to make alive, especially in all Fire Operations; and
remember this, that whenever any violence is offered to any thing, more
especially to things that has passed thorough firmentation, that the best and
friendly Virtues do first suffer Injury, or Prejudice, which every one ought to
understand, first in themselves, and secondly in all other things, more
especially in all Preparations by Fire; therefore such as would drink Beer or
Ale more wholesome, may, unless they be too old to learn, and too obstinate to be
taught, observe the Rules following, which will make your Drink wholsomer, and
save you both trouble and charge; and if neither Profit nor Regard to Health
can wean you from the slavery of silly old Custom, your Understandings are
certainly miserable already, and no wonder if your Bodies prove so in a little
time.

First, Make your Water or Liquor near boiling hot, then put just so much into
your Mashtub as will wet your Malt, stir it, and let it stand half an hour,
which will dispose the Malt the better to give forth its Virtues and Sweetness
into the Liquor; then add your whole quantity of Water or Liquor to your Malt
that you purpose to put up the first time, then let it stand one hour and a
half, but if you would have your first Wort very strong then two hours, if the
Season be not hot; then put what a quantity of Hops you think convenient into
your Receiver, and let your Wort run to them, and after your Hops have infused
an hour and half in your Wort, then strain it off in your Coolers; you have
done with your first Wort. Then put upon your Malt your second Liquor near the
same Heat as the first, rather cooler if any difference; but this must stand on
your Malt but one hour at most; then take what quantity you please of fresh
Hops and put into your Receiver as before, and let your second Wort run to
them; then take both second Wort and Hops together, and put up into your
Copper, there let them infuse till your Wort is near boiling, but not boil;
then strain this also into your Coolers, which you have done with also. Now if
you would enlarge your quantity, which is not proper, which in its due place I
shall demonstrate, then put up what quantity you think convenient of cold
Water, and let it stand, not more then half an hour, and then run it off to
some fresh Hops, and then put this third Wort, and also Hops, into the Copper,
as you did the second, and let the Hops infuse till they are near boiling, then
strain it off into your Coolers, and you have done; but you must remember that
your Liquor or Water do not boil, for boiling of Water does irritate and
evaporate the subtle fine penetrating Spirits, whence the more friendly, mild,
opening qualities do exist, which do make such Water or Liquor more harsh, hard
and fixed, which do render it not so capable to draw forth or extract the sweet
virtues of the Malt; for boiling of Water does open its Body, and sets the
Spirit on the wing; for this cause all Water that has been boiled becomes of a
colder, harsher, and harder nature then that which has never been fired, and
therefore it will not prepare any Foods and Drinks so natural, not to that
advantage as that which has not been boiled. And that you may be convinced of
this Truth, boil a quantity of good River water, and put it into a good clear
Vessel, and let it stand a while, and then take a like quantity and put into
another Vessel, and let that stand the same time as the other, and you will
find the boiled Water to stink, and never be sweet again; but your Water which
remains entire, not touched with the Fire, will also stink, or rather firment,
but then it will be sweet and good as for any use as before; the Reason thereof
is this, for the Fire does force forth and evaporate the essential Spirits and
good preserving Virtues, which do render of a dead, dull, phlegmatic, gross
Nature and Operation, as we have more largely Discoursed in our Way to Health.

Secondly, It is a general Custom to put up hot Liquor a third time on your
Malt, or rather Grains, and to let it stand an hour or more, which makes a
very ill sort of Drink; for the first and second Liquors have extracted or
drawn forth all the brisk, lively, sweet qualities of the Malt, so that this
third hot Liquor has nothing to work on, or draw forth, but only a gross
Substance, stinking, harsh, bitter, or keen quality, void of all the seminal or
sweet Virtues. Now if there be any goodness left in the Malt or Grains, it is
weak and fainty, and the gross, fulsom, Martial, Saturnine Properties are
strong, and have obtained the Ascendant, and therefore they do in a moment
swallow up the fading Virtue, and transmute it into its own Property; for these
fiery qualities do, with open Jaws, devour the friendly Virtues, and turn them
into their own Nature, ( viz.) into a fiery keen quality, a mere Caput mortuum
Phlegm; for all things when they have attained their highest degree, limit, or
perfection, do by degrees, as it were, go backwards, and sink toward their
Original or Root whence they proceeded.

Thirdly, By what has been said it appears, and ought to be considered. That
the same Beer that is made of the third putting up of the Liquor on the Malt
or Grains, is generally pernicious to Health: for as is mentioned before, the
first and second Liquors, have before drawn forth all or most of the good,
sweet, friendly Virtues, and there remains nothing but a dull, heavy, gross
Phlegm of a tart, sour Nature, which incorporates with the Liquor, and is of a
very unpleasing taste; and small, and then the common Custom is to take this
third Wort, (indeed not fit for Hoggs-wash) and boil it stoutly with the Dregs
of the Hops which has been boiled several hours before in the first and second
Wort, which still does more increase the Mischief; for the boiling of Hops
totally suffocates, evaporates, and destroys all the volatile Spirits and soft
friendly Virtues, and there does nothing remain in them after such boiling, but
an harsh, bitter, astringent, sour Property, which such small Wort in the
boiling draws forth.

For this cause most small Beer, especially that which is made after Ale or
strong Beer, is injurious to Health, and the common drinking thereof does
generate various Diseases, but more especially the Scurvy in the Blood;
therefore all that do regard their Health, ought to forbear drinking such ill
prepared Liquors. The best Small, or Table Beer, is to be made by adding a
large proportion of Liquor to your Malt (according as you would have it) and
then mix the first and second Wort equally together, for the Reasons before
mentioned, for all Preparations were intended to open the crude Body by
firmentation, or some other way, which do not only awaken, and set the fine
Spirits and friendly Virtues on the wing, but also in some degree excite the
harsh, ^itter, sour, astringent Properties, but still the balsamic Virtues are
most volatile, and readiest to give forth themselves, when communicated to a
proper Minstrim, as appears not only in the Art of Brewing, but also in common
Chemistry the Spirits and good Properties gives forth themselves, and runs off
first, and afterward the bitter, astringent, four, harsh ones follows.

Fourthly, The quantity of Hops for Beer, if you propose to keep it half a
year, or a year, ought to be six or seven pound to eight Bushels of Malt, and
so proportionable; but for Beer or Ale that is to be spent presently, two,
three, or four to eight Bushels will suffice. Also note, That all sorts of Beer
or Ale are best new, and much more agreeable to Nature, as I have mentioned
before; for the longer any firmented Drinks are kept, the more they tend
toward harshness, keneness, and sharpness, and the Saturnine, Martial
Properties are thereby advanced, and the mild, friendly qualities debilitated,
for which reason all stale Beer does heat the Body, and much more disorder it
then new.

Fifthly, Another thing is in a most special manner to be noted, ( viz) That
your Vessels in which you cool your Wort, ought to be well cleansed; and also
your Mashtub ( viz.) washed well with cold water, which is better than hot; for
boiling water does, as it were, fright or drive back into the wood a certain,
four, fulsom quality that the former Wort left behind, and which the wood of
the Coolers had sucked in; for the humidity or sweet quality that the wood
receives from the Wort, do presently turn very sharp, four, and keen,
especially in hot Seasons of the Year, so that when the fresh, new, sweet Wort
comes into such Coolers, it does most eagerly and powerfully attract and draw
forth that lurking keen, sharp, sour quality that the wood had received and
retained, which will occasion the whole to become of a sharp quality, which is
called ( Pricks,) but hardly perceivable to the Palate; but when it is
firmented, this evil quality gets the Ascendent over the whole, which is the
principal occasion why Brewers Ale in hot Seasons will not keep above four,
five, or six days, or there abouts. Now the best way to prevent this Evil is,
that your Coolers are still washed well in cold water, wherein some bitter
Herbs or Seeds are infused 24 hours, as Wormwood gathered and dried, as we have
taught in our Way to Health; and after they are well cleansed with this bitter
water, then expose your Vessels to the open Air as much as possible you can,
for nothing sweetens and cleanses so much as Air; also avoid putting your
Vessels into Cellars, or any close Places where the Air has not its free
influences. The like is to be done in the cleansing your Tun in which you work
your Drink in. The like is to be understood in Ovens; for if you bake spicy
Foods, as Pies, and the like, and afterward heat the Oven for small Bread,
such Bread will be tinged, and smell strong of the former things, that is, if
the Oven be heat presently; but if the Oven stands open two or three days, in
which time those spicy qualities will evaporate; for the Spirits of things are
so quick, powerful, and subtle, that they penetrate even the hardest of
Bodies, which neither fire nor water can presently extinguish, but they remain
as it were entire and fixed, until a suitable subject matter be offered, into
which, as by Simile, they retreat, and therewith readily incorporate, and
therefore remember your Friend the Air; and to prevent this and many other
Inconveniences, expose your Vessels to its free Influences; for no Element has
so great power to cleanse, sweeten, and to give true Life to every thing,
according to the nature of each, as Air; and where it has its free Circulation
and Influence, it destroys all Putrification, Vermin, and evil Scents. But
because brewing is become a Trade, and such must brew three or four days in a
week, therefore they have not sufficient time to expose their Vessels to this
cleansing Element, as Houswives, and others, that brew only for their own
private Families, it will therefore be convenient for them to Copper, Lead, or
Tin their Coolers over, as also the Mash-tub or Tun they firment or work there
drink in, but Copper and Tin is best, which will in a great degree prevent the
souring or pricking of their Ale in Summer, and their Beer will have the same
advantage, for the sweet Spirits cannot so easily penetrate those hard Metaline
Bodies, nor will so great a quantity of Humidity enter, and that which does
will not become sharp, nor sour, as in wood, having no such subject matter to
work on.

It is also to be noted, That your Wort ought to stand very thin or shallow in
your Coolers, for that will preserve it from fretting and growing sharp or
keen, if the other Circumstances beforementioned be observed. Moreover, your
Wort ought to be, as it were, quite cold, before it be put together to work^
for if it be set together too hot, it will firment so violently, and in a
moments time irritate and awaken the hot, sharp, fiery Spirit, which should not
be stirred up, which spends and destroys the pure fine Spirit and sweet Body,
and consequently cause your Beer or Ale to grow stale to fast. Nor ought you
when your Beer or Ale is in the Tun, to beat your Yest or Balm into it, as the
Custom of some Brewers is, especially in and about London, which is very
prejudicial to Health, and ought to be restrained by some Law; for this beating
of the Yest into the drink does so mix, and as it were incorporate them
together, and flatten or suffocate the fine penetrating Virtues, that in its
firmentation the gross excrementitious Matter cannot separate from the finer
Parts, by which means it does retain a strong, gross, and fulsom sweetness,
which too many ignorant People admire, and count good and nourishing; but in
truth such Liquors fail not to fur, foul, and obstruct the Stomach and
Passages, sending dark dulling Fumes and Vapors into the Head, and also
generate an hard, gritty quality in People subject to the Stone and Gravel:
Also such Drinks are of evil consequence to Women who are of tender Natures,
and weaker Spirits and Heats than Men, therefore let them refrain the same, if
they have any respect to their own and their Childrens Healths.

The usual Course in brewing, is to let your Drink work in the Tun till it
begins to fall or firment more gently, and then to Tun it up into your Casks,
which new motion and agitation puts the Drink upon a fresh firmentation, and
causes it oftentimes to work again as fierce and eagerly as it did at first, or
more, which is apt to make it fret or spend it self, for much or fierce working
makes all Drinks to grow keen and stale, sooner then when its firmentation is
moderate. It will indeed in such Case become fine somewhat sooner, because the
volatile Spirits and sweet Body is wasted, or rather turned into sharpness by
the two long and fierce firmentation. Therefore, those that have a mind to
avoid this Inconveniency, ought to Tun or put up their Drink young, as the
Brewers calls it, that is, before it has firmented too much, ( viz.) so soon
as your Drink works you ought to Tun it into the Barrels or Vessels, and you
need not doubt but it will work sufficiently; nay, you may when your Wort is
thorough cold, mix your Yest well with your Wort, and put it into your Vessels
presently, and it will do extraordinary well.

Now if any think that so short a time of Infusion as I have prescribed will
not get out the Virtue and Goodness of the Hops without boiling of them
stoutly, I answer, That all the mild, friendly virtues of Hops lies as it were
outward and ready, which with the least violence are drawn forth, as appears by
that delicate Scent and Odor which they cast abroad; nay, so free and tender
they are, that if they be not close ram'd or stuffed into Baggs, the very Air
shall steal away most of their Excellency, and if so, what will the fierce heat
and violent boiling do, which every considerate wise man ought to consider.

Now as to the Nature of Hops, there is in them a most excellent glance or
friendly opening quality, more especially if they were dried in the Sun, which
is to be preferred before the Host or Kill; for the spirituous parts of this
Plant is so nice, that it cannot endure any violent heat without prejudice to
its fine Virtues, and you might almost as rationally make your Hay that way,
which if you should be so dull as not to perceive your folly, I doubt not but
your bruit Beasts would upbraid you of indiscretion, and teach you the
difference. Hops naturally purges powerfully by Urine, if prepared and used
with understanding, so that they are unjustly charged to breed the Stone; for,
on the contrary, they are a special Remedy against it, if orderdered with
judgment, and as they ought to be; but as every thing consists of Contraries,
they may and do occasion the Stone, and other Diseases by accident; but it is
only when they are abused, and after their good Virtues are drawn off or
evaporated by the force of fire, as boiling, and the like, which is done in a
trice; for no Herbs that have been dried as they ought, will endure the fire or
boiling without manifest prejudice to the best Virtues; but it is a gentle
Infusion that will naturally, and without violence to Nature extract or draw
forth all that is desired in Hops, or any other dried or prepared Herbs; but
it is true, it will not rouse nor infect your Liquor with their original harsh,
bitter, sulsom, keen, hot Properties, which too many, for want of
distinguishing the Principles of Nature, call Virtue and Strength; indeed
Strength and Fierceness it is, but far from Virtue in respect of Human Bodies,
nothing scarce being more inimical and injurious thereunto, which evil
Properties in every thing are the more drawn forth and increased by over much
boiling, especially in Herbs and Vegitations which have been already firmented
and digested by the Influences of the Sun and Elements, whereby the gross
phlemy Parts are opened, and the Spirits set upon the wing ready to come forth
upon any gentle Summons.

But the swinging Objection is yet behind; You undertake (cries the professed
Brewers, and the good Dames) to teach us to brew, yet have out the principal
Verb; you say the Liquor, before it be put to the Malt, must only be
moderately hot, not boiled: Well, suppose we should yield to this, still you
forget to tell us, how long it ought to be boiled after it is drawn off the
Malt: Sure you would not have us brew without boiling at all, and make raw Ale
and Beer, and take 12 or 16 s. per Barrel only for a little Water bewitched, the
Rincings of a parcel of Malt and a few Hops in a little warm Water, with a
small doze of Yest to make it bubble in the Barrel, is like to make excellent
humming Liquor. You complain of our Ale not keeping above a week; Is it
possible (if unboyled) it should keep at all? Nay, can Absurdity call it Beer
or Ale? He is like to have Customers, who should write over his Sign, Here Is
Beer and Ale to be sold that never was boiled. When the great Fault that all
the World finds with the Common Brewers Drink, is, that they do not boil it
half enough; and yet they boil it double the time as most Housewives do. But if
you could make good your words, That good Ale and Beer might be made without
boiling away a great quantity of what they put up, the Company of Brewers might
well afford you Five hundred pounds a year for the Invention; for they could
save almost as much as their Excise comes to.

Answer. This I confess is the common Leiry, but it affects me no more than the
buzzing of Flies about my Nose in Autumn. The Objection consists of several
Parts, I will endeavor to answer them in order.

First, As to the boiling of Wort after drawn from the Malt, I do aver that it
is not only unnecessary, but mischievous, for the Reasons before mentioned, and
also by what follows. It Is not boiling, but a due firmentation that makes
excellent generous Liquor. Wine and Sider are not boiled (at least not
commonly) yet few People scruples, or think them ever the worse: What Is the
Reason? because they will say, the Grapes and Apples have passed through as
much digestion as they ought, or need to have, by the ripening Influences of
the Sun and Elements. Well then, and what is the matter but ripe Barley, which
has not only received a far higher digestion by the same Sun and Elements, and
will thereby remain good and sound several years, which the best Grapes and
Apples will not continue good a tenth part of the time; and though it be harder
and more tenatious in its kind, has yet undergone a second by its being made
into Malt, and a third afterward by our way of Infusion in water, fitted to a
due warmth to extract its spirituous Virtues and sweet Body, should need a
fourth of boiling so long as you talk of. Is Water (seeing it is originally
designed by God, and his Handmaid Nature, the common Drink for all Creatures)
of such an ill nature or quality, that it requires so much boiling? No
certainly; for boil a Gallon of Water to three quarts, and let the remainder
stand eight or ten days, and you will find all its brisk pleasantness (before to
any accustomed or undepraved pallat as relishing as any Liquor whatsoever)
wholly lost, so that you, or any Beast, will nautiate to drink it. The Reasons
why we heat Water in brewing to such a competent degree, is not so much to
correct its Rawness, as they falsely call it, as to qualify it to open and draw
forth and imbibe the good virtues of the Malt, and so likewise of the Hops,
which being once effected, all our pains in boiling is superfluous, and not
only so, but detrimental too; for henceforwards, if you proceed in your
boiling, you do but raise and induce those fierce bitter Spirits in each thing
or ingredient, which though fitly planted in them by Nature, for their own
particular Conversation, were yet never intended for the use of Man, as being
injurious to his own Nature when unduly separated from the friendly qualities
or light of Nature. If then neither the Water, nor the Malt, nor the Hops
require this tedious boiling, why is it practiced? Or rather is it not a
demonstration, that the same is detrimental; since in all Nature's ways
unnecessaries are hurtful, and over-doing there (as well as in Morals) is a
badge of Vice. You talk of Rawness, it is but raw that is indigested (Argument)
but the Drink I recommend is not such, since it has passed through all the
digestions and firmentations that it ought to do; and if People will not be
willing to give 12 or 16 s. per Barrel for wholesome Drink, as for unwholsom, I
can neither help nor hinder it, any more than persuade an ignorant Irishman to
quit his stinking Butter (of as many Colors as the Rainbow) for wholesome,
sweet English Butter, which he counts has no taste in it; all this is but the
effects of Custom. But add further, That this unboyled Drink will not keep; I
answer (better for all good Intents) then your parboiled Gear. The best way to
prove a thing feasible is to do it: Now I have more than once made excellent
Beer that never boiled, and yet has kept good, in your sense, a Twelvemonth,
and he that keeps any longer, has kept it six Months too long. As for what is
intended for long Sea Voyages, it is a particular business, and so the boiling
of it with Hops a great while may, together with excessive salt meats, notably
help the Seamen to the Scurvey, and yet both the one and the other might easily
be avoided. But still you urge, the only Fault all the world finds with Brewers
of common Ale and Beer, that it is not boiled half enough, yet, and with as much
Judgment, as once an honest Tubman, whose Employment was to carry Beer and Ale
from Brewhouses to his Masters, whom I employed to carry my Ale, who would
needs be tasting: Ay marry Master, quoth he, this is good Ale indeed, a man may
taste this is well boiled; if Brewers would but boil theirs so, we should not
have such filthy unwholsom Drink in every Alehouse; whilst all the while the
Ale he drank never boiled one wallop. But if I could make my words good, the
Brewers might give me Five hundred pounds per Annum, and get money by the
bargain. I have made good my words, but I dare not undertake to rectify at
once all the debauched Palats and depraved Judgments throughout the Kingdom. If
abundance of People will love fulsom Ale, with Yest thwackt into it, to make it
as they think strong and mighty, or the rueful Juices of parboyl'd Hops, and
will Court the Stone, the Scurvey, the Consumption, and the like, to make work
for the Sexton and the Flanel Weavers, I can no more help it then the
Selfmurther of above 40000 a year, by the use of that Alamode Liquor, Brandy.
And as for a Pension from the Brewers, I am as far from seeking it, or (bless
God) from needing it, as (I fear) they will be from following my well intended
advice; for it is no new thing for men, over whom Custom and Tradition has got
the Ascendant, to act not only against Reason, but even contrary to their own
true Interest to. Much more I could say, but I think this enough for such a
Vulgar Objection.

Here give me leave to tell you, that there are a great number of brave Herbs
and Vegitations that will do the business in brewing, as well as Hops, and for
many Constitutions much better; for it is Custom more than their real Virtues
that renders Hops of general Use and Esteem; they are an excellent Herb, and
would be much better, if they were or could be dried in the Sun. Some other
Herbs I shall here mention, fit to be made use of in Drinks.

Penny Royal and Balm are noble Herbs, and of excellent use in Beer or Ale; they
naturally raise and cheer the drooping Spirits, and open and cleanse the
Passages after a friendly way, and with a mild Operation. And also they add
great strength and fragrancy, and makes brave, well tasted Drink, good to
prevent and cure all, or most of those Diseases which the wise Ancients have
appropriated that Herb unto. The like is to be understood of Mint, Tansie,
Wormwood, Broom, Cardias, Centuary, Eyebright, Betony, Sage, Dandelion, and
good Hay; also many others, according to their Natures and Qualities, and for
those Diseases to which they are respectively appropriated. But note, that all
and every of these Herbs ought to be gathered in their proper Seasons, and dry
and preserved as we have given Directions in our Way to Health; for you ought
not to use any Herb or Vegitation in Beer or Ale whilst they are green, except
there be a necessity.

Secondly, When you infuse in your Beer or Ale Wormwood, Broom, Tansey, Cardis,
or any other Herb that exceeds in bitterness, you ought not to let them lie in
your Wort above half an hour, or if you put in a good quantity, a quarter of an
hour will be enough; for in all such bitter Herbs the Martial and Saturnine
harsh Properties are near at hand, and the warw Wort will quickly stir up and
awaken their harsh, bitter, strong, astringent qualities, which will presently
devour, suffocate, and destroy the fine spirituous Virtues and opening
cleansing Properties; and then such Drinks becomes of an hard, harsh,
constringent Nature, and are apt to obstruct the Stomach, and send Fumes into
the Head, heating the body and blood too violently; therefore all, or most
Infusions of Herbs, made after this common way, more especially of bitter
Herbs, are naughty and injurious to Health. As for Example; They put a quantity
of Wormwood, or some other bitter Herb, into their Beer or Ale, at or after it
has done working, and there let it lie infusing (or rather rotting) two,
three, four, five, or six Weeks, and in Alehouses so many Months, until the
Cask be out, whereby all the good, opening, penetrating, brisk Spirits, and
fine Virtues of such Herbs are totally destroyed, and instead thereof the Drink
impregnated with their contraries, ( viz.) with the harsh, bitter, churlish,
inimical Properties, especially when such Infusions are made of Wormwood; for
this reason common Wormwood Beer and Ale does not only hurt, but by degrees
weaken the natural heat of the Stomach, but sends dulling Fumes and Vapors into
the Head, and does prejudice the Eyes. It Is certain, Infusion of Herbs, if due
order be observed, is the best and most profitablest way yet found out to
obtain their Virtues, both for common Use and Physic, far beyond Waters and
Spirits drawn from them by Distillation, for thereby a burning, fierce,
brimstony Spirit is extracted, void of all the mild, cleansing, opening
Qualities or mild Virtues, which in firmentation are turned into a Degree of
Anasidity, which fits it, and renders it capable of Separation. As for Example,
Take Sugar (which is the most balsamic and highest sweet of any thing in the
World) firmentation will in a little time turn the whole sweet Body into a
sour, or a degree of sharpness, then distill it, and you shall have a hot,
burning Spirit, and for every pound of Sugar you will have near a pound of
Spirit. Here you see the whole, sweet, pleasant Body is turned into a fierce,
strong, burning Spirit, which has its uses in Physic, but otherwise pernicious
if commonly drunk, as too many do. The very same is to be understood in the
firmenting and distilling of any sorts of Herbs; as in the Spirit of
Scurvy Grass, so much of late cried up for its wonderful Virtues against the
Scurvy, when in truth there is nothing in it; for if you take Scurvy Grass, and
infuse it in Brandy, or any other Minstrum, for a certain time, till it
firments to such a degree, and then draw it off, or distill it, and instead then
of obtaining the friendly, mild, cleansing Virtues, and middle qualities, you
have a strong, fiery, brimstony Spirit, which is not so good as rectified
Spirit of Wine, and it has no manner of force to cure or prevent the Scurvy in
the Blood, for in good earnest, the frequent use of such Spirits do heat the
Blood, obstruct the Stomach, and increase Scorbutic Diseases. The greatest
Virtues it has, it being put into Ale, Beer, or Wine, in a Morning fasting, it
quickens the Stomach, as Spirits do, and seems to purge by Urine, as most mixed
Drinks do, especially when Spirits are mixed with other Liquors, but it is the
order and Time, and the Liquor it is put into, that is the principal point why
it purges by Urine, being generally drunk in a Morning fasting, when the
Stomach is free from Food, and the Passages least obstructed, then a Glass or
two of any sort of Liquor or Drink will quickly run thorough a man, and purge
much more by Urine, then at any other time of the day. And I do affirm, That if
any one take Brandy, or other good Spirits, and in a Morning fasting, drop
sixty or seventy drops into a Glass of Ale, and fast two or three hours after
it, and it shall purge by Urine, and also quicken the Stomach, and have as good
Effects on the Scurvy as the best distilled Scurvy Grass, let it either be
drawn off with Brandy, or of its self. And also the Mornings draught the good
Dame teaches her Husband to drink, (viz.) Ale and Brandy mixed together, which
will prove as beneficial. The like is to be understood of other things called
Medicines, if once the Multitude cries them up, though they be never so
heterogene and improper, they must do wonders, but leaving them to their own
Humors, I shall proceed to teach you several good Drinks against the Stone and
Gravel, and other Diseases.

The best Drinks to prevent the Generation, and Cure the Stone and Gravel, are
such Drinks which God and his Handmaid Nature have prepared to our hands, and
is ready every where to be had ( viz.) good River water; for the Stone and
Gravel is hardly known in those Countries where the Natives common Drink is
Water, for that of all others is the most friendly, mild, and cleansing: But on
the contrary, all firmented spirituous Drinks, let them be as wisely handled as
they can, nevertheless they heat the Blood, and a little time does naturally
cause them to tend toward heat, sharpness and keneness, which Qualities are
great Enemies to the Human Nature, and breaks the Harmony of the Humors,
especially in such that are apt in Constitution to generate Gravel or the
Stone; also such Drinks causes the Distempers called Heart-burnings, Fevers,
and unnatural Heats throughout the whole Body; therefore such as have a mind to
preserve their Healths, and be friends to their own Natures, let them follow
these Directions, viz.

Of Cold Gruel.
TAke one spoonful of good Oatmeal, temper it with a little Water, then take a
quart of the same cold Water, and brew the mixed Water and Oatmeal well
together with the other quart, in two Pots that are for that purpose, and then
it is done. Remember that your Oatmeal must be ground. The Oatmeal, if good,
will mix or incorporate with the Water. Of this sort you may drink a pint or a
quart, or more, at a time: This is a most excellent Drink to be drunk Mornings,
and at Meals, or at any time of the day, and season of the Year, for all sorts
of People, both for the healthy and unhealthy, especially in hot Seasons, and
for such who are subject to the Stone, Gravel, or any other Obstructions of the
Passages; and for young People, the frequent and common use thereof does
wonderfully strengthen the whole Body, it is so friendly and homogeneal, that
it always quenches Thirst the best of any others, by refreshing the Spirits,
bedewing the Body with a more pleasant and more natural moisture, than either
Beer, Ale, Syder, or any other firmented Drinks. It begets a natural
cheerfulness, extinguisheth all kinds of natural Flushings and Vapors that
comes for want of a strong, natural Health, and large Passages. It opens and
frees the Stomach and Passages from gross Matter that obstruct the digestive
Faculties, and powerfully purges by Urine, especially if a quart or two be
drank in a Morning fasting. It mightily assists Nature in all her Operations;
and it is not only profitable against the Stone and Gravel, but also against
griping pains of the Bowels, helps Concoction, disburthening the Stomach of
superfluous Juices, and cleanses the Vessels which are generally stopped and
furred by Intemperance; and it does naturally prevent Fumes and Vapors, by
carrying the offending windy Matter into the Bowels, causing it to pass with
ease its proper way. Also the common use thereof is an excellent Remedy against
shortness of Breath, or other ill habits of the Stomach, and against all sharp
windy Humors and Juices that falls into the Joints. And nothing is a surer and
more powerful Remedy against the Scurvy and Dropsy, by opening the
Obstructions of the Liver and Spleen; begets Appetite to admiration, cheers and
comforts the Spirits, and is in every repect friendly to Nature, and assists
her in all her Operations. And whosoever shall accustom themselves to the
frequent drinking of this cold Gruel, shall find by experience greater benefit
than I have here set down. In all cold Seasons you may warm your Water as you
commonly do Ale or Beer, to that degree of heat which do rather better it then
the contrary. It is also to be noted, that firmentation, not only in Liquors,
but also in Herbs and Vegitations, do destroy or transmute the opening, mild,
friendly, cleansing and purging qualities, by which they become of another
nature and operation, for it changes sweetness into the highest degree of
keneness and sharpness, opening the Body, and set the Spirits at liberty or on
the wing, as is most manifest in Wort drawn from Malt, which is of an opening
purging quality, but when firmented or worked, and of ten or fourteen days old,
fit to drink, then it is become another thing, for firmentation has changed or
transmuted those soft, mild, opening, friendly qualities into a brisk, lively,
spiritual Property, tending to heat, sharpness, and keeness. The like is to be
understood in the Infusion of all opening Herbs in Wort, or the boiling them in
Wort, and firmenting them afterward, therefore all sorts of opening Liquors and
Infusions are most profitable against the Stone, Gravel, and Obstruction of the
Uritors before they be firmented of all, which our friendly cold Gruel has the
first place; but for such that have been accustomed to Beer, Ale, Wine, and
Syder, and are not willing to venture on our friendly Gruel, ought to drink all
their firmented Liquors, new Ale a week, Beer twelve or fourteen days, and
Syder and Wine new; and if they will use any opening Seeds or Herbs, then let
them infuse them in a pint of your Beer, Ale, Syder, or Wine one quarter of an
hour before you drink, and warm it a little, so much as you do Ale or Beer when
you drink it, which is a commendable way, far better then putting or infusing
the Herbs or Seeds in the Barrel, or working of them in the Wort. And you must
remember that in all your Infusions that you use, infuse but one Herb or Seed
at a time, make no mixtures, least instead of advancing, you quite destroy the
natural and simple Operations of that from which you expect help, for few men
do understand the genuine Nature and Operation of two or three several Herbs or
Seeds, when mixed or infused together, much less when four, five, six, seven,
eight, nine, ten, or twenty are jumbled together, as I have elsewhere
demonstrated.

Those that desire a more friendly Ale then is generally drunk, may infuse what
quantity they please in there warm Wort, as you do Hops: Also use the Herb
Ale-hoof, Fennel Seeds, Caroways, and Coriander, all which are notable Purges
by Urine; but they purge by Urine more powerful when infused in either new Ale
or Beer, that is already firmented, as is mentioned before; so you may do it in
small quantities, as you have occasion: But if you infuse those, or any other
Herbs in Water, ( viz.) in cold Water, for ten or twelve hours, and then drink
a pint, or what you please, which have a far more powerful Operation against
the forementioned Distempers, then in any firmented Liquor. It is further to be
considered, That strong, stale Beer, Syder, Wine, or any other firmented
Liquors, the frequent drinking thereof do not only generate the Stone and
Gravel, but they do as often occasion the Gout, Consumptions, Dropsies, and
many other Diseases, all according to the Nature of each man's Constitution, and
what properly has got the Ascendant in the Humors of the Body, as is manifest
in great Eaters and Drinkers; one man drinks and eats himself into the Gout,
another into a Consumption, another into a Dropsy, or some other Distemper;
the evil Effects are as various as their Natures and Constitutions are
contrary. Be therefore reconciled to Water, that generous Element which without
doubt was, and is the only Drink ordained for all Creatures by our Creator,
therefore he that first firmented the Juices of the Grape, and made strong
Drink thereof, did drink and was drunk, and therefore was cursed with the
greatest of Curses, which ought to be considered by all wise and good men; but
Water is so friendly, and does contain many secret and admirable Virtues, which
the Creator has endued this Element with, as in all Ages has been manifest;
for it being pure and clear in its own Nature; and is it not the only, and
alone thing, by which all External things are purified, purged and cleansed?
And though it be a vulgar Proverb, As weak as Water, yet I must tell you, Water
is more strong and sublime then most imagine, for it contains a most ravishing
and excellent sweet Virtue, whence proceeds the pure, friendly, refreshing
quality, whereby it has power, by its innate Virtue, to delight and purify
all sorts of Food. Also in Preparations it is so innocent and friendly, that it
dissipates the gross phlemy Body, and preserves the more Essential Parts and
Virtues, and keeps them living. What shall I say, words cannot declare its
excellency; it is not only the most plentiful and truly pleasant of all Drinks,
but it supplies Nature with its friendly moisture, and relieves Thirst beyond
all other Liquors or Juices, it is so simple, and endued with such equality,
that it insinuates its mild opening Virtues into all parts of the Body in an
insensible way; it makes no noise, nor causes any tumults in the Brain, nor
awakens any inequality in the Body; but it imparts its meek Life as it were in
silence; and as Bread has the first place of all Food, and may justly be
called Concord, as being the foundation of all good Nourishment, the like is to
be understood of Water, that being the Radix of all moist Nourishment, and
renders all things fit and profitable for Mankind, of which there are great
variety, all according to the Natures and Salniteral Virtues of the Earth it
proceeds from; but for general Use, Rain, River, and Spring Water are the best,
and that of these sorts that will wash, brew, and perform all Preparations in
Houswifery is the best, ( viz.) that Water that will wash Lining to advantage
is the best, which generally River-water will do, far better than most Springs,
as I have demonstrated in our Way to Health.

Cautions against certain Foods that Generate the Stone and Gravel.
First, SUch as are naturally subject to these Diseases ought to refrain from
all over-salt Fish and Flesh, for such things are not only hard of Concoction,
furring the Passages, but they do heat the whole Body, and infect the Blood
with a salt, sharp, scorbutic Humor, occasioning Crudities and evil Juices,
obstructing the Passages of the whole Body, and especially the Uriters.

Thirdly, Let them refrain all Spicy Foods, for they naturally heat the blood,
hurt the natural heat, and produce the same Effects, especially in youth.

Thirdly, Let them refrain all or most sorts of Food made sweet with Sugar, for
the frequent use of such Meats and Drinks do prove very prejudicial to most
Peoples health, but more especially to such as are subject to the forementioned
Diseases; for over-sweetness in Foods and Drinks, does not only thicken the
Blood, and hinder its free Circulation, but it indues it with a watery
phlegmatic quality, and turns the Humors to the highest degree of souerness,
more especially if fats and sweetness be compounded together, as they are for
the most part (as the sweetest Wines makes the sharpest Vinegar) which
immediately tends toward Putrefaction, whence proceeds various Diseases,
according to each man's Constitution and Complexion, viz. Scabs, Boyls,
Leprosies, Consumptions, Gout, and Stone, all Stoppages of the Breast, ill
Digestion, Nautiousness, rotten Teeth, offensive Breath, all which Distempers
have of late years been more brief and frequent, since the common eating of
sugered Foods and Drinks. And indeed most Mothers and Nurses, through an
ignorant fondness, do lay the Foundations for these, and the like Diseases in
Children, from their very Infancy, by the continued use of sweetened Milks, and
other compounded Foods; for Sugar, though it be the King of all Vegitations, and
the sublimest Salt the Vegitative Kingdom affords, as being more highly
graduated in the almost paradisical quality the Sweet; nevertheless, that too
frequent or overmuch eating of it proves baneful to Health, especially to
young People and Children; for when it comes into the Stomach, and is there
firmented, it presently tends to keneness, sharpness, and souerness, which in
many People proves of evil Consequence, and does generate a hard gretty Stone,
making Substance as it finds Matter capable, and disposed to receive and join
Forces with it.

Fourthly, Also let those that are subject to the forementioned Diseases,
forbear as much as in them lies, the frequent eating of fat succulant Foods;
for you must note, that all fat Bodies are nothing so easily dissolvable,
neither can the Natural Minstrum or Heat of the Stomach, so well digest or make
separation thereof, as it can on Vegitation; neither do such things generate so
good Blood, or fine brisk lively Spirits; for this Cause fat Foods lie long in
the Stomach, and seem to satisfy it, not that they afford more or better
Nourishment, but the reason thereof is their oyliness, as is manifest in all
External Operations, for what Menstrum will easily separate and dissolve fat
oily things. The like is to be understood of the Stomach; for this Cause a man
may eat double the quantity of lean Foods as he can of fat, and yet be more
brisk, lightsom, and airy, and sooner an hungry again, especially when used
thereunto. Besides, fat Foods do not only fur the Passages of the Uretors, and
generate evil Juices there, but in all or most phlegmetick Constitutions,
obstructs the Stomach, causing Coughs, and great increase of Phlegmatic
Matter, whence grosness and fatness in such People does proceed; and the only
and most principal Foods to prevent such inconveniences are simple Vegitations.

Fifthly, Improper Mixtures and Compositions are to be avoided, as also baked,
fried, and stewed Foods, and not to eat any thing hotter than your Blood, and
in Summer let all your Foods be quite cold, only spoon Meats may be eaten as
hot as Milk from the Cow; for whatsoever Food is taken hot, as the general
Custom is, the same is contrary to Nature, and does generate bad Blood, viz.
makes it hot, sharp, and saltish, which will manifest it self by breaking out
in various Spots on the Flesh and Skin, commonly called Symptoms of the Scurvy;
therefore consider the great and most wonderful work and mystery of Nature in
Generation, and making of all Creatures, which is performed by a due heat and
moisture, the heat not exceeding that of our well tempered Blood, which we have
treated on more fully in our Way to Health. The truth of these things, I think,
no wise man can deny, the same being sensibly demonstrated by the Natives of
those Countries, where they live for the most part on simple Foods, and
innocent Drinks, viz. Water, which makes them strangers to the Stone, Gout,
Consumption, and to many other Distempers that we are most generally afflicted
with; therefore those that would enjoy Health and long Life (which, amongst all
wise men, was, and is esteemed a great blessing from the Lord) and prevent and
cure themselves of these Diseases, let them, I say, apply themselves to simple
Meats, and such Drinks as are before prescribed, viz. to eat freely of Bread,
Herbs, Gruels, both of Oatmeal and Wheat Flour, and all Foods made of
Vegitations, which are of various sorts, and yet natural and innocent, and
every one may by practice learn how to apply them.

A good Drink against the Stone and other Stoppages.
TAke good Chalk, infuse it in either River or Spring Water two, three, four,
or six days in open Vessels in the Air, this is of excellent use, and very
profitable against all stoppages and assid sharp Juices that are subject to
gripe the Stomach and Bowels; also it purges by Urine, and brings away Gravel
and slimy offensive Matter; for Chalk does naturally indue or impregnate the
Water with a fine, mild, soft, friendly, or milky quality, very good against
Obstructions and sharp sour Juices; it is taste is pleasant and grateful.

The good Houswife may brew with this Chalky Water to great advantage, for it
makes excellent, mild, soft Ale, friendly to Nature. This Water also will wash
to great advantage, for it will save them both Labor and Soap. The truth is,
Chalk is a brave, noble, Virgins Earth, of a Venerial Balsamic Nature and
Operation, of admirable use and profit in the Manuring of all cold, stiff,
claiey Ground, it is to be preferred before Lime, for one Manuring with Chalk
will continue its Virtues several years, but the Salniteral Virtue of Lime will
not hold so long, because in the burning of Lime the violent harsh fire of the
Kill does totally destroy the mild, soft, friendly quality, and there does only
remain the Original Salt, which is of an hot tart Nature and Operation, drying,
and astringent; which qualities are very profitable and useful in several
Trades and Arts, especially in refining and making white Sugar, and indeed all
sorts of Sugar, it gives it Body and Life, causes a Coagulation.

But Chalk, being entire and simple, retains a most sweet, allaying, mild,
friendly Virtue, which also is one of the best things for Manuring Fruit Trees
that stand in wet, cold Ground, to render them fruitful.

So Chalk being powdered, and put into Vinegar or Lime-Juice, it will presently
set it into a firmentation, and in a very little time it will allay or drink up
the sharpness or assidity thereof, so that it will become almost mild; also
being put into the fierce, corroding, keen Spirit of Salt, it will in some
measure allay its fiery sharpness. Likewise, if the powder of Chalk be put into
hard stale Beer, Syder, or Mum, and stir or brew it together, and then let it
stand two or three minutes, and it will presently settle; it will drink new,
mild and pleasant, and also very wholesome and palatable, so wonderful is its
qualifying, friendly, mild nature, and without doubt it does contain many great
Secrets (the discovering of which is not suitable to this place) what is said
being sufficient to insinuate the usefulness thereof, both in Husbandry and
Housewifery, and Physic, in which last Respect, for the preservation of
Health, I recommend it to all People, especially to those that are subject by
Nature or Accident to those terrible Distempers the Stone and Gout.
Furthermore, it is a common Experiment when People are troubled with the
Distemper, vulgarly called the Heart-burnt, to beat or powder a little Chalk,
and put it to Water, and drink it, which gives them ease; but the reason of the
Cure few considers. I conceive that that Distemper does not so properly afflict
the Heart, as resides about the Orifice of the Stomach, arising from a sharp,
keen, sour, burning Humor or Firment, occasioned by Excess and ill Digestion,
which seems to inflame those Parts; now the drinking of Water, in which Chalk
is infused, does by its mild Balsamic Virtues, allay or mitigate that short
severeness or violence, and thereby gives the Party ease; for if it has such a
power, when only outwardly infused in stale Beer, Syder, Mum, Wine, of Vinegar
and other eager Liquors, it is but reasonable to believe it will have no less
signal Operation, when taken in a proper quantity inwardly, where the friendly
powers of Nature are ready to assist, and help advance to the highest Mergie,
for removing and subduing that which before afflicted and oppressed them.

A good and profitable way for the Poor, and wholesome for the Rich, to make
Cherrywine, or Drink of Goosberries, Currants, Apricocks and Plumbs, being easy
and wholesome, pleasant and cheap. There being but one way and manner in the
making and operation, therefore one Example will serve for all.
TAke ripe Cherries, Goosebearies, Plumbs, Currants, or any of the like Fruits,
bruise them in a convenient Vessel, then put them in a Tub, such a one as you
mash your Malt in when you brew, with a Tap in it, then put what quantity of
good Water ( viz. cold) as you please, as you would have your Drink, small or
strong; let these Cherries infuse twelve, fourteen, sixteen, or eighteen hours,
then draw it off, and if it be to keep, infuse some bitter Herbs or Seeds in it
three hours; but if it be for present drinking, then Balm, or any other good
Herb: After this, add to every Gallon two or three pound of Treakle, or two or
three pound of Sugar or Honey, but if you would have it very strong, then add
more sweetning; then take some Yest or Barm, and put it a working, as you do
Beer or Ale. The same method you may observe in all other Fruits, as
Goosberries, Currants, and the like. This sort of Drink or Wine is to be
preferred before that which is made of the whole Juice, especially if your
Sugar be good; it drinks finer, and is lighter on the Stomach, and more warm,
not so apt to send fumes into the Head, and will digest any sort of Food much
better than that which is commonly made.

There is another way of making this sort of Drink, ( viz.) Take good Water,
and make it scalding hot, put it into your Mash-tub to your bruised Fruits, and
let them infuse one hour, then draw it off, infuse your Herbs or Seeds in it,
if they be bitter half an hour, if not, then an hour, then put it a cooling as
you do Wort, and then put your Sugar, Treakle, or Honey, what quantity you think
fit, or as you would have it in strength, then add some Yest, stir it well
together, and it will firment or work, and so barrel it; but cold Water from
the Fountain is to be preferred before hot, and is much a brisker Wine.

These are easy, cheap, familiar ways, and makes most excellent Drink. If your
Fruits be of your own Growth, it will then stand you but in a small matter,
very little more than ordinary Beer, and be much stronger. This sort of Drink
every poor man may have; and indeed it is a better, and more wholsomer Drink or
Wine then the common sort made by pressing; for Water is the Homogenial
Menstrum in the World, and most familiar to Human Nature; and by this way of
Operation, it mildly and sweetly draws forth all the good Virtues of the Fruit
without force and violence, and leaves the harsh, bitter astringency of the
Stones and Skins behind, whereas pressing does by its violence force forth the
bitter harshness, both of the Stones and Skins, and is very hurtful, as is
clearly seen in Syder and Wine, for the Stones and Skins are of a harsh, bitter
astringent Nature and Operation; for hard bruising, and violent pressing of
tender Fruits, do not only extract and force forth the harshness of the Stones
and Skins, but it does as it were suffocate or dismay the fine, lively,
spirituous qualities, which your Sense of Tasting will tell you. Taste the
Fruit before it be bruised or pressed, and then the Juice that proceeds from
them, the Juice drawn out by our mouth, is fine, brisk, and penetrating; but
the Juices pressed out are dull, heavy, and gross to the Palate and Stomach.
The same is manifest in the Juices pressed out of green Herbs; for Example,
Take what sort, or sorts, of Sallad Herbs, bruise them to mash, then take them
and dish them into a Sallad, and they will be so gross, dull, heavy, and fulsom
to both Palate and Stomach; but those same Herbs that are dished up into a
Sallad, which are not bruised, will be moist, pleasant, and grateful. Now here
you see that this hard bruising and pressing, has as it were wholly destroyed
the brisk lively Virtues, and indeed all that is desirable or delightful both
to the Senses, as well as to the Stomach.

Note that the forementioned Drinks that are made of Water, Herbs, Fruit,
Sugar, Treakle, or Honey, are best with cold Water, as I have told you before,
especially in hot Countries, for fiered Drinks are no Friends to Nature, except
wisely handled; therefore the Natives of those Climates, where they drink
Water, are not known to have the Stone, and where their Foods are simple, which
all wise men ought to consider.

Lastly, Note that all sorts of Syder would keep much better, and be far
wholsomer, especially for ancient People, and such are more or less subject to
the Stone or Gravel, if when it is new made you infused in part of it, some
bitter Herbs, gathered and prepared as we have taught in our Way to Health,
viz. Wormwood, Hops, Cardis, Centuary, Sage, Betiny, Dandelion, or the like,
for the bitter quality does naturally hold the sweet Body and Volatile Spirits,
as it were, captive, for Mars loves Venus, also bitterness does mightily
withstand and moderate the keen, astringent, hard, harsh properties, that they
cannot advance nor devour the sweet, mild qualities; for this cause all bitter
Herbs do preserve all sorts of Drinks, and keep them from sharp hardness and
astringency, longer then otherwise they would. Besides, they are wholesome,
pleasant, and healthful when People are used to them.

Also good store of such Herbs, whose predominant quality stands in bitterness,
ought to be infused in all Drinks made of Sugar, Mallas, Treakle, or Honey,
because such Liquors or Drinks tends to a sharp keneness sooner then Drinks
made of Malt, which our English, and others, ought to consider that inhabits
the West Indies, and other hot Climates, where they frequently make various
sorts of Drinks with Sugar, Mallas, and Fruits, and where also they are
terribly afflicted with the Stone, Gout, and Gravel, viz. which all or most
Drinks made of Sugar or Mallas are apt to generate; for the highest Sweets,
when firmented, either in Liquors, or in the Stomach, quickly tends to the
highest sharpness and keen harshness, especially in some Constitutions, if the
sweet quality be not some degrees alaid or captivated by the bitter, which do
also moderate or withstand the astringent band.

Having had Experience and certain Knowledge of the Virtues of these
Preparations, I thought it my Duty to Communicate to the World, for the benefit
of such as shall please to make use of them, and for such as scorn and deride
them, they shall, though they slight my poor Advice, enjoy my Cordial, Pity.

AN APPENDIX, SHOWING The Natural Causes why Fruit Trees do so frequently fail
Bearing, and Offering Expediments to make Orchards almost constantly fruitful.
With a new Experiment of preserving of Eggs sweet and good for several Months.
HAving in our other Writings occasionally discoursed of Syder, and how
advantagiously the same might be made, especially to Farmers and poor Country
People, I shall here take leave to add a few Considerations touching
Fruit Trees.

It Is certain, that planting of Orchards, as it is a thing of great Delight,
and but of little Labor, and that most Natural and Agreeable unto the first
Commandment of our Creator, so it might be as Profitable an Employment of
Ground as any whatsoever. The only thing, I conceive, that discourages many
People, is, That Fruit Trees, especially old planted, seldom brings any
considerable Crop; for if they bear full one year, its odds but the next they
miss, nay often till the third and fourth year after, they yield not any
considerable quantity of Fruit, the Reason of which is commonly attributed to
great Frosts, sharp Winds, uncouth Seasons, Blasts, and Blithes from unwholsom
Air, and such like External Accidents. But I conceive the true Reason is more
natural, constant, and settled, and being once known, might without much
difficulty be remedied from things known, we by an equality of Reason, may
probably guess at like things, though unknown. Now methinks, in the Husbandry of
Corn, we have every day Instances, very probable to this of Trees, only what is
constantly practiced in one Case, is not regarded in the other.

It is a Rule in Husbandry, not to sow one sort of Grain or Corn two, three, or
four years on one piece of Ground. For Example; Break up Ground, if it be good,
strong, loomy Earth, they will sow Beans; if weaker or light, Oats; after the
Beans or Oats, Wheat; after Wheat, Barley; after Barley, Peace or Rye. But if the
Land be dunged every year, or eevery other year, then you may sow Barley or
Wheat, Beans or Peace two years together, because the fresh dunging of it does
add or strengthen the Salniteral Properties or Virtues, which was much spent or
weakened, or drawn forth by the former years Crop. Nor does any discreet
Husbandman expect a good Crop of any Grain, if he sows it several years
together on the same Field, except he dung it; nor will that do, if he persist
in sowing one and the same sort two, three, or four years one after another;
for the Dung cannot replenish such Land with a sufficient quantity of that
Natural Salniteral Virtue, Fat or Juices that is proper for the Nourishment and
Augmentation of the same kind of Grain so often repeated.

Thus it is plain that each sort of Grain (and consequently every other
Vegitation, of what Species soever it be) does by Simile attract and draw unto
its self, out of the Bowels of the adjacent Ground wherein they grow, such a
particular Nutrative Virtue or Juice, as is proper and natural for the
Nourishment and Propagation of its own Body: And though every sort of Corn, and
other things, has, and is endued with all the sevenfold Forms and Properties of
Nature, yet in each thing there is some one quality or property that is chief,
or most predominant, and which does draw from the Earth what is agreeable to
its self, and so leaves the contigious Ground barren or poor, as to the
particular Juice, though yet still by a general Salniteral fatness, may be in
very good heart, strong and apt to produce Vegitations of another kind, if one
and the same Corn be continued, it will prove thin, poor, weak, and dwindling,
answering neither the Hope nor Charge and Toil of the Husbandman, but if
another Corn (though such as naturally requires a richer Mould then the other) be
sowed there, it shall flourish; nay, though you dung your Land frequently, yet if
you sow the same Grain more than one year, if the Season prove not extreme
kind, such Corn will be apt to fail, and come to little, as often happens near
London, where they dung their Ground much, because they till it every year, and
many times twice a year: So that if Husbandmen should continue one sort of
Grain for several years together on the same Land, there would be as great, or
greater Scarcity and Want of Corn, as there happens to be of Apples and other
Fruits.

For what we have observed in the Tilling and Manuring Land for Corn, and the
method of making the Ground constantly fruitful, by changing the Species of the
Grain committed to it, holds good (as to the former part) in all kind of
Fruit Trees, but the same method (as to the latter part) for the Remedy cannot
be observed in the management of them, as in Land for Corn, and therefore they
often miss, and much the oftener for not being so well ordered and manured as
they might, and ought to be. In Husbandry you change your Grain, and often dung
your Land, whereby it is in some measure furnished with a Recruit of every sort
of Juice; but Trees cannot be every year or two transplanted out of one Ground
into another, nay, scarce at all when they grow big, but are commonly continued
thirty, forty, or sixty years, or more, in the self same Place or Ground. Now
Trees being generally planted near together (which by the way is a very great
Error in planting of Orchards, robbing each other, not only of nourishment from
above) and being of great Bulk and Substance, large Roots and spreading
Branches, they must needs require great store and quantity of Nourishment to
support their Life, Growth and Fruit, even much more then most sorts of Earth
can administer, for every Tree does powerfully draw forth of the Earth such a
Salniteral Virtue or Juice, as is proper to Maintain and Nourish its own Body,
which no Earth can continually afford, except it be much helped by Art; for as
we have showed in the Management of Land for Corn, so the Ground, where
Fruit Trees grow, will in process of time become poor, sour, and hungry, as to
the Virtue that is proper for the Nourishment and Support of Trees, and
therefore they are not able to bring forth or bear Fruit every year. The very
same Inconveniences would happen to Corn, if the Land were not often dunged,
limed, or the like, and the Grain changed frequently; therefore the principal
Cause why Fruit Trees do so often blight or miss bearing, is not so much from
External cold sharp Airs (though they may sometimes do mischief, or at least help
forward the evil) as Internally, for want of sufficicient Nourishment; for if
Land cannot bring forth good Crops for several years, one after another, of the
same Corn, (which is inconsiderable, as to Substance and Bulk, in respect of
Fruit Trees) how then can it be expected that an Orchard should bear
plentifully every year, where there is neither Change, nor Tillage, nor
Dunging, it may be for the space of thirty or forty years; and many times the
Trees planted too thick, that the Sun Beams can hardly Influence the Earth.
It Is true, some Trees will bear every year, others every other, and some every
third year, according to the Nature of the Earth and Fruit, for that year or
two that they bear not, is as it were a Sabbath unto the Earth and Trees; or
like Land when it lies fallow, in which time they get heat, and replenish
themselves with strength and virtue, which inward virtue does withstand all
sharp and pinching keen Airs, that they hurt not; for if the Internal
Salniteral Virtue or Radical Moisture be strong, whence all Vegitations has
its vigorous Birth, then there is little or no danger of Outward Accidents; but
on the contrary, when the Inward Oil and Nourishing Juices are weak and
impotent, then every Outward small Accident, as Frosts, cold sharp Winds, and
the like, do take place, and help forward the Evil. The like is to be
understood in the Human Nature, and Animal Kingdom: If a man be of a crasie,
impotent Constitution or Nature, then every cold Air or little Accident will
wound his Health; or if any particular Member or Limb be weakened or disordered,
that same Part, upon any Outward Heat or Cold, or other Accident, will suck in
the Injury, and be easily made more weak and impotent, which does hold good in
all things, whether Vegitations or Animals, according to the Nature of each;
for this Cause it often happens, when we have very warm, mild Springs, little
or no Frosts, or sharp Easterly winds, (which of all are esteemed the most
pernicious to fruit) that there is but little Fruit the following Summer: On
the contrary, other years, when there happens cold North, and North-East winds,
and severe Frosts, great store of most sorts of Fruits, the truth of this every
Country man does know; and yet for all this, all their cry is, All our Fruit is
blasted in one frosty cold Night, or a sharp Wind, never so much as
considering, that other years they have had great store of all sorts of Fruit,
and yet far colder and sharper Springs; but most People do in this, as they do
by themselves, every Disorder that happens to them, they attribute to outward
Cold and Accident that comes that way, and hardly think of the inward Causes,
Intemperances and other Violences they offer to Nature, whence most or all
Obstructions does arise and proceed, as we have largely demonstrated in our
other Writings.

The truth of what we have before declared, is further manifested by this, viz.
if you cut down an old Orchard, and cleanse the Ground as well as you can from
the Roots, and then plant young Trees in the old ones places, neither the one
nor the other will thrive, nor come to any Maturity, but are very Scrubs, and
often dye, and come to nothing, at least not thrive, or grow so much in ten
years as those in new Ground will in three or four; the chief Reason thereof
is, because the Ground in which old Orchards stood, is as it were destitute of,
or contain very little of that Radical Juices or Salniteral Virtues, that is
proper for the Nourishment of such Fruit Trees (since the foregoing Trees) but
all new ground, especially such as is proper for Fruit Trees, does abound, and
is impregnated with that Salniteral Juice and Virtue, as is clear by the
thriving and proving of Trees there planted. Moreover, most or all old
Orchards, the Boughs, Limbs, and Branches of the Trees are covered with a
certain Moss, of a dry, husky, harsh, astringent Substance, which does arise
for want of a proper quantity of Nourishment, that stops the Passages and
Pores, hindering the true Circulation of the Radical Moisture, and then the
Essential Juices becomes tough, and as it were stagnated, which presently
destroys the lively Complexion and Beauty of that thing; and whenever this
happens in Trees, presently a mossy Scurf grows on the Limbs and Boughs, like
unto Scurf or a mangy Disease in Animals; for when the Ground, by the long
standing of Trees, grows poor, hungry, and barren, as to the virtue that Trees
delight in, then that Nourishment that they do draw forth is not good, neither
does it generate good Juices, and the Trees begins to Languish and become
Consumptive, which is the true Cause of Moss, Cankers, Blithes, and the like;
and yet that same Ground, if Manured for other things, as Beans, Peace, and the
like, will bear great Crops, for it was rich enough in that Salniteral quality
that was proper and natural for the Nourishment of such Grain, but poor and out
of heart in respect of Trees, but if you cut down an old Orchard, and Manure
the Ground for various sorts of Corn, and Dung it as other Land for eight or
twelve years (the longer the better) then plant a young Orchard, the Trees will
thrive pretty well, for in this time the Earth has recovered, and strengthened
the weak and fading Salniteral virtues proper for Trees, but not so strong and
vigorous as that Ground that never had Fruit Trees planted in it. But here some
will Object, Why should not Fruit Trees thrive and bear without manuring and
dunging, as well as other Trees, viz. Oaks, Elms, Hazels, and the like, which
will grow in one sort of Ground without any dunging or manuring for, many score
years. I Answer; It Is to be understood that all such Ground in which Oaks,
Hazels, and the like, grow, is principally endued with such a quality as is
proper to bring forth and nourish such Trees, and consists chiefly thereof, and
therefore such Woods will grow naturally there without planting, as well as
without manuring. So all good Ground will always bring forth Grass, more or
less, as the Season is kind, or the contrary. But our Apples, Pears, and most
fort of Wall-fruit, does not so naturally grow in our Climate, any more then
several sorts of our Garden Herbs, which, both Trees and Herbs, are all managed
by Art, and great Industry, or else they will dwindle away and come to nothing,
though Field Herbs are plenty enough naturally, so that every thing must be
managed according to its kind, and there is no parity between Fruit Trees and
other common Trees, both for the Reason just now given, as especially because
the latter does not bare any Annual Crop as the former, but if the Trunk and
Branches live and grow it is enough, whereas you expect much more from your
Orchards, and therefore must be at more pains with it. Sometimes you shall see
in the Spring a Tree bravely blossomed, and yet at Autumn no Fruit; the Reason
is commonly ascribed to Blasting or Frosts; but I believe it may most times be
referred to the Cause beforementioned; for in the early Spring the Sun giving
every thing vigor, the Soil made shift to supply the Tree with Radical Moisture
enough to make that show, but not being able to continue its Recruits, the poor
Tree could not perform its Promise, nor Nature accomplish its Intentions. But
you will say, What Remedy for all this? Can you show a Natural way to keep and
render Trees capable of bearing every year, or for the most part. I Answer you,
and it is thus: Digg three, four, five, or six yards about each Tree, to the
Root, carry away most of the Earth, and supply the place with fresh Earth mixed
with a little Dung, alike quantity to which you carried away, and this you
ought to do every three, four, or five years, or as often as the Farmer dungs
his Land for Corn, which will give such Life, Power, and Virtue to your Trees,
that you need not much doubt of a Crop every year, or at leastwise it will
seldom miss, and your Fruit will be large and fair; but if this be too much
trouble and charge, then digg or trench your Orchard, and Dung it well once in
two, three, or four years, which may serve indifferent well. The very same
management ought to be observed in all sorts of Wall-Fruit-Trees, and others.
It is also to be noted, That when you plant Orchards or Walls in poor, hungry
Gravel, or hot Sandy Ground, then you ought to Trench your Ground very deep,
and at the bottom to lay store of good black Mould, or Earth mixed with Dung,
and then turn in the uppermost or surface of the Earth, and carry away the
undermost Gravel or Stony Earth, for that is so hungry, hot, and lean, that if
it be mixed with the good Earth, it will, as it were, eat out or destroy the
good Virtues thereof; but if you will not be at the trouble and charge of
digging up, and trenching all your Ground, then digg large deep Holes, and
carry away the undermost Gravel, Sand, or Clay, and supply the place with good
Earth, or Dung and Earth mixed together, and then plant your Tree in it a
proper depth, viz* so deep as your Tree did naturally grow, for deeper is
injurious to the Plant; and when you have filled your Earth in about your Tree,
within a little, then put a little good Dung round your Tree near the Surface,
and cover it with Earth, which will keep the Roots of your Tree cool in the
Summer, and warm in the Winter.

It is also to be noted, That if your Ground be hot and sandy, then mix or
manure your Trees with good Loom, Dung, and black Earth; if gravelly, hungry
Ground, then good Mold and Dung mixed together; if cold, clayie Ground, then
mix Chalk and Earth together; which, if this Order be observed, it will
mightily advance and cause your Trees, not only to thrive, but bear more and
larger Fruit. It is also to be noted, That the old Custom of opening the Earth,
and laying bear the Roots of Fruit Trees in the Winter Season, is an Error in
Husbandry, except there be immediately the old Earth taken away, and the place
thereof supplied with good fresh Earth, or Earth and Dung well mixed, such as
Trees have never grown in, as is mentioned before, for that Earth that covers
the Roots are their natural Clothing, which do secure them from the Injury of
the Element, keeping them warm in the Winter, and cool and moist in the Summer,
the Earth being many Degrees warmer in the Winter then the common Air, but in
the Summer as many cooler; therefore the uncovering of the Roots, and exposing
them for two or three Months to the cold pinching Airs, viz. Frost, Snow,
Rains, and violent Winds, must needs be unnatural, and consequently prove
prejudicial by weakening the inward Power and Salniteral Virtues of such Trees,
rendering them the more incapable of bearing the following Summer. Consult
Nature, and she will teach you the Truth of what we have here declared. Will
not all Gardeners, when they dig up a small Tree, as Goosberries, Currants, and
the like, if they cannot conveniently plant them presently, cover the Root in
Earth so deep as they did naturally grow, which are inconsiderable Trees in
comparison of large Fruit Trees, and most of them will as naturally grow as
Weeds.

Note, That the most natural and proper time for planting most or all
Fruit Trees, is from the middle of October to the last of December, for by
early planting the Earth and the Roots do not only settle well together, and
unite, but the Roots do draw and grow, and thereby they are not only more
forward then late planted Trees, but also they will the better endure any hot,
dry Season that may happen the following Summer. The same Time or Season is to
be observed in pruning and cutting superfluous Branches, the earlier in the
year it is done the better; for every Branch or Limb that is Cut off from the
Body is a certain Wound, and the Tree cannot recover that Injury till it has
passed a Spring and Summer; the Truth of this is demonstrated by their not
bearing so plentifully the following Summer; therefore the earlier they are
pruned, the more time they have to recover such Inconveniences; and if you do
Cut off any eminent Limb or Branch, then you ought to take the same Composition
of Earth you use in grafting, which is generally done with good Loomy Earth,
mixed with a little Cow Dung tempered well, then cover or plaster the cut Limb
or Branch, which will keep the Wound or Place warm, and heal and preserve it
from the Injury of a severe Winter* as cold, sharp, pinching Airs, Frost and
Winds, penetrating Rottenness and Rankness, and other Distempers that often
happens to such wounded Parts. The like is to be understood of the laying of
the Roots of Trees open, as is mentioned before, and exposing them bare faced
to a severe Winter, and Injury of the Elements, as extreme Cold, Wet, and
Winds, for under the Surface of the Earth the Natural heat is not only greater
and stronger, but more constant than the common Air in Winter Seasons, which is
varied and changed according as the Eye of the World increases or decreases,
and from what quarter of the Heavens the Wind blows; which is further
manifested by most or all Fountains and Springs, which in Summer or hot
Seasons, the Waters proceeding out of the Earth, at the Head thereof are many
degrees colder than the common Air; or the Waters of other Rivers that runs on
the Surface of the Earth; but in Winter, or in cold Seasons, at the Head of the
same Springs or Fountains, the Water thereof is as many degrees warmer then
either the common Air, or the Waters of Rivers that runs on the Source of the
Earth; for this cause, in cold Seasons or in Winter, we can see them send forth
Fumes and Vapors, which is chiefly occasioned by the Contrarieties of the two
Qualities, viz. Heat and Cold; not but all or most Fountains, Springs, Rivers,
and other Waters, and also the whole Earth, do continually and at all times,
more or less, breathe forth Fumes and Vapors, the degree thereof is according
to the Nature and Constitution of the Elements, Season of the Year, and
Celestial Influences; though these Vapors and Fumes which the Sun and Celestial
Bodies do continually exhale, cannot be seen but only when the Air is colder
than the Earth, which cold keen Air does immediately condense those Vapors,
that they become visible; but when the Earth and Air are of an equal
Temperature, then you cannot see those Fumes no more than you can see your own
Breath in a warm Season; but you must not conclude that you do not breathe
because you do not see it; and it is as natural for the Earth and Water to
breathe and send forth Fumes and Vapors as for Animals, and they do arise and
proceed from the Centeral Life of Nature, and are the living Powers of the
Elements, for without Motion nothing could subsist, neither could the Earth,
Waters, or any of the Elements generate or bring forth any living Creatures, if
they had not this natural Motion, there being a continual sympathetical
Operation and Mixion of all Qualities and Elements. But it is to be noted, That
some sorts of Grounds and Waters, and also in some Seasons of the Year, those
Fumes and Vapors are more plentifully sent forth then in other; as after an hot
Summer, in August, September, and October, the Elements then being moist and
full of Humidity, occasioned by the Declination of the Sun, the Days warm, the
Nights cold, which do condense those warm Vapors that the Earth and Waters
breathes and sends forth: Now these Streams or Breathes, which are nothing else
but the natural Motions of innate Life and Operations of Nature, are better or
worse, good, or bad, healthy or unhealthy, according to the Nature and quality
of the Waters, and situation of the Ground, which they proceed from. Now these
Steems or Vapors that arises and proceeds from clear Fountains and Springs, or
from running Rivers, especially such as have Flux and Reflux, as the River of
Thames, and many others have, are fine, moist, thin, and penetrating, and are
powerful openers of Obstructions, and great Preservers of Nature, and begets
Appetite, and are good against Astmatical Distempers of the Breast, especially
if the quality and quantity of Meats and Drinks be carefully observed; but the
contrary is to be understood of those Steems and Vapors that arises and
proceeds from low boggy Grounds, Pools, standing Waters, and the like, which do
agree but with few Constitutions, except such as are born and bred in such
places; and though good Airs are great Preservers of Health, yet Temperance and
Order has the first place, and ought to be regarded above all other
Circumstances, and if that be wanting, other things and observations signifies
little. It is also to be noted, That all Waters do more plentifully breathe
forth Steems and Vapors than the Earth, as being more penetrable, thin, and
transparent, and therefore more capable of receiving the Light and sweet
Influences of the Celestial than the Earth, which is a close, firm, compacted,
dark Body in comparison of the Element of Water; therefore the Vapors
proceeding from the Earth are heavier, duller, and fewer in quantity, but not
so thin nor penetrating in quality as these from the Water; for this Cause
those Persons, whose Employments are in and about Waters, have for the most
part greater Appetites than others, and are more lively, brisk and strong.
Therefore it is very good for all People that are afflicted with shortness of
Breath, Stoppages at the Stomach, or overfatness, to employ themselves on
Waters, or use themselves to walk by Rivers sides, as much as they can, in all
Seasons of the Year, but more especially in Spring and Summer; for those fine,
thin, cool, penetrating Vapors, are as it were sucked in on all sides of the
Body, which do render those, whose Employments are abroad, brisk, lively, and
healthful, more especially in moderate Seasons, and when the Air and Elements
are a little inclinable to Humidity, which do mightily rarifie the Air, and
make it more penetrating, and all Men and Beasts are not so subject to heat and
drought, and other Indispositions, as in hot, dry Seasons; for heat and drought
do not only, as it were, close up the Poors of the Earth, but it thickens and
stagnates the Air, consuming the fine, thin, moist, penetrating Vapors and
Spirits, making them thick, hot, and sulpherous, and hinders the natural
Motions and Circulations of the Elements, and their Salniteral Virtues. Now
this Motion, Circulation, and continual Sympathatical Mixtion of the Elements,
is further manifested by the Sea, which is the Center of the Element of Water,
the Moon being the Governess thereof, she having a certain, secret Influence,
according to her Increase, Decrease, and Configurations she has with the
Celestial Bodies; for if there were not a continual Motion in this great
Fountain, Tides, Flux and Reflux, there could be no Creature generated; or
should there be a Cessation from Motion but a few hours, the whole would
immediately become a stinking Lake, and all her Inhabitants would be destroyed;
for that which we call Tides, is nothing else but the natural Motion and
Circulation that proceeds from the Center or Heart, and Animals can as well
subsist and continue there, being without Motion and Circulation of the Blood,
and breathing, as the great Fountains of Waters or other Elements, can live or
give being to their Children, without Motion and continual Circulation, which
arises and proceeds from an innate power of the Elements; for these Elements
are the great Body and wonderful Powers of God, and by his centeral Word and
innate Virtue, all things, both in the Animal, Vegitable, and Mineral Kingdoms,
have been, and are made, generated, and preserved; for the whole Globe of
Earth, Water, Fire and Air, are the living Powers of God, in which his holy
Word do continually create and bring to manifestation the hidden Mysteries and
Wonders both of Time and Eternity, to his eternal Praise and Glory, and his
Work goes always on in exact Number, Weight and Measure; for in God, nor in his
Handmaid Nature, there is no such thing as standing still or idleness; for
should the Primum Mobile cease from its natural Motion and Circulation, but a
few Minutes, the whole Mundam Sistime would be ready to sink into Confusion;
for standing still, or idleness, have no sympathy either with God or Nature;
for the Heavens, Stars, and Elements, with the wonderful and amazing Varieties
of Beasts, Fishes, Vegitation and Minerals, wherewith the lower Worlds are
endued and furnished, are the living Powers and Works of the Lord, and are
still continued by his Alwise Providence and Divine Word, which is never idle;
for Idleness, as is said before, is allowed no being, either in the Internal or
External Worlds; all in the Beginning was brought into a Being through Labor
and Motion, as the Learned Moses says, The Lord moved himself on the face of
the Waters, and they are still sustained to this day by the same active and
working Power of the Creator. Consider the daily Motions and Circulations of
the Celestials, viz. Sun, Moon, and wonderful Company of Stars, their Rising,
Setting, continual Motion, Courses, and various Configurations, and all in
exact Order: Behold the Fountains, Springs, and Rivers laboring continually in
a long progress to pay their tributary Streams to the Ocean; and the Ocean by
industrious Tides, Flux and Refluxes, striving as it were to supply the Land
from its innate or central Power. Do not the great Eye of the World, by a
sympathatical Power and universal Motion of all Elements, exhale Moisture from
the Fountains of Waters, and bottle it up in the Clouds or Powers of God till
an appointed time, and then Return it with plenteous Usury, to water and make
fat the Earth with the Dew of Heaven? And are not the like Circular Motions and
variety of Powers understood in Man? And is not he a little World out of the
great? In him is contained the true Nature and Operation of all Elements; and
yet, what great Matters can he do or perform without Motion and Action? Are not
all these necessary things, that serves for the support and accommodation of
Human Life, are not, nor cannot be procured without Labor and Motion? Nay,
Life it self cannot otherwise be maintained, the Blood must always be
circulating, the Pulse, Natures Clock, continually striking, the Stomach must
labor hard in her Kitchen to dress, and prepare, and separate Aliment; for the
other Parts, the Lungs be busy in Transpiration, the Heart sending forth
Reserves and new Supplies of Spirits to all the Frontier Garrisons and remote
Limbs of the Body, whilst the Brain is no less solicitous to give the necessary
Orders from the Grand Council, held between the Understanding, the Will, and
the Judgment, whereunto Intelligence every Minute arrives from the five Sally
Ports, called the Senses, and all their Results are carefully Registered, and
treasured up by the Recorder, Memory; nay, should the hands grow sluggish, and
neglect the supplying the Stomach with Food, the Mouth would soon be open to
upbraid their Laziness; from all which, it is a parent, as if written with the
Sunbeams, that standing still or idleness has no Being in God, nor in his
Works, but all the Elements, and other numerous Offsprings, do labor with
highest Diligence for to manifest the wonderful Mysteries of their Beings,
which all Mankind ought seriously to consider, and by industrious Courses of
Life, in the Ways of Virtue by which he may advance and bring to light the
Treasures of his Soul, and good Talants the Lord has endued him with; Idleness
being a greater Evil then most imagines; it breaks the first Command of God,
and contradicts the whole Course of Nature, and is the Mother of Oppression and
Violence; a Sin that never goes alone, but attended with a black Train of
Vices, always subject to the gross inferior Powers and evil Demons, which
continually prompt him on to commit all kinds of Outrages against God and his
Law in Nature, and is the first to all Evils.

There is a reserved Opinion amongst, not only both ignorant Countrymen, but
even those that pretend to Learning, That at the latter end of Summer, about
Michaelmass, that the Sap or Essential Virtue in Trees, does fall down or
retreat into the Root, and at the return of the Sun in the Spring it ascends
again, and replenishes the Tree, and all its Branches. But this is a very fond,
though almost general Error; for if this were true, the Roots of all Trees would
be be endued with a far greater quantity of Juice or Radical Moisture in the
Winter than in the Summer, whereas the contrary is most evident, viz. That
there is nothing near so much Juice, Moisture, or Sap in the Roots of Trees in
the Winter as there is in Summer, or at leastwise not so much manifested. The
like is to be understood in the Body and Branches: I refer to any Artist, and
let him separate the Parts.

Besides, there is a great Argument to confute this Error, ( viz.) If the Sap
that is the Radical Moisture or Essential oyley Property, whence Life, Growth,
Light and good Complexion of all Trees arise, and takes being, should thus
descend into the Root, and there inhabit all the cold Winter, then it were
impossible that any of the rest of the Tree should live; for when that
Essential Virtue or Sap is withdrawn from any Tree, or part of a Tree, the same
will immediately wither, rot and perish; Animals can as well live and subsist
without Blood, as a Tree without Sap, or any part thereof, or of this oyley
Moisture: But most true it is, that at the Declining or Retreat of the Sun, and
Approach of Winter, this Essential Oil or Sap does every where Retreat into the
main Body, or the Root, but absconds it self inwardly in eevery Branch or Twig,
and when it is strong and vigorous, the cold and fierceness of the Elements
cannot hurt it or the Tree; but if it be weak or indisposed, for want of
sufficient or due Nourishment from the Earth in the Summer before, then the
Severity of the Season prevails upon it, and extinguishes it, and forthwith
such Twigs, Branches, or Tree dies, and no ascending Sap they talk of from the
Root can revive it; but if it withstands the Winter rigor by virtue of its
Internal Virtue or Radical Moisture, then as soon as the glorious Eye of the
World, and natural Parent of Life, returns toward our Zenith, with his
cherishing Beams and sweet Influences, the same is set at Liberty, and opens
Natures Prisoners; unlocks the Doors, and opens the Passages, and chases away
the cold Saturnine Air, and warms every thing, and makes it Buxom, Jocond and
Active, and by simile kindles and awakens all the chill, sleeping, good
qualities, and incorporating its own Virtues, invites abroad the Sap or oyley
Moisture from the Center, and mildly draws it forth to the outermost Parts and
Extremities of every Bough, and so it is pusht on to a further Growth, and
spruces it self up in Leaves, and Blossoms, and Fruits according to its Kind.

AN EXPERIMENT For keeping of EGGS.
Though it may seem foreign to the Matter, yet I shall (^^ving this Opportunity)
adventure to Communicate to the World another Notion, which I persuade my self
is not commonly known.

That Eggs are an excellent sort of Food, both by themselves raw, eaten with
good Bread, being the best way, and to the greatest advantage; and also they
serve to make up several sorts of Spoonmeats and Dishes, no Body can deny; and
great improvement might be made of them by Persons that go long Voyages to Sea,
were it not that they have been told they will not keep. The truth is, we find
most of the Eggs that are brought from Scotland or Ireland are musty by that
time they arrive here.

But I must crave leave to say, that it is not the time, but the ill keeping of
them that makes them naught, I mean, because they are crowded up in Holes and
close Vessels, and debarred from the Air; for I have kept Eggs three, four, or
five Months lying open upon a Shelf, or the like, in an open airy Room, and
proved as good as if but new laid; and, as I doubt not but any Body may do the
like, so I am apt to think, they may hold good at Sea, though in hot Climates, if
you afford them Air enough, full as long, nay perhaps for six or seven Months,
which might easily be done by contriving Wicker Baskets with several Stories or
Frames one above the other, and open between, on which the Eggs might lie one
by one, without danger of breaking, and so might many times be exposed to the
brisk Air on the Decks, and at other times set in Cabbins. Thus any Man that
loves not Salt; Sea Diet (most apt to breed the Scurvy) may victual himself
with two or three hundred of Eggs for a Voyage. Thus Eggs might be brought out
of Scotland (not to be sold as now they are cried, Twelve a Groat, when they
are good for nothing, and you cannot have above half so many good ones for that
Money) but at a good Rate, and prove a profitable Commodity. These also, poor
Housekeepers, might about Harvest send into the Country, when Eggs are Twelve
a groat, and lay in three or four hundred of them for all the Winter, as good
Husbands do Butter and Cheese. I am sure, if you let them have Air, they will
keep good four, five, or six Months, and probably longer. I shall insist no
further on this Matter, the ingenious open Trial will be able to judge whether
it may not prove of considerable advantage to diverse Persons.

The Natural Way how every one may in the Spring and Fall purge themselves with
Ease and Pleasure to considerable Advantage, with the Common Sallad Herbs that
are generally eaten in these Seasons, and also with Roots. One Example will
serve for all.
TAke as much Spinach as will go into a two Gallon Vessel, unto which add one
Pint of Water, then stew it with the said Vessel uncovered, when it is almost
prepared, add only Salt to it, then dish it up, and drink the Broth, and eat
the Herbs freely with Bread, without either Butter or other Fats; make your
Dinner of these Herbs two or three days together, as you shall find them more
or less Operate or Purge. The very same Method you may use with other Herbs,
either Simple or Compound, and also with Roots, viz. Take Turnips, cut them
small, then stew or boil them as you do the Herbs, drink the Broth, and eat the
Roots with Bread and Salt, without any other Addition, and they will have the
same Operation; but you must observe to eat Watergruel Morning and Night, into
which you must not add any Ingredient, only Bread and Salt, and made according
as we have taught in our Monthly Observations for Health; and those that do not
like stewed Herbs or Roots, may boil them, observing the same method of eating
them, and drinking the Broth, and so they will in all Respects answer your
Desires, and Purge you both by Urine and Stool, to your great Satisfaction, far
better than most of the Potions and Purges prescribed by the Learned, which for
the most part are not only Foreign, but Compounded of things of a disagreeing
Nature; but our own Herbs and Roots, thus prepared and eaten, are excellent, as
well in preserving of Health, as preventing Diseases, viz. by assisting Nature
to throw them off, when they have invaded the Body; in particular, they are
profitable against the Stone or Gravel, and griping Pains of the Bowels, by
disburthening Nature of such superfluous Matter, and keen sharp Juices that
cramp the Body, they also cleanses the Stomach and Vessels thereof, which are
generally stopped and furred by the frequent eating of Fat, succulant Foods, and
strong Drinks, but the use of these Herbs does cool and remove the Obstructions
that lies in the Passages, preventing Fumes and Vapors from flying into the
Head, cleanses the Blood, causing it to circulate freely, and chears the
Spirits, making the Body brisk and lively, being also profitable against
shortness of Breath, Phlegm, and all Watery or Dropsical Humors, more
especially if Order and Temperance be observed; for the best Means or Medicines
cannot but prove ineffectual when Disorders, and the same Intemperances are
continued, which were the first Originals of the Disease, most Distempers being
contracted thorough Excess and Innordinate Living, nor does any thing preserve
the Body, and also the Mind in health, so much as Sobriety and Temperance in
Meats, Drinks, and Exercises, and not to heap together Superfluity of various
sorts of rich Compounded Foods and strong Drinks of disagreeing Natures, beyond
the Necessity, or truly the Digestive Power of Nature. The ancient Wisemen that
lived to great Ages in perfect Health, were contented with simple Food and mean
Drink, and it would be our Happiness to Imitate them. I wish I might be an
Instrument to persuade my Countrymen to such Moderation; and in order
thereunto I do recommend the use of the forementioned Herbs and Roots, and
also to these following Observations.

A Method how every one may with Ease and Pleasure keep their Body open, and
prevent Costiveness, and being too much bound in their Bodies.
TAke Spinach, Sorrel, or any other Herbs usually eaten in raw Sallads, eat
them freely every day at Dinner, or every other day raw with your Bread and
Butter, and Bread and Cheese, or Bread and Flesh, and they will certainly keep
your Body open, and in a brave, brisk, lightsom Condition, but remember that
you eat them as they come from the Garden, without either Salt, Vinegar, or
Oil, for this Composition fixes them, that their genuine Nature, or friendly
opening, mild qualities are not felt; few are sensible of the power of
Compositions, and how it alters and changes most things for the worse, more
especially when the Ingredients are of contrary Natures. And those that desire
to understand more of this, may read our Way to Health, long Life, and
Happiness, where they may have Satisfaction. Also Herbs thus eaten, do not only
keep the Body in a due Temperature, but they mightily help Concoction, making
all sorts of hard Food, easy in the Stomach, preventing Fumes and Vapors,
especially if a Glass of our thin cold Gruel be drunk, so soon as you have
dined, which you may find taught in our Monthly Observations for Health.

FINIS.

