Monthly Observations For the preserving of HEALTH, WITH A Long and Comfortable
LIFE, In this our Pilgrimage on EARTH; But more particularly for the Spring and
Summer Seasons.

By Phylotheus Physiologus. With Allowance.

London, Printed, and sold, by Andrew Soul, at the Three Keys in N^gs
H^^d-Court in Grace-Church Street, over against the Conduit, 1688.

Monthly Observations, For the preserving of HEALTH, etc.
1. OBserving the multitudes of Distempers and Torturing Diseases People bring
upon themselves for want of a due regard to proper Foods and Drinks, hastening
Death by the Errors of their Lives, and digging their Graves with their own
Teeth; I thought it might be no worthless Service to present the Public with a
few homely Notes and Directions.

2. Not that I would invade the Learned Physicians Province, to whom it
appertains to prescribe Diet for particular Persons according to each ones
Constitution, Exercise and Disease, that he may happen to labor under, or be
inclinable unto; but that which I aim at is, only to lay down some General
Rules and Animadversions, which well practiced would render most Persons Lives
abundantly more Comfortable then now they are, and conduce not a little to the
prolonging of their Days.

3. It Is strange that any that boast themselves Rational Creatures, and pretend
to wear Brains in their Skulls, should be so inquisitive after, and affected
with remote matters, that nothing concerns them, spending precious time in
Tales and Stories, Smoking Tobaco, Drinking and finding their Neighbors
Faults out, and a Thousand other Impertinances; whilst' at the same time they
neglect matters that highly imports their own Lives and Healths, the nearest
Concern (next that of their Soul) which all wise People will, and those that
are otherwise ought to regard.

4. It Is evident that as States subsist by Importation and Exportation, so our
Bodies by Aliment or Food received, and gross Evacuations* or insenciable
Transpirations, which carry off those Drugs and Fumes that remain after Nature
(the best Chemist) has separated the pure nourishing Particles of what was Eat
or Drunk, from what therein is Impure, Useless, and consequently Prejudicial.

5. Hence it follows, that as the only end of Eating and Drinking is but to
furnish or Replenish Nature, under her continual Expenses, with apt materials
to suport our Bodies, in a due healthful Posture, such as may render them
fitest Instruments for our Souls to exert their noble Functions by; so if we
ingurge too much Food or Liquor in quantity, more then can be regularly
digested, or such as is Inimical to our Natures or particular Constitutions in
quallity, either of th^se must needs disturb the Harmony and mutual Traffic
which ought to be in the Microcosm (or Little World, the Humane Body) whence
will follow Crudities, Obstructions, dark ^^nemous Vapors, and a whole Troop
of cruel Diseases, brought up in the Rear by that Meager, but resistless King
of Terrors, Death.

6. This being obvious to every Bodies Reason and Senses, one would think there
should need no great pains be taken to persuade People to be kind to themselves
and not violate their Healths; and accelerate their Deaths by immoderate
feeding, especially on Meats Improper or Pernicious; but such is the Tyrany of
Custom; such the Contagion of ill Examples; so powerful the Thorns of a
debauched Pallet; and so gross the Ignorance, or obstinate Folly of the greater
part of Mankind, that no Remonstrances of Reason, no Tortures of Diseases,
neither the Fear of God, who injoyns us Temperance, and to subdue or keep under
(not pamper) our Bodies* nor respect to our own welbeing, nor the Terrors of
Death it self, can restrain them from their dear Excess; so that if things were
rigorously Examined, unless the plea of non compass mentis shall satisfy the
Inquest, most of our Graves might have Stakes drove into them.

7. And tho the Beastly (and yet why Beastly, some Beasts are not naturally
inclinable to it, but by Accident, rather therefore the Odious) Sin Drunkenness
be deplorable, rife and frequent amongst us, yet I dare say her demurer Sister
Gluttony destroys an Hundred Persons to her One, and therefore ought the more
strictly to be watch against. But my Business is not Satyr, yet I thought
necessary to premise thus much to Rouz People, if possible, out of their
Stupidity, that they may hearken to the Voice of Wisdom, and not devinate from
the paths of Sobriety and Moderation, which is the first Precept toward the
attaining Health both of Body and Mind.

8. Such therefore as would be Wise, ought to beware of all those things which
their irregular Appetites too earnestly desire and pursue, and upon which they
cannot Feed without being afterward convinced that they were grateful to them
only for their Hurt, of this sort are all Costly, Compounded, Luscious, Meats
and Strong Drinks; therefore frequent use of Flesh, and such Liquors, must be
Hurtful rather then Beneficial to Health; of which this may be a very good
Argument, viz. Since Health is undoubtedly best preserved by those means which
must naturally restore it when Lost; therefore since Abstinance from Flesh and
strong Liquors, is generally prescribed by the Learned in most Diseases, the
Consequence then to conserve Health must be a spare, thin, clean Diet, and no
Flesh, for Temperance and Cleanness in quantity and quality of Meats and Drinks
not only make People Healthful, but Ready, Vivacious and Quick in the discharge
of all the Actions necessary to Life, and conserves the Mind in Serenity,
Accuteness and Vigor, and all the Offices of the Body in a due Tone, Strength
and Agillity. But on the contrary, Intemperance and Superfluity beclouds the
Mind, dulls the edge of the Apprehension, and brings upon it an unmanly
Languor, bearing down all the noble Faculties of the Soul into Ignorance and
Stupidity, and the Body it renders Diseased, Feeble, Unactive and Burdensome,
and what great matters can be expected from the Imtemperate; whose Members are
Oppressed, Joints Infeebled, Sinews Relaxed, and Brains Beclouded with Fumes
and Vapors, and all by reason of their Eating and Drinking strong Drinks and
rich compounded Foods to Excess.

9. But to approach somewhat nearer our present Subject* In those Months of
March, April and May, all People, both Young and Old ought in a especial manner
to consider the Crudities, Obstructions, Coughs and Stopages the Winter, and
the disorders in Foods and Drinks then used, may have caused by the Humidity of
the Air, Closeness of the Season, want of the warming and sweet Influences of
the Sun; and especially the free and frequent feeding on Fat Gross Succulent
Foods and Strong Drinks, that have Wounded so deep, that the best of Medicines
prove ineffectual, and the rather, because the same course of Life and
Intemperance is continued, as was the Original of the Disease; therefore these
following Rules will be of great use, not only to prevent Diseases, but also to
make those Distempers more tolerable and easy to be cured that have invaded
Nature already.

1. Of the Opperation of strong Drink, Wine and Spirits on such People as are
Naturally apt to be Fat, and subject to Stoppages and Coughs, and how
pernicious such Drinks will prove to most People.

All that find themselves naturally subject to Diseases of the Breast,
proceeding from Fatness or Phlegmatic Gross Humors, as Coughs, Stoppages and
Narrowness of the Passages, whose Bodies are apt to be Swelled, and puffed up
with Phlegm and evil Iuces; all such People, I say, ought to be very moderate
in the quantity they take of strong spirituous Drinks; for the frequent use
thereof does mightily increase the foremention Diseases, and indeed that
Constitution is rare, that it does not hurt, for these Liquors so highly
prepared by Art, not by Nature, and by the several Artificial Operations, the
spirituous parts are made Volatile, by which means the Stomach and natural Heat
or separative Quality has nothing to do when such Drinks are poured into the
Vessels, the Work being done to their Hand, so that the spirituous parts do
with a quick and powerful motion penetrate, and force their way through all
parts of the Body, and dry up that fine, sweetning, cooling, moist Liquor, or
Radical Humidity; by which means the pure Spirits become thick, and as it were
suffocated, and hindered in their free Egress and Regress, as is also the
Circulation of the Blood, that Chariot wherein the Life of Nature Rides, and if
once stopped, the whole must needs fall into great Disorders; and on the other
side, the Gross, Sharp, Keen, Astringent Juces and Particles of such strong
Drinks do by their weight force their way downwards into the Passages, as into
Uiriters and Bowels; but before they pass away they do for the most part
occasion some signal Evil in the Body, if they find any matter or quality there
capable to be wrought on, whence many times proceed Fluxes, Griping Pains,
Gravel Stone, and many other Inconveniences, according to each Man's
Constitution; so that it does not only weaken all the Faculties of the Stomach;
but (which is worst of all) the common drinking thereof does powerfully
contract the Breast and Vessels thereof, because they separate so soon, and
pass away, whereby it makes Nature Idle, which is an Infirmity not to be
removed by Medicines, but only by regular Order, and proper Meats, Drinks and
Exercise, which are great supports to the Health and good Condition of Nature.

2. All gross succulent Foods do deprave Nature, and increase Crudities and
Obstructions. For Flesh and Fish are Foods not only Gross, and liable to
Corruption, but in their own Natures are Moist, Cold and Phlegmatic, and
therefore they generate in the Body, not only the Diseases, and promote the
Passions the Creature was subject unto in its Life, but fill the Body with
Venomous Juces, to the great prejudice of Nature; and they do require a
stronger, sharper and brisker natural Heat, to separate and digest them, then
is necessary for Vegitations; for all fat Foods that proceed from Flesh, are
not only harder of Concoction, but they Fur and Obstruct the Passages; for Oily
Bodies are not so easily dissolvable as the Bodies of vegitations, neither do
they afford such a brisk Cordial Spirit, as all Skilled in Chemistry, can tell
you* do not all the Noble Liquors and Excelerating Cordial Juces proceed from
Vegitations, or from Fruits, Corn and Seeds? not from the Fat of Flesh or Fish,
for their juces presently Corrupt, Putrify and Stink, nor can Art long
preserve them; therefore such food does by degrees generate Obstructions, dull
the edge of the Appetite, and help to contract the Vessels: For this cause
those that make Flesh and Fish their common Food, are for the most part dull,
and of heavy lumpish Dispositions, Especially when they grow in Years; and are
apt to be short Winded, or on any little accasion or exercise, to fetch their
Breath with difficulty.

Now this Fouling and Contracting the Passages of the Stomach, which too high
and Unnatural Food* and Drinks (...) the occasion of, are far greater Evils
then most imagine, being the true original of most Griping Windy Distempers,
both in the Bowels and Stomach* for all sorts of Natures and Constitutions do
continually generate Airy Windy matter, without which Nature cannot subsist nor
continue in Health* being as necessary as Food* and these windy Dispositions of
Nature do never injure or distemper any, except the Passages are obstructed and
contracted which hinders their Circulating, and free Egress and Regress, not
only downwards and upwards; but through the whole Body, and all parts thereof.

It Is also to be noted that Rich Compounded Foods, and the common use of strong
Drink do not only Generate Compounded. Diseases, but put nature as it were on a
firment, as if it were in a Feavor; which does mightily Burn up and Consume the
sweet moistening Dews, which are Natures Balsamic Oil of Life; and this does
not only thicken and stagnate the Humors, but dull and render the Spirits
Heavy and Impure, which is the original cause of the generation of Gross, Fat,
Phlegmatic Juces and Matter; for those Gross Fat Paunches are seldom caused
from the quantity of Foods, but chiefly from the Quality, and the frepuent use
of Exhilerating Drinks, and want of proper Exercise in agreeable Airs, for the
narrow Vessels and Passages in a little time do weaken the natural Heat, and
then a great part of the Food turns to Gross Juces, for want of a quick Fire to
separate them: Hence it is that most Fat People are subject to go to Stool
often, which is a sign of a weak Heat, and if such happen to be bound in their
Bodics, then their Heads are frequently troubled with Fumes and other
Disorders, which do also show that the Passages and Vessels of the Stomach, are
not only narrow, but many Crudities and Obstructions, that the windy substance,
that is continually generated, are occasioned; which does rarely happen to
Persons that have strong natural Heats, in whom the Passages and Vessels of the
Stomach are large enough for all sorts of Humors, both Good and Bad, to pass
in and out, and circulate freely from one part to another, which renders all
such Persons Healthful, Active and Lively.

It Is also to be known that the Radix, or true cause of the Diseases, called
Vapors, and Fainting or Trembling Fits, is the forementioned Disorders in
Meats, Drinks and Exercises, which will better appear if we consider what sort
of People, viz. Women are most subject to such Diseases; for we generally find
them to be not only naturally of tender weak Spirits, small Vessels, narrow
Passages, and but weak Constitutions; but such whose Education and bringing up
has been Foolishly Nice, and Irregular; such as Live Easily, Fare Deliciously,
without Labor or proper Exercise; such as scarce can get themselves Dressed
before Dinner, and snort out more then half their Life in soft and overwarm
Beds, which course cannot but contract the Vessels, and mightily infeeble all
parts of the Body; so that then the Blood (Natures Balsamic Fountain) is
thickened, their Spirits dull and impure, and each part sympathizing in the
Mischief on every petty Accident, as Love, Hate, Fear, Anger, Grief, etc. the
Spirits being so debilitated are I resently Wounded, and all the Salliports of
Nature Swells, or seems to be Closed, which hinders Transpiration and
Breathing, and then in a moments time they fall into wild agonous Fits, and all
the parts tremble and are disordered; which Diseases Country Women of Exercise,
that live on mean simple Foods and small Drink, are very rarely afflicted with;
but when I consider how Impurdently most People Live, what Disorders they
commit, how Hetrogenious their Foods and Drinks are, together with the many
other idle Habits and secret Wounds they give Innocent Nature, by visiting too
frequently the Shades of Venus, which quickly makes the strongest Nerves to
Bow, and is the chief Cause and Original of most Consumptions, especially in
the Males. I say, when we consider all this we need not wonder at the multitude
of Torturing Diseases abroad in the World; but rather admire People are so Well
and Healthful as they appear to be. What an Hodg-potch do most that have
Abilities make in their Stomachs, which must wonderfully oppress and distract
Nature: For if you should take Flesh of various sorts, Fish of as many,
Cabbages, Parsnops, Turnops, Potatoes, Mustard, Butter, Cheese, a Pudden that
contains more then ten several Ingredents, Tarts, Sweetmeats, Custards, and
add to these Churries, Plums, Currants, Apples, Capers, Olives, Anchovies,
Mangoes, Caveare, etc. and jumble them altogether into one Mass, what Eye would
not loath, what Stomach not abhor such a Gallemaufry? yet this is done every
Day, and counted Gallent Entertainment. To teach this mischievous Art Books are
Written, and to practice it French Cooks are Employed, as if we had not natural
Folly and Vanity enough at home, but must learn it by Art, and from foreign
Nations; in the mean time how is poor Nature Captivated? how does she Groan in
a Language, severely to be felt, tho not heard? Therefore if you would avoid
those Torturing Diseases and Inconveniences, observe the following Rules;
always remember, that most Distempers are contracted through Excess and
inordinate Living, nor does any thing preserve the Body in Health, or the Mind
in perfect Freedom, so much as Sobriety and Temperance.

1. Let not a little Trouble, thwarting your unruly Appetites, or fond Humors,
depraved with ill Customs and Wantonness, divert you from getting your selves
possessed of this Jewel Temperance, that true Phylosophers-Stone, which turns all
into the Golden Elixir of Health, Content and Serenity; since we see none of
the little perishing Goods of this World are to be had or obtained without
Trouble and Difficulty.

2. Neither Meats nor Drinks are to be taken that are too strong for each Man's
particular Nature or Constitution, which for the most part are such as are
compounded of many Ingredients of contrary qualities; but let Nature always be
stronger then the Food, which will be sure to prevent Surfeits, and a Thousand
other Inconveniences.

3. As you are not to accustom your selves to the frequent eating of Foods that
are over Fat, for the Reasons aforesaid; so neither ought you at any time to
Eat or Drink of any thing whatsoever to Dullness, especially if compounded with
rich Ingredients; for the same will certainly sow the Seeds of Grievous
Diseases: Therefore if any healthy Person feel himself oppressed after Meat, he
ought to consider the reason thereof, and thenceforth make abatement in the
quantity, or alter the quality; do not most People find themselves before
Eating and Drinking Quick, Lightsome and full of Spirits, provided they have
not fasted too long? but after their Meals (because they make them Immoderate)
they are generally sensible of a cloging Heaviness and dull Indisposition,
which is a certain Index, that the necessity and convenience of Nature is
exceeded either in quantity or quality, since the true intention of Food is to
Refresh and Support Nature, and not to Oppress and Incommode her.

4. But the greatest Snare in Eating and Drinking (and therefore the Psalmist
teaches us to pray, That our Tables may not be our Snare) is when Meats and
Drinks are not Simple but Compounded, whereby the liquorish pleasures of the
Palate is prolonged many degrees beyond the necessities of Nature, and indeed
beyond the concoctive ability of the Stomach, whence many People over-charge
This, whilst wantonly they gratify That, and so heap up Crudities, Noxious
Juces, Torturing Diseases, and in the end Death it self.

5. Moderate Fasting is an excellent means to preserve both the Body and Mind
in Health and Serenity, for it cleanses the Stomach by digesting and removing
the Obstructions that lie in the Passages, and also purify the Blood; and then
how sweet, how agreeable is every mean wholesome thing to the well prepared
Stomach? such sober Persons feel and taste the most pleasant opperation of the
divine hand in all things, their Bodies are delight ed with that which is
Natural, Clean and Innocent, their Minds satisfied, their Beds easy, their
Sleep Sound; they are not subject to dull Indispositions, nor molested with
Feavours, nor are their Stomachs or Bowels oppressed with Fainting Fits, or
Windy Griping Humors; they rise as Early, and no less Fresh then the Morning
Sun, Blyth and Merry as the Lark, and are fit for all Exercise, either of the
Body or the Mind; their radical moisture flows freely through every part, like
a pleasant gale of Wind over the Sun-parcht Mountains, which moderate the
central Fires, that they burn not violently: In a word, proper Fasting is the
best Physician, and preserves Health far beyond their Evacuations, it has an
accult quality, for the digestive faculty and natural heat is never Idle;
therefore when the Stomach and Vessels thereof are not filled with superfluity
of Food, and often Eatings and Drinkings, it draws away all the superfluous
matter that furs and stops the Passages, and which otherwise is apt to cause
Coughs and shortness of Breathing, and sends troublesome Fumes and Vapors into
the Crown.

6. Therefore be careful that you do not Eat or Drink between Meals; or before
the former Foods and Drinks be perfectly Concocted; nothing more obstructs
Nature and hurts the Blood, keeping the Body as it were in a continual Feavour,
for the fresh Juces of those too frequent supplies of Foods and Drink do
obstruct the Passages and dulls the Spirits, that they cannot pass freely in
their due order and circulation, whence Windiness and Crudities are generated,
which is the principal cause of the common Indispositions many People are
troubled with.

7. Foods ill dressed destroys Health, especially Flesh, whilst some will
wantonly eat it half Raw, and all Bloody, which looks Inhumane; and others will
have it so over-prepared that no good Nourishment can be drawn from it, both
which does generate bad Blood, and cause a lumpish heaviness to possess the
whole Body, because the lively, brisk, aerie, fine Spirit in such Foods is
destroyed in the Preparation.

8. Meats and Drinks ought not to be taken together, that are of a contrary
Nature in themselves, or disagreeable to any Man's particular Constitution,
because such Foods do secretly, yet powerfully, wound simple Nature with many
Diseases and Infirmities before she is aware, or can arm her self against their
Assaults; but let them be simple in their kind, agreeable to the Complexion,
and as near as may be equal in their parts, which will breed good Blood, and
pure brisk Spirits, and they always make the Body Lightsome and Agile.

9. Forbear the frequent eating of Flesh and Fish without distinction, and
regard had to the Season, and to their Cleanness or Unclaenness at that time,
and to the manner of their being killed after they are taken, whether it be a
Wound which may cause the free Evacuation of the original Properties of Saturn
and Mars, which is seldom done, especially in Fish and Fowls, but the same are
for the most part Suffocated or Strangled, or Die themselves, whereby the pure
Spirits and sweet Virtues (by the Agony the poor Creatures are at the departure
of their dear Lives) are fixed or overcome; for the orginal Venoms in which al
Life consists, are then so terribly agitated that they immediately suffocate
and swallow up the pure Spirits and sweet Oil, if there be not a Wound made
whereby those raging Poisons may freely pass away in the vehicle of the Blood;
for this reason, experience shows that all Flesh, as of Fowls or Fish, or the
like, that are Strangled will not eat so Sweet and Pleasent as others that have
a Wound made and Bleed plentifully, but will have a stronger and grosser Taste
and Smell, nor will it breed so good Blood or Nourishment as the other, but the
best of them is much inferior to that of Vegatations, which are more easily and
more friendly obtained.

10. Let your ordinary Drinks be mild and friendly to Nature, neither Strong,
Stale, Hard, or Sour, nor yet too new, nor such as most of the small or nine
Shilling Beer is, that is Brewed in London, viz. that runs off those Grains
that the strong Ale and Beer has drawn forth all the sweet Qualities and good
Virtues, and there remains only a Sharp, Sour, Astringent, Stinking Quality
behind, which the hot Water or Liquour extracts; and then to give it a Taste,
they Boil it Lustily with the Hops that have been boiled several hours in the
strong Beer, which have drawn forth all wholesome qualities, and there are no
better Virtues Extracted from them then the Water or Liquor did from the
Grains, and tho they do put some Ale amongst this small Beer, to help it, or
to hide the ill Taste or Qualities; but when such Drinks come into the Stomach
those Sharp Sour, Stinking Properties cannot be hid from Nature, nor their
pernicious opperations, the frequent use of such Drinks do hurt the Blood, and
Generate the Scurvy, and many other Diseases that are breed by improper and
unnatural Drinks, especially taken in too great quanties; for it not only heats
the Blood, when strong; but it keeps it as it were in a continual firment,
precipitating People into Feavors, Dropsies, Griping pangs of the Bowels; and
it also contracts the Vessels of the Stomach and Passages, dulling the
Appetite, by weakening the Natural heat, as woofull experience does daily
testify to the great ruin of the Body, Soul, Estate, and Reputation, and many
times Starving a Wife and poor innocent Children.

Of all Drinks, Water has the first place, even as Bread of Foods, the Creator
of all beeings having endued this Element with many secret and admirable
Virtues, it being pure and clean in its own Nature, and the chief thing by
which all Exterial things are Purified, Purged and Cleansed; and tho Weak as
Water be a vulgar Proverb, yet I must tell you, that Water is more strong and
sublime then most imagine, for it contains a most Ravishing and Excellent
Spirituous Balsamic Virtue, whence proceeds that pure, sweet refreshing
quality, whereby it has power by its innate Virtue to digest and purify all
sorts of Foods. Likewise in Preparations it is so innocent and friendly that it
dissipates the gross phlegmatic Bodies, and preserves and keeps living the more
essential spiritous parts, it is not only the most plentiful and truly pleasant
of all Drinks, but supplies with its friendly Moisture, and relieves Thirst
beyond all other Liquors or Juces; it is simple and endued with such equallity,
that it insinuates its Virtues into all parts of the Body in an insensible way,
it makes no noise, nor causes any Tumults in the Brain, nor awakens any
Inequallity in the Body, but imparts its meek Life as it were in Silence, and
may deserve the Name of Concord, a thing that God and his Handmaid Nature have
befriended with all the united Virtues both in the Vegitable and Animal
Kingdoms, it being the Radix of all moist Nourishment, which mixed or
incorporated with any kind of Juces renders them fit and profitable for Mankind.

The best and most agreeable sorts of Water for common use and Drinking are
Rain, River and Spring, but especially the two first, because they are not only
impregnated with the sweet Influences of the Celestials and airry motions of
the Elements; but their running through and upon the Surface of the Earth, does
thereby draw forth a saline Virtue of a mild opening Quality, which renders it
more Homogenial then Pump-Water, or such as stand without motion; and although it
be our custom to drink Beer, Ale, Wine, and other strong Liquors, yet it would
be very beneficial and Profitable to most People to accustom themselves to the
drinking of a Pint, or half a Pint at Night, a little before going to Bed, and
likewise in the Morning; it is good to cool, wash and refresh Nature; it is
also good for some Complexions to drink after Meals, especially for those that
are subject to Fumes and Vapors, if Bread be tosted hard and put into it,
letting it stand a quarter of an hour, and then drunk off, there being no sort
of Drink made by Art so friendly and capable to digest and cleanse the Passages
from Obstructions as Water, and I am confident, if People use themselves every
Morning to drink half a Pint, a Pint, or a Quart of good Water (such as each
Person shall find most agreeable, because Waters have various opperations on
several Constitutions) they would find as much Benefit, if not more, then by
going to the various Wells so much cried up for their Virtues.

11. Bad Air does further and increase all Distempers, for that being an
Element, which we continually Suck and Feed on, when it is corrupt conveys
unwho some fumes into the Body impairs the Longs, those Bellows of Life; and
infects the whole Mass of Blood; therefore proper and good Airs are of great
benefit to Health; I say Proper as well as Good; for every sort of Air, tho in
its self good, is not healthful, for some People; because there is as great a
variety Air, as there is in Complexions, and what is profitable for one, is not
so for an other, and to find out this Secret, there is no better way then for
such as want agreeable Air to Travel out of one place into an other, by which
they may be capable to find out that which is most suitable for them, for as in
the best Airs some People Languish under various Diseases, for want of a
change, so in the worst of Airs many are very Healthful, and perhaps better
then they would be in finer or thinner Airs, as many that Live in the thick
Sulpherous steems of London, are very Healthy; and Live to great Ages: And as
every bad Air is not prejudicial to all Persons, so on the other side all good
Airs are not profitable to some sorts of Constitutions; but change of Airs to
most People proves beneficial. And therefore Traveling is very Healthful and
good, especially for some People, whose qualifying Properties and Spirits of
Nature are unequal; but this not being known, many remove out of one Air into
an other in vain, or to their Prejudice.

12. Forget not to use proper Exercises in open Airy places which will prevent
many Diseases and Weaknesses, especially in Fat, Corpulent, Phlegmatic
Persons, that are for the most part troubled with Coughs, and Stoppages of
their Breasts and Lungs. Let such walk as much as they can by running Rivers
two or three hours Morning and Night, for the Air by such running Water is more
penetrating, discipating and digesting all superfluities then elsewhere; nor
are there any Persons more Strong, Healthly or of better Stomachs then those
whose Employments are near Flowing Streams, especially if the Banks and Ground
adjacent be dry and somewhat elevated, as in many places it is. Let the fattest
Punchenelloes but use to exercise themselves as aforesaid, and eat clean Foods,
with middle Ale or Bear, and once or twice a day drink a good draft of Water,
especially Morning and Night, and it will in a little time level their
Mountainous Paunches, and waste all superfluous offending matter, so great is
the power of clean, simple, natural Meats, Drinks, Exercises and Airs.

13. When you eat any sorts of strong Fat Foods, as Bread and Cheese, Bread and
Butter; Pudden, Pancake, or any solid Foods, especially Flesh, remember that
you eat Herbs with them, simply without either Salt, Vinegar or Oil, only wash
them, viz. Parsley, Sorrel, Spinach, Sage, Corn-Salet, the Leaves of young
Colworts, you may mix two or three sorts together, or any one of them, they
mightily cleanse and help Concoction, warm the Stomach, and cheer the Spirits
much better then if you put Oil, Salt and Vinegar to them, a little custom will
render them pleasant and delightful.

Of which clean simple Foods we come now to Discourse of more particularly, and
since those that are Liquid, commonly called Spoon-meats, are chiefly to be
regarded, I shall here set down such of them as are most proper for the
Spring-Season, viz. in the Months March, April, and May, of all Liquid Clensing
Foods or Spoon-meats Water Gruel deservedly claims the first place, and is
without doubt the best of all others, either simple or compounded with any
particular Herb or Herbs; at this time or season it has the most powerful
Opperation, because the Sun now increases in Strength and Power, and endues all
things not only with a brisk lively Motion, but great Virtue and Life.

The Winter is the Rest or Sabbath of the Earth, in which time she recovers
Strenght and Virtue, because she does then as it were cease from all her
Labors, and the Vegetative Quality stands as it were still. This is manifested
by the goodness and great increase of all Herbs, Fruits and Grains, being all
filled with a brisk lively Spirit and Virtue; therefore in the first Spring and
Rising of the Sun every thing rejoices and becomes very Fragrant, by Virtue of
the sweet Influences of this Celestial Body, and the Power of the Earth, so
that at this time all things seems to strive with a most lively motion to
manifest its most inward Virtue; this is the time for most People to eat Herbs
both Boiled and Raw, Salats and Pottages made thereof, such Food at the rising
of the Sun are endued with a brisk lively Virtue and Strength, and of an
opening and clensing Nature, Purging the Blood, and are good against all the
Obstructions which the Intemperances of the Winter have occasioned, Diseases
being easier cured at this time then any other, especially if Temperance and
Sobriety be observed.

Of plain Water Gruel.
PLain Water Gruel is in its own Nature of a sweet, mild and friendly
Opperation, and as Bread has the first place of all dry Food, and may justly
be called Concord, being befriended with all the good Virtues of the Vegetable
Kingdom, so this fine thin Gruel is the King of all Spoon-meats, and the Queen
of Pottages, for it gratifies Nature beyond all others, being most equal in its
parts, it stands nearest the Unity, for this cause the frequent, or daily
Eating or Drinking of it will not weary nor tire Nature; it is both Food and
Physic, Nourishes, and withal opens and cleanses, and serves both for
Victuals and Liquor, for you may either Eat or Drink it, and at the same time
that it satisfies your Hunger, it allays your Thirst; you may for need, with
Bread make a good Meal of it, or you may Drink it before or after Meals without
Bread, or with, after or before any sort of Foods whatsoever, it has a
universal tendency; for let your Food be Sweet or Sour, or Salt or Bitter,
Plain Gruel shall be agreeable to each of them, being of an allaying, softning,
dissolving and digesting Quality; and that Complexion is rare, either in Young
or Old, that it does not agree with, and tho it be of a moist Nature, yet it is
not at all Phlegmatic, but the contrary, it being easy of Digestion, opens
Obstructions, expells and hinders Fumes from flying into the Head; it
powerfully begets Appetite, makes the Blood thin, causing a free Circulation,
and thereby Cheers and Comforts the Spirits. It Is the best Spoon-Meat Women can
Drink when they Ly-in, for it breeds curious Milk, keeps the Body Cold, and
free from Feavors and Vapors, which other compounded Hetrogeneous Spoon-meats
do occasion; it is likewise admirable for Young Sucking Children, for it Washes
and Cleanses the Passages, which many sorts of Milk and sweet Spoon-meats do
Fur and Obstruct, and prevents Windiness (the great Torture of the tender Age)
by opening the all Salliports of Nature, that the airy matter may pass away
freely in their right Channels: In a Word nothing can be more friendly, if it
be made as follows.

Take Water, as you please for quantity, make it boiling hot, then have ready
some ground Oatmeal, which first temper with a little cold Water, and then put
it into your Vessel, stir it about, and let it stand on the Fire till it rises
up, or begins to boil, then keep stiring or lading it on the Fire half a
quarter of an hour, and so it is done, only season it with Salt, and let it
stand till it be cool, and by that time the Oatmeal, viz. the bigger parts
thereof will be settled to the bottom, then drink a pint or a quart, as you
think convenient, either before or after your Food, or in a Morning, and in
such case Fast till Dinner. It is also very good to be Drank after Labor,
Travel, Sweating, or the like, to prevent Surfeits, no sort of strong Drink
being comparable to it in that respect, for whilst People do endeavor by
drinking Wine and strong Drink to allay Heat and Drought, or Extinguish it,
frequently increase it, but this Gruel by its friendly Nature, quallifies all
such disorders, and presently brings Nature into a state of Harmony; and as it
is commendable and beneficial at all seasons of the Year, so more especially in
Spring and Summer, for it allays Heat and Drought far beyond any Beer or Ale;
and performs it in Natures own way.

Another very commendable way of making Water Gruel.
TAke what quantity of Water you please, make it just Boil up, then put in
your Herbs, and let it stand till it begins to boil again, then take it off
and let it stand two or three minuits with the Herbs in it, then take the Herbs
out, and having some Oatmeal ready tempered with cold Water, put that into it,
and so brew it too and fro out of one Pot into another, as you do Buttered-Ale,
a dozen or twenty times without putting it any more on the Fire, but if you
desire to eat Butter in it, then let the Butter and Salt be brewed too and fro
in the Gruel, and the Oatmeal will give forth its virtue and incorporate with
the water so as to make it the sweetest, best color, and wholsomest of all
other Gruels; if you would have it plain without Herbs, brew only the boiling
Water and Oatmeal togather, and it is done, adding a little Salt, thus likewise
you may make Milk Pottage, by putting your Milk and Water on your fire together
and when it boyles up, take it off, and brew that and your tempered Oatmeal as
aforesaid; and the like of Flowered-milk.

Of the best and most Natural way of making Water Gruel compounded of Various
Ingrediences.
TAke a Quart of good Water, into which put half a quarter of a Pound of
Currants washed, ser it on the Fire till it be ready to boil, then move it to a
more moderate heat for three or four Minuits, then in another Vessel have a
Quart of the like Water, made to a boiling, then have your tempered Spoonful of
Oatmeal ready, brew your Oatmeal and Water together, as you were taught before,
very well, then take your infused Currants out of the hot Water and put them
into your brewed Gruel, with some Sugar, Butter and Salt, throwing your Water
the Currants was infused in away, then brew it again as you did before, the
Butter, Salt, Currants and Crumbs of Bread altogether very well, and if you think
convenient to add Spice to it, then put it into the water you make your Gruel
off when you set it on the fire, for it is best to put both the Currants and
Spice into the water when cold, the water does then draw out the virtue of them
best, this way of making of it is far before any others that is in practice
amongst the Houswives; the Currants will be soft, and eat much more pleasent
then when boiled, this Gruel will have a curious white brisk, lively color,
Fragrant smell, and curious Cordial Taste, affords a better Nourishment and
easier of Concoction then any made the common way, for this way is far more
Natural, and does draw forth the fine spirituous friendly quallity of the
Ingrediences; and the brewing of it does keep and preserve the brisk, lively
spirits of the Butter which gives a curious flaver to the whole, and makes all
incorporate as one Body, also the Infusing of the Currants in the water does
wash away a foul gross quality, which cold water cannot do, which renders them
more Homogenial, and easier of Digestion; you are also to take notice by the
way; that your brewing or mixing of it off the fire, in the pleasant sweet Air,
does not only give Life, and a curious Color, but of better Taste and Smell,
more agreeable to the stomach, and easier of digestion; not so apt to obstruct
the Vessels of the Stomach, as that which is done otherwise; for the boiling
and stiring those fine thin Gruels or Pottages on the fire, does give great
advantage to the thick, gross, smooky, poisonous Vapors, which the Coals or
Wood, when stired, sends forth, which fulsome Vapors are by the Air drawn
forth up the Chimny, which are so very pernicious, that if any Persons should
hold their Heads over them, it would stifle or destroy them in a little time,
for the fire is not only the opener of all Bodies, but the separating power of
Nature, and penetrates to the very Root of each thing, and manifests the
virtues and vices of each thing; therefore forthese, and many other reasons,
too tedious for this place, the mixing or brewing these Gruels and Pottages off
the fire, are highly commendable, and they do as far exceed the common
Preparation as Light does Darkness, but Practice is the best Master, and
Experience the best Doctor.

Of purging Gruel.
TAke Water, what quantity you please, make it boiling hot, then put into it a
good quantity of any of these Herbs following, or others that you shall best
like, viz. Scurvy Grass Spinnage Corn-Sallet, Parsley, Smalage Elder-Buds. Take
your Water off your Fire, cover it, and let them infuse one hour, then take
your Liquor from your Herbs, and brew it with some tempered Oatmeal, you may
drink it with Salt, or without, from a Quart to three Quarts in a Morning, and
fast till Dinner, this is a brave Cordial Gruel, it will move gentily to stool,
more natural then most sorts of Physic; and wash and cleanse the Stomach from
all superfluous matter, thins the Blood, and open all the Passages, by which
the Humors will freely circulate, carrying away all Windy, Watery, or
Flatulent Juces; this sort of Gruel is not only good in the Spring, but at all
Seasons of the Year, when the Herbs can be procured; if the natural and proper
use of Herbs were known and practiced, there would be but little need of
Physic, especially if Order and Temperance were observed.

How Herb-Gruels, for the Spring, ought to be made, and their Respective
Virtues, and first of Elder-buds in Gruel.
TAke Water what quantity you have occasion for, make it boiling hot, then have
your Oatmeal ready tempered with cold Watter, and your Elder-buds, and put both
into your boiling Water, and keep it stirring, letting it be as it were on the
boil, but not boil up, a little while, then take it off the fire, and let it
stand two or three minuits more, then take the Herbs out, or strain it, and add
only a little salt, and when cold drink a Pint, or a Quart, as your Stomach
serves, a little use will make it familiar, this Gruel is a great cleanser and
opener of all sorts of obstructions that offends the Breast and Passages, and
moves gentlel to Stole; it is very good for Fat Pussy People, especially, if
they join Exercise therewith.

But probably some may object -- What good can there be in such poor Watery
slip-slop; give me Pottage made of Cocks-Combs, and Knucles of Veal, and Necks
of Mutton, and Shins of Beef, Boiled three or four hours, till it becomes thick
as a Ielly; and then put in Plums, Sugar, Spice and twenty other good things,
and this is like to be somewhat Nourishing and Comfortable indeed.

Well, let the Objector enjoy his fancy, and his Rich chargeable Slop, still I
will not change my Plain Water Gruel with him; for I must tell him (were he
capable of hearing Reason) all such mighty compounded Pottages, how much soever
they may be cried up as Nutritive and Restorative, and indeed Destructive, for
they obstruct Nature, stagnate the Blood, becloud the Spirits, and ruin the
Appetite: Moreover the much Boiling of Pottages, and especially Gruels made of
Flower, does in a manner destroy all the wholesome, cleansing, opening, cooling,
exhilerating Virtues; because it too violently opens the Body of the water, and
sends the fine spirits flying to Iapan, or else suffocates them, for this
Reason, Water once boiled, and then put into a Vessel, and kept, will Stink,
and never be sweet nor good for any use afterward, whereas Water that has
never been at the fire, being put into a like Vessel, will indeed stink, as
well as the other, but then it will recover its self, and be sweet again
afterward, and as good as ever; this shows, that in boiling, Water loses its
fine Spirituous preservative quality, nor does the boiling less impair the
lively virtues of the Flower; therefore we conclude it not fit nor convenient
to boil Pottages or Gruels after the common manner such being good neither for
Food nor Physic; whereas one main end of Gruels is to fit and prepare Nature
for Food, that is to wassi, cleanse and free the Passages of gross obstructive
matter.

Others may say, How is it possiblh that this infusion, or small boiling, can
draw forth, or endue the Gruel with the Virtues of such Herbs as shall be put
into it; for we (they will say) have been taught otherwise, viz. to boil them
an hour or two at least -- Now this is as great an error as the former, for
boiling of Herbs, especially in this particular case, does as it were totally
extinguish and destroy those fine, pleasant, opening, Cordial Virtues, which
all Men seek to obtain in all preparations either of Food or Physic; if your
Reason be too weak to apprehend this, yet you cannot blind your Nature, viz.
your Palate and Stomach, for will not all Pottages and Gruels, wherein various
sorts of Herbs are long boiled, taste strong and fulsome, and do not they lie
gross and heavy on the stomach? and do not you find that they are hard of
Concoction? besides, you are to know that in all hot infusions, the hot or
boiling Water does first seize, or draw forth the mild, sweet, cleansing,
pleasant Virtues; and if such Liquors are drawn off from the ingredients, in a
convenient time, they shall be endued with all the good pleasant Virtues of the
Vegetation infused; but if they lie too long in the hot Liquor, then those good
properties first extracted becomes suffocated; for the boiling Liquor
continuing still its opperation on the things Infused, after it has sucked out
the sweet friendly Properties, does awaken the Harsh, Bitter, Stinking,
Poisonous, Sharp, Astingent, Qualities, and draws forth that too, whereby the
former becomes spoiled or turned into the forementioned evil qualities; thus
Brewers, or any good Houswives will tell you, that the best virtues of the
Malt is first drawn forth by the hot Liquor, and the oftener they put up, the
meaner is their Wort, and if they let their first infusion stand too long
before they draw it off, it will become of a strong, sharp, keen, sour,
quality, not fit to make either Beer or Ale of; for by long standing, the hot
Liquor continuing its opperation, does penetrate even to the Center, and stirs
up the harsh, bitter, sour, properties of the Malt, which evil Juces does in
a moments time swallow up, or turn all the sweet, pleasant, mild, friendly,
Virtues into its own Nature, for which Evils there is no cure or bringing of it
back again; but it will still continue its progress into the harsh, bitter
Astingency, or its original Properties.

Note also, that the better, or more Skilful Brewers will not boil their Liquor
or Water at all (whatever Custom, and Vulgar noise may clamor to the contrary)
but only heat it to a convenient degree, because they are taught by Doctor
Experience, that boiling does not only fix or harden the Liquor, but causes it
to lose its opening soft quality, so that it will not so kindly draw forth the
good virtues of the Malt; but if these Reasons, backed by Experience, which are
truly Natural, will not satisfy you, you have Liberty to follow your old blind
Guide Ignorance and Tradition.

There still remains an other Objection, viz. What Virtue can there be in one
simple herb alone, we are advised by the Learned, that for Spinnage Gruel or
Pottages we must put into the same Mess Elder-buds, Nettle-tops, Clivers,
Brook-lime Watercresses, and as many more as we can think off that it may
cleanse us bravely -- But let me tell you (and I will tell you nothing but
naked natural Truths) that wherever such a multiplicity of Ingredients are
jumbled together, you may be sure there are as many various Natures and
Qualities, and it is more then probable that some of them at least are contrary
to each other, so that their distinct Virtues are thereby confounded, and you
have neither the true Virtue of one nor the other, but a mere Gallimaufry,
which will be irksome for nature to receive, and burdensome unto the Stomach to
digest, being both of an ill Taste and Savor; therefore the surest, and most
natural way is to take such a simple Herb as you conceive most proper for that
infirmity you are subject unto; and such simple Gruels will prove more pleasant
to the palate; Secondly, more agreeable to the Stomach; Thirdly, they do to a
better degree, Answer the end for which they are taken.

Of Gruel, with that gallant Herb, Balm.
The making of this Gruel, as to the manner of preparation is exactly the same,
with what we taught you of Elder-buds, and so it is of all the other Herbs
herein after mentioned, or any other that you please to make use of; and
therefore we refer you back thereunto, being as unwilling to write unnecessary
repetitions as you can be to Read them. The Virtues of Balm-Gruel, are that it
cleanses bravely, and is very profitable for all People both Young and Old; but
especially for those that have but weak heats and tender Spirits, or are
subject to Wind and Vapors, as also for Fat, Gross, Dropsical People, it
mightily removes Obstructions that lies in the Passages, and cheers the Natural
Spirits, making them fine, which all such People want; I recommend it therefore
to be drank every Morning during the Spring, viz. in March, April and May.

The Virtues of Scurvy Grass Gruel.
This being made as before directed, I may safely Affirm is more Effectual
against all the Distempers which this universal Herb is appropriated unto, then
either the Spirits of it, which are so much cried up for their manifold
virtues, or the Gross Juces of it, which some force forth of the Herb, and put
into Ale, which way is not at all to be approved of, because the terrene,
Gross, fulsome, quality comes out with the more fine, it will gallantly correct
and refines the Blood, begets Appetite, purge by Urin, and sometimes by Stool,
being a great Evacuator of those gross, heavy, dull Humors which indispose
both Body and Mind.

Gruel made of Alehoof or Ground Ivy.
This is a great Cleanser of the Stomach and Bowels, wholesome for all Ages, and
for those that are Healthy, as well as those that are Infirm.

Smallage Gruel.
Purifies the Blood, and powerfully opens Obstructions, begets Appetite, and is
profitable against Shortness of Breath.

Sage Gruel.
Is a Noble useful preparation and good against the infirmity which the
Ancients have appropriated that Herb unto.

So is Gruel made of Pennyroyal or Spinach, respectively each in its kind; and
after the same manner you may use what other Herbs you have occasion for; this
being one of the best and most natural ways to draw forth the fine spirituous
virtues of any Herbs. -- Only remember to make your Gruel of any sort thin, and
let your fire be clear and brisk, else you will fail of your ends.

There are many other Pottages proper to be Eaten in the Spring, as
Milk-Pottage, Milk and Flower, Milk and Rice, and the like; but remember that
Milk-Pottage ought to be made after the same manner with small ground Oatmeal,
viz. put in your Water and Milk together, make it almost boiling hot, on a
clear brisk fire, then temper your Oatmeal with a little cold Milk or Water,
and add that, and stir it about, and let it stand till it begins to boil up,
but then stir or lade it to keep it from boiling half a quarter of an hour, and
then take it of the fire, and when it is cool eat it with Bread or without as
you like best; the like is to be observed in making flowred milk.

There are many other brave wholesome foods (far better then either Flesh or
Fish) to be eat in the Spring, as Sallads, both Boiled and Raw; this being the
principal time of the Year for the eating of Herbs, viz. in the Month of March
April and May, for by the Approach of the Sun, and the sweet Influences he now
scatters through our Hemisphere, all the vegitations are endued with lively and
powerful virtues, more then at any other time of the Year, and it would be the
happiness of English people, if they did eat more of them, and less Flesh and
Fish, nor is it to be doubted, but the first Instituters of Lent might probably
(amongst other things) have this in their eye, to appoint a time of Abstenance
and Temperance from gross succulent Foods in the Spring, to remove and Remedy
the mischiefs that might arise to their Healths from the too large Feeding on
such Victuals all the foregoing Winter, during which time what through their
gross Foods, strong Drinks, and the uncertain Weather, viz. sometimes close,
rainy, and cold, and then presently warm again, together with their broyling
themselves by Cole or Turf-fires, whence arises thick sulpherous Airs, and
smoky Vapors, their lying overlong in Bed, and neglecting due and proper
exercises, they cannot but have Treasured up a vast fund for future Diseases
and Calamities, no way to be so happily prevented, as by a strait and spare
Diet, in the beginning of the returning Year, for in these Three Months the Sun
(which is the Fountain of central heat in all things) has a powerful Influence,
and gives a lively motion to all being capable thereof, so that if we will but
put to our helping Hand, and observe the good Rules of Temperance, Cleanness
and Order in Meats, Drinks and Exercises, many great Evils and Diseases may by
the blessing of the Lord be avoided.

The Foods most proper for this season are the Gruels and spoonmeats before
mentioned, with Bread Butter and Cheese, but the two fast ought to be eaten
sparingly, because they are Fat Strong Bodies, too great quantities thereof may
do injury to many Constitutions.

I have as little occasion as inclination to advise English People to the
eating of Flesh and Fish, for that they are already too apt to indulge
themselves therein, but this I must say, that this is the best Season, because
the Food of most sorts of Cattle, that are now killed by the Butchers, having
been for some time past either Hay or Corn, which does generate better Blood in
the Creatures, and firmer Flesh, besides the Season is brisk and cool which
drives the natural heat more central, and gives great strength to the digestive
faculty, whereby their Foods is better separated and the Creatures becomes
stronger, of good Heart, and full of brisk airy Spirits; add to this that they
are not so subject to be surfeited by over driving, which renders their Flesh
better in all respects, and more healthful.

An other way of making water Gruel, without being put on the Fire, which is a
Summer Gruel.
Take one spoonful of good Oatmeal, temper it with a little Watter, then take a
quart more of Water, put the Oatmeal into the other quart, and brew it very
well together in too Pots, that are fit for that purpose, and then it is done;
the Oatmeal will mixed or incorporate with the Water; of this sort you may drink
a pint or a quart at a time, it is very good at all times of the Year, but more
especially in Summer and hot weather; it is so friendly and Homogenial, that it
allays Thurst the best of any others, by refreshing the Spirits bedewing the
Body with a most pleasant and more natural moisture then either Beer or Ale, or
any fermented drinks, the common use thereof in hot Seasons does strengthen the
Body, and all the Members thereof, begets a natural Cheerfulness, extinguisheth
all kinds of inward flushings and vapors that comes for want of a strong
natural Heat, and large passages; it opens and frees the Stomach from gross
matter that obstruct the digestive Faculty, purges by Urine, as all sorts of
Gruel do, if made as we have Taught; the frequent eating of this, and other
sorts beforementioned do mightly assist Nature in all her opperations; in
particular, it is profitable against griping pains of the Bowels helps
Concoction, disburthening the Stomoch of superfluous Juces, and cleanses the
vessels which are generally stopped and furred by Intemperance, either in Meats
or Drinks; for all Gruels and Pottages do naturally prevent fumes and vapors;
by carrying the offending windy matter into the Bowels, causing it to pass away
with case its proper way, neither shall those whether Young or Old, that often
eat this Gruel, be subject to shortness of Breath, or other ill habits of the
Stomach and Breast, and if Children do eat frequently of it in quantities, it
will prevent those evil sharp windy Juces that falls into their Joints, which
do cause the Disease called the Rickets; it has also a powerful opperation
against the Scurvy and Dropsy, by opening the obstructions of the Liver and
Spleen, begets appetite; it cheers and comforts the Spirits, it is in every
respect friendly to Nature, and assists her in all her Opperations; for as most
distempers are contracted by excess and Inordinate living; so on the other
side, nothing has so much power, not only to prevent. Diseases, but also to
throw them off when they have invaded Nature, neither can the best of of
Medicines prove Effectual, when disorders, and the same intemperance, in Meats,
Drinks, Beds and Exercises are continued, that was the original of the
Diseases; it is also very profitable to Woman in Childbed, the frequent use
thereof would prevent those feavorish indispositions, vapors, windy fuming
Humors, that most are subject to in that conditions, which is for the most part
occasioned by their ill conduct, and by their hot thick compounded Spoon-Meats;
but I do not call them h^^ from the fiery heat they are tenged, with in their
preparation; which also is injurious to Nature, if not cool before it be taken
into the Body; it being a contrary heat both to the natural heat of the food,
and Stomach too; but from the innate heat the ingrediences of those Spoon-meats
are endued with; also those Gruels are very profitable for all Children,
especially those that suck; for many Women's Milk is defective, besides Milk
naturally furs the passages and stomach, and often heats the Blood, whence
Fevers and indispositions proceeds, which generally is attributed to the
breeding of Teeth, but many are mistaken; now this Gruel does cool and cleanse
all the passages, and refresh the Spirit, and thin the Blood.

Of moist Airs.
WHen the Fountains of water in the upper Chambers of Nature are stirred or
awakened by the motions of the Elements and Celestial Configurations, all
things, presently become dewy, or filled with humidity, for heat and moisture
naturally opens all Bodies, exerting their inward qualities, and makes them
defusive, whether they be Good or Evil, and renders them capable to mixed or
incorporate with the Air, for so great is the power and efficacy of this
Element of Water, that all or most productions are attributed thereunto, as
that whereby they are Generated, Nourished and increased, so that it seems a
prime natural cause of all things that grow in the Earth, and when it obtains
the Government, or Dominion over the other Elements, it opens the Gates of
nature, and then all properties do breathe or send forth their innate
qualities, intermingling with the Air of that place; which if it happens to be
low, morish fenny Ground, near Lakes Ponds, Jakes, Close Towns, or great
Cities, as London, where various sorts of Filth and Uncleanness are heaped up,
then the Air is filled with foul fulsome vapors of pernicious qualities; but
on the other side, when the Air is humid, if the Ground be dry, or amongst
Gardens, Corn Fields, open Heaths, Running Rivers, or where Springs trickle
down from the Breasts of a rising Plain or Hills, where Hedges and Trees do not
stand too thick, all such places do naturally exhale pleasant, and fragrant
Smells which Impregnating the Air, renders it both delightful and wholesome.

Hence it appears that Water is the great Menstrum of the World, the opener of
all bodies, and the aawakener of Qualities, making all things penetrable,
whence Motion and vegetation does arise; so that when Water and Air are
incorporated, the latter is rarefied, and it becomes more penetrating,
moystening, digesting and cooling; for when the sweet dews of Heaven are
withheld, all things are locked up in the hot, harsh, astringent Chamber, which
threatens all things with death, the Air becoming Sultry and Sulpherous, which
consumes the radical moisture in all Creatures, and so renders them not only
more unfit for Labor or Exercise, but also more subject to Diseases, then in
moist Seasons, making them droughty hot and feavorish by stopping up the pores,
which frets all the inwards parts both of Men and Beasts, and parches up the
Earth, but where Water and Air do kindly embrace or inbibe each other, that
place or Climate gains a brisk, spiritous refreshing property, that it sucks in
on all parts of the Body; for the pure natural and Animal Spirits in man are
not altogether a terrene thing, or Body nourrished only by gross Alement
received through the Organs, by the Concoction of Meats and Drinks only, but
draw in a more refined nourishment, like spunges at every pore of the Body,
from the thin vapors that encompass, and penetrate it on all sides; for the
Air being plentifully; endued with a salnitral virtue, does furnish and refresh
Nature with a curious, brisk Airy Spirit; and for that reason Rain Water being
Impregnated with a greater quantity of that Good virtue, does naturally advance
Vegetations beyond all other sorts enriching the Earth, and making it hollow or
Plumplike, a ferment or leven, whereas other Waters; bind and close-up the
Pores thereof, but still the moist Air of Woods are not commendable as to
health, because such places do naturally attract Humidity and retain it; so as
it became thick, hot and sulpherous, because the Sun, Wind etc. has not free
passage to refine it; but all Airs by, or near Springs or running-Water are
more commendable in the Summer then in the Winter, and wonderfully refreshes
the natural Spirits; and therefore Employments or Exercises near unto, or on
the Waters are both pleasant and healthful, so that its a very vain
Apprehension in many People so much to fear the dwelling near Rivers, tho
possibly the same may not agree with all Constitutions.

And as moist Airs are most wholesome and healthful in hot Seasons of the Year:
The like is to be understood of our Homogenial Water Gruel, and other Pottages,
tho the contrary is practiced by most. Gruels and Pottages, being mostly eaten
in Winter; but they are far more agreeable in Summer or hot Seasons, for our
Winters are for the most part cold and moist, which does naturally drive the
heat more central, which does strengthen the Stomach, and digestive faculty,
that Nature can the better dispose and digest, stronger, fatter, harder, drier
Foods and Drinks, then in Summer or hot Weather; besides, Airs then are cold,
humid and dewy, which do powerfully penetrate the Body, and the thin spiritous
parts thereof are drawn or sucked in on all sides as by Spunges which do not
only quicken, and make the natural Spirits brisk and lively, but it helps to
dissolve and digest the Meats and Drinks, and makes that Food easily digested
that would prove burdensome in Summer; besides tho spoonmeats, viz. Gruels and
Pottages, are not hot in their natures and innate qualities: Their heats are
accidental, viz. received from the fire, the continuation thereof, is no longer
then they become cold; for no Foods nor Drinks can be counted hot, but what
have an innate natural heat, the heat received from the fire in preparations is
Accidental, and forced, and not natural, it being contrary both to the natural
heat of the Food and Stomach too, and tho these Pottages and Gruels are good in
all seasons, yet they are most beneficial to Health and Pleasure in Summer, for
in hot weather most People are apt to Sweat, also the Sun which is the Central
heat, does then by its Influences powerfully attracts and draws forth the
natural heat, opening the pores, by which the Spirits are on all occasions or
exercises apt to evaporate, from whence proceeds hot, droughty, fainty,
Indispositions, Small and imperfect Appetites, and weak Digestions, which evils
are very much increased by unproper Meats and Drinks, viz. Salt Flesh, or Fish,
much Cheese and too strong Drinks; and also by all other Foods that are Fat
Succulent or hard of concoction, or that which lies long in the Stomach before
they digest, therefore our sweet, moystening, mild, clean, easy simple Gruels
and Pottages, if frequently eaten, will prevent many inconveniences, and supply
nature with its dewy moystening virtues, which will not only dilate the vessels
of the Stomach, but they will beget Appetite, and mightily help concoction,
moderately cool the Body and gentlely move to Stool, open all sorts of
Obstructions that lie in the passages, and prevent the Generation of Wind in
the Stomach; besides those that daily accustom themselves to the eating of
those Gruels and Pottages, will rarely be afflicted either with the Griping
Pains of the Bowels, or Wind-Collick, for those simple Spoon-Meats do not
generate any Crudities, nor sour short saltis matter, as grosser Foods do,
especially compounded foods and strong stale sharp, drinks; but they sweeten
the Blood thin the Humors of the Body by which means the Blood and the natural
Spirits circulates freely, whence proceeds a lively; brisk, pleasant,
Harmonious Temperament of Body and Mind, a little Physic will serve your turn,
and as few Guineys, for Mr Doctor; for the true happiness of Mankind consist
chiefly in this, that he keeps his Body and Mind as near the Tempeature as is
possible, which cannot be done, except he make a due choice in the qualities
and quantities of his Meats, Drinks, Employments, Airs, and Communications, and
apply himself to those that are the most simple and Innocent, viz. that stands
nearest equality, because each things do imposs its own property both on the
Body and Mind; and the Blood and natural Spirits, inclinations and dispositions
are not only supported by these things we Eat and Drink, but also continually
made as it were new. And if such Meats and Drinks be too highly graduated in
any particular property as in Sweetness, Bitterness Sourness or Astringency,
then they do awaken, stir up, and strengthen their like quality by Simule, but
if the foods be Flesh or Fish, then remember that all Beasts are not only
endued with senses equal with Man, but also with all kinds of Passions as Love,
Hate, Wrath, and the like, which their Flesh and Blood is not freed from, for
in the Blood consists the high Life of every Creature, therefore the
Illuminated Prophet Moses Commanded that it should not be eaten, because the
more noble human Nature should not partake, nor be infected with the
Beastiality, for Killing and Eating the Flesh and Blood of Beasts, cannot be
accounted human, for men have no Example in all the Creation, but only the
cruel, fierce, Savage Beast of the Desert, in which Creatures fierceness and
wrath have the Ascendent.

Of the Seasons of the Year, in which all sorts of Flesh are most Unclean, and
aptest to contract and breed Diseases, as also the danger of Eating much
Green-Fruits.
THe season which most People are most apt to contract Diseases, by the
frequent Eating of Flesh, is from the middle of June to the last of October,
for 1st this season is hot, which opens the Pores causes Sweating, and as it
were a continual Evaporation of the Spirits, which causes Fainty
Indispositions to possess the whole Body, for all heat that exceeds the medium,
whether it proceeds from Meats, Drinks or Exercises, does gradually waste and
consume the Spirits and natural heat, which does dull the edge of the
attractive, digestive and retentive faculties of the Stomach, for this reason
all superfluity and intemperances, are tenfold more dangerous, and Men are
apter to contract Distempers in the one then in the other, as experience
manifests; we see that the Natives in all hot Climates are naturally more
temperate in Meats, Drinks and Exercises, then they are in cold, which is one
cause why English People, and others, that Travel into the East and West Indies
are so Unhealthy.

2dly. In this Season most People eat great store of Green Foods, as Beans,
Peases, Cabbages, Colliflowers, and the like, all which things do contain great
store of gross phlegmy matter, especially in cold Countries, where the Sun
(which is the central heat in all things) has not the power to prepare such
Foods as in hot.

3dly. It is likewise to be observed that a great part of that Green Food
before mentioned, does often lie a considerable time before they are eaten,
especially in great Cities and Towns, by which means they lose their pure
brisk lively Taste, and Smell, which renders them nothing so quick of
Concoction; as those that are boiled fresh, for they presently lose their fresh
lively Spirits and Tinctures whence do proceed the pleasant taste with the most
fragrant Smell and natural Color.

4thly, All this time of the Year, the Air (which is the Life of the Spirit in
all Cities and great Towns) is thick and sulpherous, full of gross Humidity,
which has its source from many uncleanness, such places do plentifully
afford, more especially in this season, which is Inamicable to the pure
spirituous virtues of all such Foods, for all green food is naturally subject
to Putrefaction by reason of their Phlegmatic Body; this makes them more
unhealthy and dangerous then otherwise they would be if fresh and lively.

5thly. In this season the Sun also declines in strength and vigor which being
the central Power and Life of all things, they do proportionably decline as
appears in Herbage (also the Earth, which is the Mother of all things, in this
Season) is weakand impotent because she has already put forth her strength and
manifested her lively virtues in the first spring or rising of the Sun;
therefore in the first spring and rising of the Sun every thing rejoyeth, and
becomes very flagrant, by virtue of the sweet influences of their celestial
Body, and the power of the Earth.

6thly. In this Season, viz. from June to the last of October, most sorts of
Cattle breed many Diseases, first from the heat and gross humid Air which in
this Season is more thick and sulpherous, the pleasant Influences and Spirits
of the Air are dull and thick, which causes a fainty Indisposition to possess
the Bodies and Spirits of most Creatures; Men themselves can witness the Truth
of this; likewise the foods of most Creatures is Grass, which is of a
phlegmatic Nature, and generates not only an unfirm Nourishment, but fills the
Body full of evil Juces, for this cause it will not take Salt as at other times
of the Year.

In this Season the weather being hot the Spirits of most Creatures are quickly
evaporated by driving, and other accidents, which most Beasts are subject to,
especially such as come from remote Parts to great Cities; besides it is the
time of their uncleanness, therefore it was not without great reason and
Wisdom, that the Ancients commanded, that Flesh should be eaten sparingly, and
that there should be a particular care taken about the good state of the Bodies
of such Cattle, viz. that they were Sound Healthy, free from Uncleanness* and
Surfits, for whatsoever inconveniences attend the Creature before killed, the
Flesh does still retain; and therefore the Eaters thereof cannot but partake of
the evils; for the causes before mentioned, Flesh in these Months ought to be
eaten sparingly, is any at all, there being many other sorts of Food that do
far exceed Flesh and Fish, more especially in this Season, as Bread, Butter,
Cheese, Gruels, Pottages of various sorts, Eggs, Herbs, and many others that
are after a little use more pleasant, healthier, and generate firmer
Nourishment, and greater Strength, if Sobriety and Temperance were observed;
and other Circumstances belonging to Health, a little Flesh would serve; in
this Age a man may speak and write of Temperance, and an orderly choice of
Food, which can never be understood nor believed without practicing, which
makes all notions essential, few do or can immagine, how little and mean things
will every way fully contribute to all Natures wants and necessities.

There are two or three other things, which (having the oppertunity, tho they
may seem not so pertinent to the present Subject) I would advertise my Country
Men of.

1. That Diseases are transferred from one to another several ways, but
especially, by lying in Beds with, or after Diseased People; which all Persons
ought to take notice of, there being scarce any sort of Learning more
necessary, and yet none more neglected; for these secret conveyances of Virtue
and Venom, or the transfering of Distempers from one to another is done after
an hidden inpreceptible manner, by way of Spirits, Gleams, Rays and Glances,
the natural Spirits being so subtle and penetrating as they powerfully search
into all things, so that a Man cannot touch any thing tho it seem never so
impassible or hard, as Iron, Stone, or the like, but those nimble Scouts, do
not only penetrate it, but are more or less retained in it; if this were not
so, the Dog could not find the Individual Stone his Master throws amongst a
Thousand others; nor could he follow him unseen by his Foot-stops; nor could
the deep mouthed Hounds trace the light heel'd Hare in all her doubles and
winding, and tho she runs so fast and swift, as she scarce seems to touch the
surface of the Earth, or bend the topes of the Grass, over which she mounts;
yet she leaves such real Effluviums and impressions, enough to betray her to
those pursuing Enemies. Indeed nothing can hold or withstand the natural
Spirits, they are so thin, quick and piercing, no Iron Stone or Wood can resist
them, and if they will incorporate with those hard substances as is most
manifest, how much more must they be imbibed by soft Beds, where People lie
long, Warm and Sweating, and where the Air cannot come with its refreshing
Influences, to cleanse and purify those grosser Excrements, the Vehicles (or
Lodging) of malignant Spirits, that are continually breathed forth by infirm
Persons, and of all others Feather-Beds are more dispossed to entertain and
welcome such unclean fulsome Vapors; therefore it concerns all People,
especially such as are Young, to be careful who they lie with, or after, all
Diseases being catching at one time or other; moreover hot, soft Feather Beds
are for the most part in themselves. Unwholesome, because they keep the Body too
hot, and infeeble the Loins; whereas hard clean Beds, viz. Quilts, or Straw, or
Flock-Beds (but especially Straw) are much more commendable as to Health.

2. The principal Cause that so many Children, especially Young Virgins in
London, and other parts of this Nation, are deformed by crooked and disorderly
growing, is, 1st, By reason of their hard Swathing in their Infancy, for who
ever saw a Black (who use no such binding) Crooked. 2dly, This is increased
when they grow up by the tyrany of foolish pernicious Fashons, over strait
Lacings, hard Bodies and stiff Stays (invented only for Mischief, and the
consumption of Whale-Bone) all which their weak Bones and tender Nerves cannot
endure without great prejudice; besides it straitens the Breast and the Vessels
of the Stomach, and lays Foundations for Asthmas, Phtysicks, shortness of
Breath, Green sickness, and forty other Malladies. 3dly, When they come to be
about six or seven Years old, they are generally put to sowing or working of
Samplers, as they call it, where most of them are kept by an Ignorant
Impertinent Mistress, as hard to it, as if they were to get their Bread before
they eat it, five, six, seven or eight hours in a Day, are they there keep
sitting in a mopish still Posture, with their Heads downwards, leaning on their
Breasts, and all their Limbs crumpled up almost like a Hedge-Hoggs. This makes
many of them dull, Sleepy and Heavy all their Life after, by that base, early
contracted Habit; others to ease themselves lolling or leaning on one side,
hold their Necks awry, get a trick of lifting up one Shoulder half a Story
higher then the other, and a Thousand other ridiculous Postures, which by time
becomes natural, and then the Swing is thought of, and the Steel-Bodices sent
for, which certainly concludes the Work, and renders their Crookedness yet
worse, and indeed altogether incurable; whereas, had these Children been
Educated with change of Employments or Learning, viz. one hour, or an hour and
an half to Sew, the next to Read, or Write, or learn Languages; after that to
play on the Music, Sing or Paint, to go in a handsome Posture, their Schooling
would not only be much more pleasant and delightsome to them, but they would be
more Airy, Brisk and Healthy, and learn more in one hour, then they do in
several Days by being kept thus dully to one thing so long day after day, as it
were stupifiing there Senses, procuring many other Diseases, besides
Crookedness which is always accompanied with many other inconveniences, which
all careful prudent Mothers ought to consider, and study to prevent.

3. The best Exercises that I have observed against Consumptions, shortness of
Breath, and all kind of Obstructions of the Stomach and Breast are those that
most Employ the Arms, and open the Chest; therefore for Women to rub Tables for
one hour every Morning tell they sweat would not be amiss; for Men any sort of
Labor on the Water, but especially Rowing in Boats with Water men, does
effectually open and remove all Impediments and Diseases of the Breast and
Stomach, at once it strengthens the Muscles, and opens the Passages, or if any
find themselves inclinable to it, the Exercise of Shooting at Butts, in a long
Bow is very commendable, such Exercises have cured many Consumptive Asthmatical
People, when they have been given over by the Doctors, for as the walking in
proper Airs gets a good Appetite so the drawing the Bow dilates the Breast and
removes Obstructions.

But I have already exceeded the limits I proposed to my self in this Paper:
Those that shall observe the Rules herein laid down of Temperance, choice of
Diet and due preparation, will, I am more then confident, find great benefit
thereby; therefore I shall not Trouble my self to make any Apology to any, who
having their Eyes blinded by the Dust of Custom, and Tradition, may be apt to
condemn or flight these Advices as useless Chymeras; sure I am what I have
delivered is agreeable to undisguised Nature, and whosoever shall Act
accordingly will find the benefit, but without practice all precepts are vain,
or at least fruitless; unless it be to remain as Monuments to reproach those
conceited Fools that despise and neglect them. What I have here heartily, and
in a simple plain familiar manner delivered, I leave to Gods Blessing and the
practice of all prudent Lovers of their Health, and humble Followers of Nature
in her easy and Innocent Methods.

FINIS

