A SERMON Preached before the KING, On Easter Day, 1684.

By Francis Lord Bishop of Rochester, and ALMONER to His MAJESTY.

Published by his Majesty's special Command.

LONDON, Printed by J. Macock for R. Royston Bookseller to His most Sacred
Majesty, at the Angel in Amen-Corner, 1684.

Hosea VI. 2, 3. After two days will He revive us, in the third day He will
raise us up, and we shall live in his sight.

Then shall we know, if we follow on to know the Lord: his going forth is
prepared as the morning; and He shall come unto us as the rain; as the latter
and former rain unto the earth.


SUCH an August and Solemn Assembly as this, how well does it suit with those
Glorious, Titles the Ancient Fathers bestow upon Easter Day, the Feast of
Feasts, the Solemnity of Solemnities, the Queen or Empress of all the Churches
Festivals! And well may the Christian Church be allowed to pay the highest
observance and greatest reverence to the memory of his Resurrection, Whom God
has raised up to be a Prince, and a Savior, (as St. Peter styles Him) to be
our God, and our Lord (as Saint Thomas calls him); when even the Gentile World,
whom ever they took upon them to worship as a God, their natural Religion
dictated to them this, That Feasts in Honor of Him should be observed. The
Roman Emperor Tiberius (as Eusebius relates) upon that amazing Story he
received from his Lieutenant Pontius Pilate, concerning our Saviors Death and
Resurrection, was very desirous to have Deified our Lord Christ: But by the
special Providence of God, the Senate found a pretense to cross that Design of
Tiberius; for Christ would never be beholding to the Secular Heathen Powers to
advance his Divinity, which was to astonish the World into its belief by a
quite contrary method, of suffering their Persecutions, and dying for it.

But since all the Triumphs of Christ, that were the consequence of his Death
and Passion, began from his Resurrection, (Because he was obedient unto death,
even the death upon the Cross, therefore God also has highly exalted him;
again, God has made that same Jesus, whom ye have crucified, both Lord and
Christ; which implies, that Christ was made more The Christ, that is, more The
Anointed Son of God, by his being the first-begotten from the dead this Day;)
then we must needs allow this Day a preference to all others in our Christian
Calendar: This is foretold, As the Day of his Power, when the people should
offer him free will Offerings with an holy worship; when he was first enabled
to declare, All power is given unto me in Heaven and earth; This is the Day
which Christ has called properly His, Father Abraham desired to see my Day, and
he saw it, and was glad to see it, then when he received, Isaac from the dead
in a Figure, a Type of Christ. This is the Day which the Lord has made: I
could allege a great consent of the Ancients interpreting that Passage of the
Psalmist, as Prophetical of Easter Day; a Festival that we hear of in as old a
Record, and as venerable a Piece of Antiquity, as is the Story of Polycarp, St.
John's Disciple; a Festival, which Constantine, the first Great Christian
Emperor, commanded by a special Edict to be observed; which Socrates our
Ecclesiastical Historian assures us, that in his time no Heretics had
impudence enough to disparage, nay, that all of them kept it. Now methinks it is
exceeding strange, that so many of our Schismatics should have so much zeal as
they pretend to have for the Weekly Festival, and none for the Annual
Commemoration of our Blessed Lords Resurrection; that the Lords Day being
confessedly derived from this Day, every Sunday but as a shadow of Easter: Yet
some almost Judaizing in the Doctrine of the Sabbath, should refuse to join
with the rest of the Christian World in honoring of this Day, whence the other
one and fifty Days in the Year had all their beginning, and borrow all their
Glory. But as for you that come hither on the score of Devotion, I may address
my self to you, as the Angel began to those that had the honor to hear the
first welcome News of this Day, Ye seek Jesus of Nazareth, that was crucified;
He is risen. The Christian Saints of old, when they met upon Easter-Morning,
the one accosted the other with this Salutation, Christ is risen; the Custom
still continues in the Greek Churches, to which the other joyfully echoes and
replies, Yes, Christ is risen: But I will not say with the Angel, Ye seek
Jesus, He is not here; Indeed he was no longer there in his Monument, but he is
here in the Blessed Sacrament, which shall be in the worthy Receivers as, Seeds
of the Resurrection, ('it is Irenaeus's expression) to make our vile Bodies like
his glorious Body; and he is here in the Text, as I shall clearly show, though
it were but an obscure Prophecy to the Jews, as every Prophecy is a Mystery
till it be fulfilled; yet now it is turned into the plain Story of this time; to
us Christians it is a demonstration, if it pleases Christ to open our hearts, as
he did those of the two Disciples that went to Emmaus, when he expounded unto
them in all the Scriptures, and all the Prophets, the things concerning
himself, That Christ ought to have suffered those things, and to enter into his
Glory: for unless he open our eyes, as he did theirs while he opened the
Scriptures to them, we may be but as they were, slow of heart to believe all
that the Prophets have spoken.

Saint Paul, who tells some parts of this Story concerning the Resurrection
more punctually than even the Gospels have done, tells us, that Christ rose the
third Day, according to the Scriptures. The Resurrection is the only Article of
our Creed that has the circumstance of time particularly annexed to it; and
this he says was according to the Scriptures, that Christ rose the third Day:
Which are those Scriptures then? For he must needs mean those in the Old
Testament; and which are those? None more plain than this place of Hosea; which
therefore I have chosen to discourse upon, though it be not so commonly
observed, and though it be left for an exercise of our Christian Industry,
which should be much employed in searching the Scriptures, for this is a Text
not quoted in any place of the New Testament: Yet I shall not deny, but this
Prophecy might also signify that reviving or restoring of Gods people from
their woeful Captivity, in which they were, as it were, dead men and dry bones,
(as the Prophet Ezekiel calls them;) Recovering their Liberty was like
receiving new life, after those two days, or two calamitous times, first of the
Assyrian Captivity, then of the Babylonian; and then a third glorious Day broke
out joyful and happy to them, upon the Victories and Triumphs of the Great
Cyrus, (whom the Prophet Isaiah calls by his Name some Ages before he was born,
Who has said unto Cyrus, Thou art my Shepherd); accordingly Cyrus took order
for gathering the scattered sheep of Israel, for raising them up from a kind of
Civil Death, from Slavery to Freedom, from Banishment to resettle them in their
own Country. But allowing this Interpretation of the Text in its first literal
meaning, it does not follow but a higher sense should be put upon the words;
the Fathers and learned Ancients contend with one voice, that Christ is here,
that his plenteous Redemption, his gracious releasing us from the Death of sin,
his raising us to the Life of Grace, of Righteousness and of Glory, were
prefigured and typified by that restoration and temporal deliverance of the
Jews: It Is Christ, whose going forth from the bosom of the Father into the
World, is said in my Text to be prepared as the Morning, prepared of God by his
ever-fixt and never-failing Decree; by the determinate counsel and
foreknowledge of God, the very Days of Christ's Incarnation, his Birth, and his
Resurrection, were appointed set-days, as certain to come, as they were surely
expected by those that waited for the consolation of Israel, who should no more
be disappointed in their expectation, than those that looked for the constant
returns of the Morning-light; and this Day of his was to be as the Morning, as
the Dayspring from on high, to dispel the darkness by the presence of his
Light; to disperse the Fumes, that from ignorance and sin, with its mortal
effects, had so long clouded the minds of men; to dilate and spread over all
the World the influence of his heavenly Doctrine, both of Grace and Glory: and
as he is likened to the Light, so he is also set forth in my Text by that other
great Blessing from Heaven upon Earth, the Rain, And he shall come unto us as
the Rain; so says the Psalmist, He shall come down like the Rain into a Fleece
of Wool, so gentle, so refreshing, and so fructifying, even as the drops that
water the earth; an Emblem of Christ that Isaiah delights to use, Drop down ye
heavens from above, and let the skies pour down righteousness. But there is
something more implied in his Coming unto us as the latter and former rain unto
the earth: For in that part of the Earth, the Holy Land, that flowed with milk
and honey, it was one of their Blessings, that these Rains came at settimes and
seasons, not so uncertainly as in these Parts of the World; but the former rain
about the time of sowing their Seed, the latter rain about this very time, in
the Spring: And if Christ be there compared to that former Autumnal, and this
latter Easter Rain, it is easy from our own thoughts to draw out the parallel,
That He came like the former Rain at his holy Nativity, and like the latter
Rain at his new Birth, for so His Resurrection is called and thus compared, as
well as His Eternal Generation, The Dew of thy Birth is as the Womb of the
Morning.

The Words being thus explained, I may prosecute the Design of them either of
these two ways, as there are two methods of handling any Article of the
Christian Faith: for Example, this of the Resurrection may be treated of,
either, first, in an Historical way, considering the Matter of Fact it self
that makes up the Article; so in my Text this Matter of Fact is supposed, that
Christ revived after two days, or was raised up again the third day.

Secondly, The Article may be enquired into, as it is a Mystery of Faith, or as
it contains the Effects, the consequence of these great things that Christ
either acted or suffered for us, so the power of his Resurrection (as St. Paul
calls it) is also set down in these words, He shall revive us, He shall raise
us up again, and we shall live in his sight: He shall come unto us as the rain,
as the latter and former rain unto the earth.

But thirdly, Here is an Obligation upon our parts, or a Condition imposed upon
us: if we mean to reap advantage from this revealed Doctrine of Christ's
Resurrection and ours; then must these Principles be pursued extremely home,
and we must go on throughout the whole course of our lives to practice
accordingly, Then shall we know, if we follow on to know the Lord.

First then I shall consider the Matter of Fact that makes up the Article of
Faith, as it is contained in this glorious Prophecy, and in some others like
it. For the testimony of Jesus is the Spirit of Prophecy, says St. John the
Apostle; and it was a great and just Appeal that the Prophet Isaiah made
against Idols, and their false Prophets, Show the things that are to come
hereafter, that we may know that ye are Gods. Now if ever things to come were
plainly and distinctly showed long before, these so important Transactions
relating to our Saviors Passion and Resurrection were written as with a
Sunbeam, were translated out of Hebrew into Greek by the Command of a Heathen
Prince, but by Gods special Providence, some Ages before their Completion;
Whose voice could it be, if not his that was before David, who spoke it in his
behalf, They pierced my hands and my feet? Who was so pierced, but he, with the
Nails on his Cross? I may tell all my Bones, as it follows there: Could there
be a more proper description of that Distortion he suffered during his
Extension upon the cursed Tree? It Is as narally painted out in Isai. 25.
another of the four Evangelists, (as I may call the four Great Prophets) of the
Old Testament And he shall spread forth his hands in the midst of them, as he
that swimmeth, spreads forth his hands to swim; that the very Price should be
set down beforehand, the goodly price at which they valued him, and what they
should do with it, Buy the Field of Blood; then that every circumstance of his
Death should be so punctually foretold, the very words they should
contemptuously speak in the midst of his Passion, He trusted in God that he
would deliver him; let him deliver him, if he will have him. The words stood a
long time before, where they stand now, in the 22th Psalm, the Passion-Psalm;
there you may also find the Soldiers parting his Garments among them, and
casting lots for his seemless Coat: It looks more like a History than a
Prophecy; yet Greece from the Septuagint attests the words, as well as does
Judaea from the Original. That there should be darkness over the earth, and the
Sun should not give its light; they had warning of it, Amos 8. 9. And it shall
come to pass in that day, says the Lord God, that I will cause the Sun to go
down at Noon, and I will darken the earth in the clear day. Why, there were
many Eclipses, say the Jews: Not one, by their good favor, when the Moon was
at Full, as it was always when they kept their Passover; and yet this
prodigious Darkness is witnessed by several Heathen Writers of undoubted
credit. For the time when all this should come to pass, that Messiah the Prince
should be cut off, and to make an end of transgression, it is so exactly set
down in the Prophecy of Weeks in Daniel, that I may call that Prophecy a
persect Gospel. The very time of Lent, of fasting and mourning for our sins, is
expressly predetermined (as I may say) in the Prophecy of Zechariah, chap. 12.
ver. 10, 11. applied by the Apostle directly to the passion of our Lord, They
shall look upon him whom they have pierced, and they shall mourn for him, as
one mourns for his only Son, and shall be in bitterness for him, as one that
is in bitterness for his firstborn: In that day shall there be a great
mourning in Jerusalem, as the mourning of Hadadrimmon in the Valley of Megiddo:
But that mourning in Jerusalem certainly was for that excellent King Josiah, an
undoubted Type of Christ; And since it is here foretold, that the Church of
Christ, the true Jerusalem, should so mourn for Christ as the Jews did for
Josiah, it follows forcibly, That as the mourning for Josiah was an annual or
yearly Solemnity; so ours for Christ must be: and so is our Good Friday, and
indeed the whole Great Week, as it is usually styled, before this Capital Feast
in memory of his Resurrection.

As for his Resurrection it self, what Prediction more plain and clear than the
Text in the 16th Psalm, on which St. Teter made his Sermon, Acts 2. on which
St. Paul preached, Acts 13. Therefore my heart [Christs heart] was glad, and my
glory rejoiced; my flesh also shall rest in hope: for why? Thou shall not leave
my soul in Hell, neither shall thou suffer thy Holy One to see corruption.
Whoever can but say his Creed, may in that Verse find most of the prime
Articles of the Christian Faith, the Death and Burial of Christ, his Descending
into Hell, his rising again from the Dead; to which if my Text be added, After
two days he will revive us, in the third day he will raise us up; then what is
wanting in this Confession, that we ought to believe as Fundamental in the
Dectrine of the Resurrection? Some indeed think themselves most learned when
they can show these Prophecies literally fulfilled in the Types of Christ, as
this in David himself. Be it so; but yet says the Apostle, David saw
corruption; implying strongly, that it was applicable to David in so poor and
so low a sense, it could hardly be so applied, that even according to the
Letter (as we say) it was more truly, as well as more gloriously accomplished
in Christ the Son of David. To tell you the worst thought that can arise in an
unbelieving heart: It has been thought by some, or said at least, That some
Enthusiastic Spirits writ these strange things, we call the Prophecies of the
Old Testament; and then some others, either as much transported with devout
Phancies, or else far engaged in design, to set up a new Divinity, have adapted
those Characters, and alluded from these seeming Predictions to such and such
Passages in the Life and Death of Christ; which Passages either they really
credited in pious ignorance, or cunningly pretended to do so: But if we
consider how undeniably proved are these Matters of Fact in the Story of
Christ, that answer to those Prophecies, then I hope all is firm, then the
Foundation of God is sure. Now it is too short an expression to say we have the
same assurance of the truth of these things in the Life of Christ, as of any
thing in the Life of Alexander the Great, whose Victories and Monarchy were
foretold, and showed him in the Prophecy of Daniel; had we none but Quintus
Curtius, and the other Heathen Writers of the Greek Story, we had reason enough
to believe there was such a Conqueror as Alexander, because indifferent persons
have recorded it, such as lived so near his time, they could not be deceived,
nor could they have any interest to deceive us; this may create a Humane Faith,
that it is morally impossible such a Matter of Fact should be false: But we have
more reason by far to give credit to things attested by such persons as are
mightily concerned and engaged by their Party to gainsay them. Now it is the
peculiar strength of the Christian Faith, that two Parties which hate it most,
I mean the Jews and the Heathens, do very strongly support it, and prove it
against their Wills: For the Jews confess and contend that such Prophecies as
these were left them, nay the most learned Jewish Doctors, Ancient and Modern,
interpret most of these Prophecies to concern their Messiah, whom they expected
to come, and to suffer many things, though not Death. But then our other
Adversaries, the Heathens, Celsus and Julian, and the rest, cannot but
acknowledge many of Christ's Miracles, though most unreasonably they impute
them to his skill in some forbidden Arts: And for those Miracles which they are
loath to confess; yet they dare not deny, but his Followers died to attest, not
only their constancy to such a belief, (for so have Jews and Heathens done) but
to attest such Matters of Fact as they had seen with their eyes, as well as
such Matters of Faith once delivered to the Saints; and such Evidence as this,
impossible not to be true, must be allowed as sufficient to found a Divine
Faith, upon which the Church is built, as upon a Rock, and the Gates of Hell
shall never prevail against it.

For, first, I suppose that if Christ wrought such Miracles, and rose from the
Dead, and gave his Apostles like power to raise the Dead; then all that believe
a God and his Providence, must admit the whole Christian Faith. For Miracles,
and especially raising the Dead, are the Great Seals which God keeps in his own
hands, to set to his Truth when he sees occasion. If the Devil himself were
able to raise the Dead, why has he never done so, once at least, after the
Executioner has done his Office dexterously upon some one of his faithful
Servants? He has had above 1600. Years to try, but could never shake
Christianity, as he might have done by raising the Dead; so as the act might
have born the Test of a fair and full Examination.

Secondly, Then I suppose it possible for men of common sense to be infallibly
sure of some notable and very remarkable Matter of Fact, which they all
believe, and think that they see with their eyes, and hear with their ears, and
their hands handle at the same time. For if we cannot be sure of so much as
this comes to, then we may all be dead men, or no men, but beasts, for any
thing we can discern: But if we can be certain of thus much, then we must allow
it as possible for those who pretended to have seen Christ raised from the
Dead, to be as infallibly certain that they were not mistaken.

Thirdly, I suppose it very possible for some Matter of Fact that was not seen
with ones own eyes, (suppose it be done in the next room) to be so undeniably
witnessed, as shall abundantly supply the want of ocular demonstration.

Lastly, I assume, That if we can be sure of any Matter of Fact which we did
not see with our own eyes, then we may be infinitely surer of the wonderful
Works of Christ, and especially of his Glorious Resurrection; That Christ was
openly crucified, or nailed to a Cross before a multitude of Enemies; That
after exquisite pains, he gave up the Ghost; Then to make all sure, That he was
thrust into the vital parts, that the water gushed out of his side; without
which Cooler he must needs have been parched to death, if he had not undergone
many deaths before: that the Apostle St. John, who saw this, with many others
bare record; That their record is true; That the Enemies of Christianity knew
it to be so uncontroulably true (as to the point of this Dying) that scarce any
Jew or Heathen has ever been so impudent as to deny the certainty of his Death;
That this extraordinary Person, so publicly executed, was closed and sealed up
in a Sepulcher, and his Body guarded by Orders thus strictly issued forth, Ye
have a Watch, go make it as sure as you can; That after three days he appeared
alive again in the same Body; That he appeared several times, in diverse places,
to many Spectators at once, to above five hundred Persons; That he had
threatened his Foes beforehand, that he would unbar the Gates of Death, let them
do what they could to debar or hinder him; for it was their own Deposition
before Pontius Pilate himself, Sir, we remember that this Deceiver said while
he lived, The third day I will rise again: That he provoked some that believed
not for joy, and some that obstinately disbelieved, to feel his Pulse, to
handle and see the print of the nails, and to thrust their hands into his side,
till the most incredulous man assented whether he would or no; These Matters of
Fact were immediately proclaimed and preached to all the World, by such
Eyewitnesses every where, as not only were ready to seal it with their blood,
That this Testimony of theirs was true; but God also set to his Seal, That many
of those who were ready thus to lay down their lives, and who took it upon
their deaths, that they saw Christ raised from the Dead, should themselves be
enabled to work undeniable Miracles, and even to raise the Dead. No wonder then
if the Gospel spread so fast: For if a man of God (how contemptible soever)
should revive but one Malefactor after he had been openly put to death, it
would not be many Months e're the whole World would have an account of it.

But then their working of Miracles, as a demonstration that their Witness was
most true, who affirmed they had seen Christ risen, comes to be as
unquestionably asserted by many other Eyewitnesses, and by so many others that
had it from the mouths of these, they made up a Noble Army of Martyrs, who
loved not their lives in comparison of this Truth which they advanced by their
deaths, viz. That they had seen the Apostles or Apostolical men confirming the
Word, by Signs following.

And lastly, That there were such a Glorious Company of Martyrs, such as
endured a thousand indignities, (and, as it were, died often) with this
Testimony of Jesus in their mouths, this Testimony (I say) of the Martyrs is
confessed and acknowledged by all the adverse Parties; no Jew, no Pagan, no
Persecutor of Christianity, no Atheist, no Devil, had ever the hardiness to
deny what themselves had inflicted, and for what these men had suffered. And
all this put together were enough, one would think, to secure the Doctrine of
the Resurrection, and by consequence the Christian Faith.

No, It is said, That one man may possibly deceive, or be deceived: If one,
then two, then three, then thirty, then thirty thousand, then all the whole
Company of Martyrs. Truly it is extremely hard to conceive, that in things so
gross and palpable, and of highest consequence, any one man of common sense
could be imposed upon, much less deceitfully impose on others, and those that
were dearest to him, where he could have no imaginable interest to do so, as it
was in this Case of the Primitive martyred Christians.

But what if humane Nature might admit of this highest depravation of sense and
reason in one single Example? What if an Heap of Corn being poured out at
random on a large Threshing-Floor, it may happen after many trials that some
of the Grains may fall into some regular Figure; would it follow thence that
this whole World of Beauty and Order could have been composed by a casual
motion of Atoms? What if a Printers Characters being thrown together at all
adventures, it may come to pass after ten hundred thousand essays, that such of
the Letters may accidentally meet as may make up the two or three first words
of my Text; yet could it enter into the heart of man to think it possible for
them so to be joined by mere chance, as to make up all this Divine Prophecy of
Hosea? or (to put the Case yet higher) to make up all the Sacred Volumes of the
Old and New Testament? To cut the matter short: Can Chance produce effects as
wise as any, God can produce? But if all reason abhors the Atheist's wild
supposition, That such blind Causes, as an Heap of Corn, or a Printers Letters,
that have no greater tendency one way than another, should produce effects so
extravagantly wise by Chance only; then if we follow the Grain of the same
Argument, and pursue it home, it runs more clearly, and ends in a more
infallible Conclusion, against the Deists (as they love to style themselves) or
the Disbelievers of the Resurrection and Christianity, than against the
Atheists. For that a World of knowing and rational Beings, or Men, at least, of
common sense, that have a natural appetite, an inseparable inclination to their
own happiness, (which those inanimate things have not) that all of them could
act so extreme unnaturally in an Affair that concerned all their good in this
life, as well as in the next, as all of them wilfully to deceive the Children
of their own Bowels; or all of them to be so senselesly negligent, as to suffer
themselves to be perpetually abused, when they needed but open their eyes to
discover the imposture, if there had been any in these Matters of Fact: this is
utterly impossible to conceive, and is really beyond the reach of all
imagination. If it be possible (I say but if still) if it be possible for any
very considering man to debauch his Reason into a real disbelief of the
Resurrection, and of those things which are most surely believed among us, and
upon many infallible Proofs (as St. Luke declares) that man can have no reason
in the world to conclude there is any thing real: nay, all the reason he has
left will rather oblige him to sit down under a wild suspicion that his Life is
a waking Dream, that the Heaven and the Earth and all things else about him,
are but false representations made by some hidden accursed power that is always
deluding his fancy, and that there is nothing in the World but the Devil and
himself fit Companions for one another.

And having thus discoursed Historically of the Matter of Fact which the
Prophet delivers in the Text, I shall now proceed to consider but very briefly
of the Mystery of Faith, the consequence or effect of these great things that
Christ either did or suffered for us; so the power of his Resurrection (as St.
Paul calls it) is also set down in these words, He shall revive us. He shall
raise us up again, and we shall live in his sight; He shall come unto us as the
rain, as the latter and former rain unto the earth.

This Similitude is taken from a thing that is most common, that is, Rain; and
yet this Philosophical, or at least this Experimental Age will allow me thus
much, That the richest Notes, and the most undoubted Conclusions, in the Book
of Nature, are such as we draw from the most vulgar, and therefore the most
constant Observations. Therefore of all the Similitudes upon which the Divine
Prophecies and Parables in the Old and New Testament are turned and formed,
there are no Comparisons so frequently used as these, between the products of
Nature, and the growth of Grace; between the Fruits of the Earth, and the
increase of heavenly Virtue and Glory in the humane Soul and Body: no temporal
Blessings are so often promised, or so constantly performed, to put us in mind
of the Spiritual, as the sending of the former and the latter rain, the shining
of the Sun on the just and on the unjust; the watering the earth, and blessing
it, and making it very plenteous. The Church is every where represented as
God's Husbandry, as God's Vineyard; and Christ himself is by himself resembled
to a Corn of Wheat that fell into the Ground, and died; as if he had said, The
Corn of Wheat, this my Body; the Corn of Wheat which falls into the ground, and
dies, this is my Body, which is given and broken for you. To the same intent
and purpose it is observable, that the Ceremony of waving the Sheaf of the
first-fruit of the Harvest, on the next day after the Feast of the Passoever,
was appointed in the Law of Moses, as a significant Type of the Resurrection,
or of Christ's reviving and raising our mortal Bodies as His Sheaves with him;
and it is yet more observable, that God's peculiar Providence overruling the
blind Jews to defer their Feast until Saturday, that year when our Savior
suffered, ordered it so, that they waved the Sheaf exactly on the first
Easter-morning when Christ arose.

But these effects on our Bodies are not the only or the greatest effects of
Christ's Resurrection; the Power and Wisdom of God in it is greater still, in
comparison of this Wisdom the Apostle counted all things no better than dung;
good only, as that is, to manure the Ground, to prepare it for that good Seed,
and for this blessed Rain that should come upon it; that was all that all the
knowledge of the World was good for to those who knew not Christ: But of what
consequence now to our Souls, as well as our Bodies, is the Knowledge and
Belief of this prime Fundamental Article? The sum of all this, Because Christ
did and suffered all this for us, therefore did God his Father give him by the
Holy Spirit a power to raise up himself first, and then all that are his, with
all manner of Resurrections both of Soul and Body, from all manner of Deaths to
which they were obnoxious. Therefore the Scripture in some places uses the word
(...), that is, his full and entire Resurrectim; the whole 6th of the Romans,
and most of the 5th, is upon the force of his Passion and his Resurrection,
where it is made the Idaeal Cause, the very similitude and pattern of our
Resurrection, and, more than so, a vital influence is supposed to be derived
from him upon us, to assimilate or make us like him, as well in our Souls as
our Bodies; that as we have been planted together in the likeness of his Death,
we shall be also in the likeness of his Resurrection: For this implanting, viz.
in our Baptism, supposes a drawing of Virtue from Christ, and is secured on his
part to our lives end, there is implied not only our Obligation, but our
Ability, by the power he gives us, that we also should walk as he did after
this day forty days together in newness of life; supposing that none can raise
their hearts from the World, and be thus renewed, but by thinking on these
things.

And this falls in with my third and last Part, the Obligation upon our parts,
or the Condition imposed upon us, if we mean to reap advantage from this
revealed Doctrine of Christ's Resurrection and ours; then must these Principles
be pursued extremely home, and we must go on throughout the whole course of our
lives to practice accordingly, Then shall we know, if we follow on to know the
Lord? For in the very next words to those of my Text, the Prophet takes up this
lamentation, O Ephraim, what shall I do unto thee? O Judah, what shall I do
unto thee? For your goodness is as a morning cloud, and as the early dew it
goes away. It seems that these men whom the Prophet had to do with, were men
of good intentions; but so they say, Hell it self is full of good intentions,
that is, it is full of those that one time or other intended to do well: but
here was their great mistake, they thought the great work was done as soon as
it was but intended. Alas! we are apt to take every faint endeavor and every
feeble attempt for overcoming the World. But then shall we know, if we follow
on to know the Lord; that is, if we proceed in taking just pains with our
selves, till we love what we know, or else we know nothing yet as we ought to
know; He that loves not, knows not God; for God is love; That Jesus Christ
came into the World to save Sinners, this is not only a faithful saying, but
avowed with good reason by the Apostle to be worthy of all men to be received;
but every thing in Nature is received according to the capacity and figure of
the worthy or unworthy Receiver. Our Christian Philosophy! it is a most noble
speculation! Angels delight to pry into it! Unbelievers themselves will
acknowledge in their sober moods, that our main Body of Divinity is a piece of
magnificent Wit, admirably refined, and strongly knit together: But because
they want a soul for it, to ponder and contemplate these great and amazing
Truths, till they come to practice as they ought; therefore the men love
darkness rather than light, not that Religion has any blind sides in it, for
God is light, and in him is no darkness at all, but because their deeds are
evil, and every one that does evil hates the light. One of themselves, a great
one, has confessed the only reason why men have so little controverted or
contradicted the Principles of some other Sciences, by which we build Houses or
measure Fields, it is because (says he) these Principles do not cross our
Appetites: Be that famous Proposition in Euclid true or false, for which
Pythagoras offered an hundred Oxen in thanks to Heaven for helping him to find
and demonstrate it, they need not sacrifice one vile affection for it; and yet
even those Principles that are as plain as two and two is four, have been
gainsaid: But then it was for some interest; it was in hopes of founding a
speculative Atheism (for the sake of a practical one you may be sure; of
founding it, I say) more strongly upon Skepticism, to the utter contempt of
humane Nature; baffling all sense and reason, granting just nothing for fear of
allowing some truth, lest then some Notions of good and evil should have
followed upon it. But to show it is the inordination of men's affections that
causes the evil heart of unbelief to depart from the living God, instead of
following on to know the Lord: What was it else but the old leven of the
Pharisees and of the Sadduces, that converted Christ's Manna into Gall? that
turned the very Bread that came down from Heaven into that which perished with
them? For when the people saw him multiply the Loaves, they were ready to
follow him for those; not only to satisfy their hunger, but their ambition:
for presently they apprehended he that was able to make such extemporary
provision for a multitude, had it in his power to maintain and defray an Army
upon easy terms. Whereupon it is very observable in the next Chapter, after the
relation of this Miracle, they would have taken him by force to make him King;
intending him, no question, for their General against the Romans that oppressed
them; so that he was fain to avoid their irresistible importunities of
accepting a Crown, by retiring up into a Mountain with his Disciples: But when
they saw him resolved to be a man of retirement, when they saw him bent upon
it, not to serve turns and their politic Ends, not to head their rebellious
designs against their Roman Masters, nor to cherish their aspiring thoughts for
Universal Monarchy; then say we not well, That thou art a Samaritan, and have a
Devil? But after all the dirt and contempt they had thrown upon him; yet if at
any time they took a fancy from some powerful action of his, that he was
breaking out in a blaze of State and Splendour, straight they began again to
worship him as the rising Sun, then they resounded Hosannabs, Blessed be the
King that comes in the name of the Lord; then He was the Son of David, and
Messiah the Prince, the Heir of the Crown, while they had any hopes and
expectations that the Kingdom of God (as they called it) should immediately
appear. But then again when they found themselves disappointed by his repeated
Declarations, That his Kingdom was not of this World, they soon returned to
their old pass, We have no King but Caesar, He that makes himself a King (when
they would have made him so) speaks against Caesar: Nay, to instance in
better men; His own Disciples themselves, till the Descent of the Holy Spirit
upon them had subdued their affections, they were but men of like affections
with us, their passions clouded their reason, they had some venial doubtings
and failings too, they deserved sometimes to be censured by their Great Master
and ours for men of but little faith. But all their want of affiance proceeded
not from want of evidence in the thing it self, That which we have heard, which
we have seen with our eyes, which we have looked upon, and our hands have
handled of the Word of Life, that which we have seen and heard, declare we unto
you: Did these good men want Proofs of the Resurrection? It was proved to all
their senses, and yet some doubted; because they did not see him in a triumphal
Chariot: for to the last hour of his stay upon Earth, and immediately before
his ascension into Heaven, they never lost that ambition, which made them say,
Will thou at this time restore again the Kingdom unto Israel? But the former
Contest among themselves which of them should be the greatest, had like to have
made St. Peter himself no Christian; as those that call themselves the
Successors of St. Peter have almost turned the Christian World upside down with
the same unhappy Contest about Supremacy, so early begun in the Church, they
forget what a sharp rebuke it brought upon St. Peter, Get thee behind me Satan;
for he tempted our Savior, as did the Devil before him, to think of the
Kingdoms of this World, and the Glories of them, rather than speak of suffering
at Jerusalem; for which his Master gave him fair warning to look to himself,
and his own deceitful heart, For thou savourest not the things of God, but
those that are of men. It Is still the scandal they take at the Doctrine of the
Cross of Christ, or rather at the Duty of taking up the Cross themselves, that
hinders the whole Jewish Nation, which knows so much of these Prophecies, from
following on to know the Lord. But it was on the other side a very remarkable
Proof, that they who do his will shall know of his Doctrine, that when the
Pharisees, with their overweening pride and ambition, stood out against all
conviction that Christ himself could afford them, when the Sadduces denied the
Immortality of the Soul, because they rather wished the Immortality of the Body
and its fleshly Lusts; the Essenes, another Sect among the Jews, whom we do not
find any where reprehended by our Savior; for they were honest and humble men
of heart, they lived much within themselves, and had little to do with the
World; these flocked apace into the Church, (as the Church-Histories inform us)
and, for receiving the good Seed, these proved the best Ground in all the Land
of Promise. The Sower, that is, the Preacher, could he be sure he were entered
upon such Ground, he might afford to do as Moses was bidden to do, and put off
his shoes from his feet in reverence to it; Who is there that would not
willingly go barefoot all the days of his life, on condition the place whereon
he took his standing were always such holy Ground? But how shall we become
such? My Answer is still the same, Then shall we know, if we follow on to know
the Lord; and our Savior himself has told us, That the good ground are they
which in an honest and good heart, having heard the Word, keep it, and bring
forth fruit with patience. Which that we may all do, I shall conclude with the
Apostle's excellent Prayer: Now the God of peace, who did bring again from the
dead the Lord Jesus Christ, the great Shepherd of the Sheep, through the blood
of the everlasting Testament, make us perfect in every good work to do his
will, working in us that which is wellpleasing in his sight, through Jesus
Christ, to whom be Glory for ever and ever. Amen.

FINIS.

