The Planter's SPEECH TO HIS Neighbors and Countrymen OF Pennsylvania, East
and West-Iersey, And to all such as have Transported themselves into
New-Colonies for the sake of a quiet retired Life.

To which is added, The Complaints of our Supra-Inferior-Inhabitants.

LONDON: Printed and Sold by Andrew Soul in Shoreditch, 1684.

THE Planters Speech To his Neighbors and Countrymen in Pennsylvania, East
and West-Iersey, etc. And to all such as have Transported themselves into
New-Colonies for the sake of a quiet Life.
My dear Friends and Countrymen;
THough it may seem very Impertinent and Unnecessary to go about to repeat to
you the Occasions and Motives that inclined you to abandon the Land of your
Nativity, and those comfortable outward Employments and Accommodations which
most of you had there, and to adventure your selves to the Hazards of a long
Voyage at Sea, to come to this Remote part of the World; yet lest you should
forget those Inducements, as often it happens, that men by a slothful
Negligence or Ignorance, after some Tract of Time, fall from their first Love,
and blindly hurrey themselves into the very same Mischiefs which they intended
to avoid, and build up again what they justly endeavored to destroy, not
foreseeing the future ill Conveniences of their present (supposed Innocent)
Actings; I shall take leave briefly to mention some few of those weighty Causes
which I am confident originally swayed your Spirits to this Transplantation,
and those good Ends, for the obtaining of which you chiefly removed hither.

The Motives of our Retreating to these New Habitations, I apprehend (measuring
your Sentiments by my own) to have been,

1 st. The desires of a Peaceable Life, where we might Worship God and Obey his
Law with freedom, according to the Dictates of the divine Principle,
unincumbred with the Moldy Errors and Fierce Invasions of Tradition, Politic
Craft, Covetous or Ambitious Cruelty, etc.

2 dly. That we might here, as on a Virgin Elysian Shore, commence or improve
such an Innocent course of Life, as might unload us of those other outward
Cares, Vexations and Turmoils, which before we were always subject unto from
the hands of Self-designing and Unreasonable Men.

3 dly. That as Lot, by flying to little Zoar, from the Ungodly Company of a
more Populous Magnificent Dwelling, we might avoid both being grieved with the
sight and Infections, as well as odious Examples of Horrid Swearings, Cursings,
Drunkenness, Gluttony, Uncleanness, and all kinds of Debauchery continually
committed with greediness; and also escape the Judgments threatened to every
Land polluted with such Abominations.

4 thly. That as Trees are transplanted from one Soil to another, to render
them more Thriving and better Bearers, so we here in Peace and secure
Retirement under the bountiful Protection of God, and in the Lap of the least
adulterated Nature, might every one the better improve his Talent, and bring
forth more plentious Fruits to the Glory of God, and public Welfare of the
whole Creation.

5 thly. And Lastly, That in order hereunto, by our Holy Doctrine, and the
Practical Teachings of our Exemplary Abstemious Lives, transacted in all
Humility, Sobriety, Plainness, Self-denial, Virtue and Honesty, we might gain
upon those Thousands of poor dark Souls scattered round about us, (and
commonly, in way of Contempt and Reproach called, Heathens) and bring them not
only to a state of Civility, but real Piety; which effected, would turn to a
more satisfying Account, than if with the proud Spaniards, we had gained the
Mines of Potosi, and might make the Ambitious Hero's, whom the World admires,
blush for their petty and shameful Victories, which only tend to make their
Fellow Creatures Slaves to those that are already the Devil's Vassals: Whereas
hereby we might release Millions from the Chains of Satan, and not only teach
them their Rights as Men, and their Happiness when Christians, but bring them
from the Power of Darkness, into the Mavelous Light and the Glorious Liberty
of the Sons of the most High.

These Thoughts, these Designs, My Friends, were those that brought you hither;
and so far only as you pursue and accomplish them, you obtain the end of your
Journey. If these be neglected, though your Ports and Rivers were full of Trading
Ships, your Land never so Populous, and laden with the most vendable
Commodities, yet I would be bold to say, That your Plantation were in a most
unthriving Condition; that like men in a Fever, tumbling from one side of the
Bed to the other, you have shifted your Dwelling, but not recovered your
Health, nor are one Inch the nearer your proposed Happiness in America, than in
Europe; and have traveled some Thousands of Miles to as little purpose as the
Jesuits into Iapan and China, or foolish Pilgrims in their tedious vain
Journeys to Compostella, Loretto, or Jerusalem.

Our business therefore here in this New Land is not so much to build Houses,
and establish Factories, and promote Trades and Manufactories, that may enrich
our selves, (though all these things in their due place are not to be
neglected) as to erect Temples of Holiness and Righteousness, which God may
delight in; to lay such lasting Frames and Foundations of Temperance and Virtue
as may support the Superstructures of our future Happiness, both in this and
the other World.

In order to these Great and Glorious Ends, it will well become, nay, is the
Indispensible Duty of all that are Superiors amongst us, to make Laws and
imitate Customs that may tend to Innocence and an Harmless Life, so as to avoid
and prevent all Oppression and Violence either to Men or Beasts; by which we
shall strengthen the Principle of Well-doing, and qualify the Fierce, Bitter,
Envious, Wrathful Spirit, which (as it is said of Fire and Water in their
Extremes) is a good Servant, but a bad Master.

Be pleased therefore to give me leave, (or whether you are pleased, and will
give leave, or no, I must, because it is my Duty, take it) to nominate some
Particulars, which in my Opinion will be convenient for us to observe, and may
be as so many Pillars to sustain our New-Building, and prevent those Deluges of
Evil, that otherwise will in time unavoidably break in upon us.

I. Since Temperance is the sirmest Establishment of a People, and most fits
them for all the Duties of a Civil and Religious Life; since Strong and Heady
Drinks are no way necessary to Humane Life, but rather their at first (perhaps)
innocent and moderate use, is most apt to degenerate into Excess, and the
Example of those that use them most sparingly, tends to encourage others to
partake therein, who have not so much discretion as to use them properly,
(which indeed should be only in certain cases, as Physic) as is apparent in
our Neighboring Indians, whose Welfare we ought, in Christian Charity, to
tender as much as our own, and not lay Stumbling Blocks before them, whereby
both our Holy Religion becomes scandalized, as well as our future Temporal
Safety endangered. I would humbly, and I hope may justly, piously and
prudentially Advise, That we should either wholly prohibit, or lay very large
Impositions on all sorts of Brandy, Rum, distilled Spirits and Wine, so as to
render the common use of them impracticable.

For much better it is, that the Merchants that deal only therein, and the
Distillers should lose their Trade, and the Vines for that use be neglected,
than that We, and our Posterity and Neighbors should by such a Temptation
perish, and commit all kind of Outrages and Uncleanness in the use of them: For
what if all such amongst us, either Young or Old, Rich or Poor, that are found
to drink of them (unless in case of Sickness, and prescribed as Physic) were
punished with Servitude for a certain time, and the Offense not to be bought
off with Money; What would the Public, or any sober Person be the worse for
this? Has not woeful Experience taught us the evil Consequences of drinking
such Liquors in our own Native Country? Are not such Practices the Leading
Cards to all Vitiousness? They precipitate Young Men into all kinds of Fury,
Madness and Folly; and besides weakening the already exhausted Natural Heat of
the more Ancient, they render Gray Hairs, (which ought to be the Ensigns of
Gravity and Wisdom) ridiculous and contemptible; In Women they destroy and
corrupt the very Radix of Nature, and intail a great Number of incurable
Diseases on Posterity; add to this, that they not only Spend and impair the
outward Substance most unnecessarily, but at the same time drown the Mind, and
debilitate all the Intellectual Faculties, and by extravagant Expenses render
us incapable to perform those Offices of Charity and Beneficience, which we
might otherwise, and ought, render to our poor Neighbors, and the public
benefit of our Country: In a word, these Superfluities and needless things
cannot be procured and used without hazard to our Health and Lives, and
oppression to the whole Creation, for all such things are dear, and hard to
come by; and when they are procured, the use of them proves of more dangerous
Consequence than the charge and trouble of getting them, so that when all is
done, they only serve to Tickle and please the sensual and depraved Appetite of
vain Men, and to force Nature out of her innocent way.

The use of such Superfluities is attended with many other evil Circumstances,
as first, it occasions men to let their Farms or Plantations dear, or makes
them labor very hard* or put their poor Servants upon Excessive Toil, and put
their own, both Body and Mind as it were on the Rack, to procure such things as
are necessary, and then not content therewith, they must exchange them away for
that which stands them in no stead, viz. To sell their most pleasant and
fragrant Fruits, Grains and Seeds at a low and poor Rate, that with the proceed
thereof they may buy Brandy, Rum, Wine and the like at dear Rates, As to give a
Bushel of brave Wheat for half a Gallon of Brandy, or a Gallon of Rumbullion;
What comparison is there to be made between a Twelve Penny Wheat Loaf and a
Pint of Brandy, Rum or Wine? The first is the real Preserver of Nature, a
durable sustantial Food, most grateful to Nature: The last serves only for a
moments time to please the sensual Appetite; but its evil Operations and
Effects stay behind, heats the Blood, makes the Veins glow with an unnatural
Heat; destroys the edge of the Appetite, renders the whole Body uneasy, and
fills the Mind with an innumerable Troop of wanton and vain Imaginations, which
seldom are raised, but (as it is said of evil Spirits in Magic) they do some
Signal Mischief, both to the Body and Mind. Or (to take notice by the way of
other the like Superfluities) which is most useful and beneficial to humane
Nature, one Ounce of Nutmegs, Cloves, Mace, and the like, or 20 or 30 brave
New-laid Eggs? (which of all sorts of Food are the compleatest, and being well
ordered, afford the best of Nourishment) Or which is indeed most serviceable. a
Pound of good Butter or Cheese, or on the other side, a Pound of Sugar,
Currants, Raisins, and the like? Indeed these last are excellent Fruits, but
they will not grow in our Country, nor under our Elevation; therefore not so
proper for our Bodies, every Soil naturally bringing forth, by the merciful
Wisdom and Providence of God, such Vegetations as are most agreeable to the
Constitutions of the People of that place.

Besides, all foreign Fruits and Commodities are dear, and for the most part
serve only to squander away Estates, advance Gluttony and procure Diseases, and
the frequent use of them does sow seeds of Oppression, causing mankind to
labor for that, which in truth he had much better have been without. Has not
this particular evil Inclination unto, and hankering after strong Liquors, and
other the like Superfluities, destroyed the Healths and Estates of many
Thousands in these Western Indies, (as ^hey are called) of our Countrymen,
viz. in Iamaica, Barbados and the Leward Islands, where they have and do make
it a common practice to sell their excellent Butter, Eggs, Fruits, and fragrant
Herbs, their Hens, Turkies, Ducks, etc. to purchase Rum, Brandy, Wine, and
putrified stinking salt Flesh and Fish, which have destroyed their Healths,
emptied their Purses, and rendered them in every respect Unhappy?

Moreover, the Disorders hence arising have put out the Eye of their
Understanding, and debauched the Natural Faculty of distinguishing between Good
and Evil, Wholesome and Harmful, Pleasant and Nauseous, and made them Brutish,
Sottish and Ignorant, even like Swine, to take pleasure in that Mire wherein by
Custom they have long wallowed themselves.

In particular, there is a pernicious sort of Drink in great Reputation and Use
amongst them, called, PVNCH, which with your leave, I shall give you some
Account of, as to both its Nature and Operation, to the end we may expel and
prevent, even in the bud, the growth of such evil Customs and Habits amongst
us. This sort of beloved Liquor is made of Brandy or Run, Sugar, Water,
Lime-Iuice, and sometimes Ginger or Nutmegs: Now here are four or five
Ingredients, all of as different Natures as Light is from Darkness, and all
great Extremes in their kind, except only the Water.

1 st. Rum and Brandy are terrible hot, fierce, sulpherous Spirits, void of all
the good friendly Balsamic Virtues, and middle Quality, which is the Moderator
and Qualifier in each Body, whilst it remains unviolated or entire; but
whenever it shall happen that this benign Property is wounded or destroyed,
either by undue Preparations, or other Accidents, then that thing becomes
either of a fierce raging domineering wrathful Operation, or else of a stinking
rank Nature, according to the Nature Original in each thing, as is plain in all
Balsamic Liquors; As Canary for Example, when once this aimable Quality is
destroyed by the common way of Distillation, then it becomes fierce, raging and
unnatural; and when the same is perished in Flesh, Herbs or Fruits, they become
putrified, rank and stinking; therefore in all sorts of Foods and Drinks there
ought to be great care and diligence used, not to destroy this friendly Quality
or middle Nature, which is in every thing the Uniter and Preserver (as it were)
of Soul and Body, it being that which gives the most fragrant Smell and
pleasant Taste to all Drinks and Foods, and is the true Life, Light and
Splendour of every thing in the Annimal, Vegetable and Mineral Kingdoms. And in
what thing soever, be it Annimal or Vegetable, this friendly Quality is either
naturally impotent, or impaired by pernicious Art, or other Causalty,
thenceforwards that thing is neither good for Food nor Drink, except the Venoms
of the Martial and Saturnine Properties (which then are altogether predominant)
be first corrected; for if it be in Animals, then such Beasts are fierce,
cruel, ravenous and unclean; If in Minerals, they are high Poisons; if in Herbs
or Fruits, they are rank and fulsom, and also in some degree Poisonous; and all
this by their natural Constitution and Quality: And the very same is to be
understood when the Essential Virtues of things in themselves, most wholesome
and pleasant, come to be hurt or destroyed; which being done in the Preparation
of Rum, Brandy, and all such sulpherous Spirits, it is evident how destructive
the use thereof must be to Nature.

2 dly. Limes are an immature Fruit, wherein the Martial and Saturnine Poisons
are so powerful that the Sun and Elements have not had power to awaken the
Balsamic Virtues, or bring the Properties of Nature into an equal Operation,
as it has in other Fruits. The Juice of Limes therefore contain two siery
Qualities, viz. a Saturnine churlish Fire, which is of an hard Coagulating
Nature in Operation, like the raw cold Saturnine Airs of Winter, which congeals
the Water, and hardens all things; 2 dly, a sharp keen Martial Property, of a
sower harsh fretting Nature and Operation. And though in that Drink called
Punch these Extremes are somewhat allayed or moderated by the friendly
Ingredients, viz. Water and Sugar, which do not only render it pleasurable to
the Palate, but also more tolerable to the Stomach. Nevertheless it must be
granted that no Extremes can be made altogether Homogeneal by any Artificial
Mixtures, or give Nature such ample Satisfaction as those things that are equal
in their parts. For the first leave the Stomach and Desire always either
Craving and in want, or disordered. For when such improper Compositions of
Mature and Immature Fruits and Unwholsom Liquors come into the Body, Nature's
Limbeck, the Stomach, quickly separates them, as sometimes you may perceive
after you have eaten or drank such things, by the sower Belehes and keen sharp
matter the Stomach sends up into the Mouth; as when any shall eat Pyes, Tarts,
or other Food made of unripe Fruits, though never so much sweetened to deceive the
Palate, if one make a Meal of them, he shall find those sower distasteful
Belchings, and also that they leave his Stomach unsatisfied. The same may also
be said even of Ripe Fruits, when too great a number are jumbl'd together of
contrary Natures. There are but few that are truly sensible of the many sore
Evils and Dissatisfactions improper Mixtures in Diet brings upon the Body and
Mind of Man.

But certainly, My Friends and Countrymen, you cannot but be sensible how
freely, how bountifully the Creator has given us all those things that are
truly Natural and Necessary to support Life; and are they not familiar, and
procured with little Labor and less Hazards, either to the Body or Mind? But
on the contrary, are not all these Needless things hard to come by, so that
oft-times the Acquest of them tends to the Ruin of the Soul and Body? And yet
when all is done, the enjoyment of them gives neither Satisfaction to the one
nor Health to the other, but makes our Wants the greater; for presently we
shall want Doctors and Physic to repair those Ruins which our own
Intemperances have made; such improper Meats and Drinks being the original
Causes of those cruel Belly-Akes and griping Pains in the Bowels, Fevers,
Fluxes and Dropsical Diseases, both here and in the West, as also in the
East Indies, where our English inhabit, all according to the Nature of each
place, and as other Circumstances of Intemperances shall concur.

But besides Diseases, there are many other Mischiefs that do attend all those
places and Countries that accustom to give themselves up to Superfluity, and
especially to the drinking of strong Liquors; for they deprave both Superiors
and Inferiors, and are the Nurses of perpetual Crimes, Confusions and Disorders
on both sides, rendering the first Fierce, Rash, Tyrannical, and unfit for
Government; and the latter, Rude, Bold, Surly, Inhumane, and more apt to
Contemn all Authority than Obey*

Nor is this Prohibition more fit and requisite in respect of our selves, than
in regard of our Neighbors; so that if once we admit the common drinking of
such Heady Intoxicating Liquors, we may justly expect the same Inconveniences
to befall us as have done New England. For the Venom of such Liquors, by our
fatal Example, will quickly spread it self amongst the Indians, and so instead
of making them better, or more humane and tractable, by our Christian Virtues
and Abstemious Conversation, we shall make them Tenfold worse, and teach them
the grand Sin of Drunkenness, which is the In let, Parent and Nurse of the most
Monstrous Enormities, as Uncleanness, Murders, etc. For all People who have not
the true Knowledge of God, and his divine Principle, and the Understanding of
the hidden Natures of things, are terrible greedy and desirous after such
fierce wrathful Liquors, as also after Food wherein the Blood is, it being the
Original of every Life, which is the forbidden Fruit, that man ought not to
have eaten, nor awakened, there being scarce a more evident Token of his
depraved state, and that the fierce wrathful Spirit does bear sway and carry
the upper Dominion in men's hearts, than their violent Inclinations after Blood,
and fierce strong Liquors, which two things have a simile to, and with each
other, and the Devilish Nature and Wrath is nourished by the use of them; which
is further manifested by all the Savages of the Desert, as the contrary appears
in Sheep, and all tame humane and tractable Creatures, which therefore we call
Clean Beasts.

II. Another thing, my Friends and Country men, which I desire you to consider,
is, the innumerable Evils and cruel Miseries man draws upon himself, and the
whole Creation, is the common use of war like destructive murdering Weapons,
and their Appurtenances, viz. Guns, Swords, Powder, Bullets, Shot, Drums, and
the like Devilish Instruments; I may properly so call them, for no doubt the
invention and use of them all did originally proceed from, and is still
fomented by the fierce Wrath; for as they have been always used for
Destruction, so indeed they can have no other use, but onlv to awaken and
encourage Wrath and Bloodshed; Therefore let not our Streets (the Temples of
Peace, and Tabernacles of Love and Innocence) be encumbred with such
mischievous Tools; let not our pure Air be disturbed with their ungrateful
Noises, Clashings, Ratlings and Bouncings, nor poluted with the Sulpherous
Steams they send forth, as if so many Devils had marched through the Skey, and
left the stench of the Infernal Regions behind them.

Wherefore should we give wild Indians, that do not know the use of these
Messengers of Death, such a bad and fatal Example, as to show a new Method how
to kill one another, which no doubt in process of time they will improve so far
as to make War upon us, and kill us with our own Weapons, witness the Evils
that by this very means have attended our Neighbors, and the like, we or our
Posterity may justly expect. Besides, tell me, I pray, what Affinity there is
or can be imagined between a Christian, and Guns, Swords, Powder, Shot, Drums,
and the frightful noise of Armed Troops marching on to Manslaughter,
Desolation and Spoil? does such Employment of Wrath and Blood, look any thing
like the pure, peaceable, meek, innocent Christian-Life, which teaches to do
unto all as we would be done unto; and to love not only our Friends and our
Neighbors, but also our Enemies; which assures us, that those that use the
Sword shall perish by the Sword, that commands us, if we are smote on the Left
Cheek, to turn the Right, etc. Can any thing be more Opposite to all this, than
swaggering in Buff and Armor, and boasting how many Men we have killed in a
day?

And though many of you do not use, nor perhaps intend these Martial
Instruments for Manslaughter, but only to kill and destroy other inferior
Creatures, and Inhabitants of the Elements; yet I pray consider, why will you
arm your selves, and provide thus to kill those innocent Creatures? Does not
bounteous Mother Earth furnish us with all sorts of Food necessary for Life?
Wherefore then will you trouble your selves to kill those Creatures who have a
have a Title by Nature's Charter to their Lives as well as you? Shall not the
groaning of those Creatures call for Vengeance? And must not there be a
Retaliation? Can you think the Noble Race of Man was made to be a Tyrant over,
and a Scourge unto the inferior Inhabitants of the World? No sure, he was to
treat and govern them in Love and Friendliness. But instead thereof, he is now
become their deadly Enemy. Therefore though you will not sight with, and kill
those of your own Species, yet I must be bold to tell you, That these lesser
Violences (as you may call them) do proceed from the same Root of Wrath and
Bitterness, as the greater do* there being but one grand Fountain from whence
all kinds of Evil, Violence, Oppression and Cruelty do proceed, whether it be
toward our Brother, Man, or any other of our Fellow Creatures. And though
Custom has made the killing and oppressing of Beasts, Birds, etc. to be
familiar, and consequently easy, and done without any Remorse or Bowels of
Pity, yet it is still from the dark Root. It Is true, we read in Scripture
frequently of the Killing both Men and Beasts; and it is true, the Lord did give
the Nations liberty to kill and eat the Flesh of Inferior Creatures; But note,
That this was not done until Mankind had departed out of his holy Law, and
government of his divine Principle, into his fierce Wrath, out of which wrathful
Principle he permitted the killing and eating of Flesh; so the Scripture says,
The Wickedness of Man had corrupted the Earth, and then the Lord said, My
Spirit shall no longer strive with Man, Threescore and ten years shall be the
term of his Life, etc. That is, Man would not submit unto and be governed by
his holy friendly Principle of Love and Light; therefore the Lord in his fierce
Wrath (which man had rather chosen to precipitate himself into) shortened man's
Life, and gave him Flesh to eat; which sort of Food had the nearest Affinity to
that Wrathful Spirit that had then gotten the Government in Man. But in
Paradise, that is, whilst man continued under the sweet Conduct of the divine
Principle, his Bill of Fare, allowed by his Creator in love, was only, Every
Herb bearing Seed, and every Tree in which is the Fruit of a Tree yielding
Seed, to you it shall be for Meat, Genesis 1.29. Thus far the Children of Israel
in the Wilderness, as long as they were Obedient, God provided and fed them
with Angels Food, pure and delicious Manna; but when they grew Disobedient, and
Murmured, and nothing would serve them but Flesh, God gave them Flesh in his
Wrath, and Quails in his Displeasure, which fitted them for Destruction.

Furthermore, though you will not kill those of your own kind, yet your
Children seeing and learning these Preparations of Oppression and Violence,
they may come to be of different Opinions, and by degrees kill one another with
their Fathers Guns and Swords; for we know not what sort of People will come
after us, nor what Spirit they may be of: Therefore it will be highly
convenient for us to prevent the Growth of all Fierceness, Wrath and Violence,
even in the bud, by our Laws and wholesome Customs; for there is no way or means
that can or will so powerfully disarm the Rage of Men and other Creaturs, as
Clemency and Well-doing. Has not the Lord by his divine Hand of Providence
brought us into a pleasant and fruitful Country, that flows (as one may say)
with Milk and Honey, that is, all things necessary for sustaining Life and
rendering it delightful, as far as Nature desires, or Innocence will admit; why
then should we by our Intemperance make it flow with Blood, Oppression and
Violence? Will not a little Labor cause the Earth to bring forth a great
number of brave fragrant Herbs, Fruits and Grains, which will readily supply us
with both dry and moist Nourishment, and preserve our Health and Strength
without the use of Guns, Swords, Powder, Shot, or the like Engines and Utensils
of War, which have their Original from the fierce Wrath of God in Nature, and
let men pretend what they will of Necessity, cannot be used, but only by the
same Spirit.

Wherefore should we Christians, whose Laws and the Doctrines of our Savior
engage us to live in love and unity, that we may be rendered capable to
understand and enjoy that glorious Liberty of the Sons of God, which the whole
Creation groans to be delivered into; why, I say, should we with wrathful
Weapons, and breathing Death and Destruction, terrify, amaze and alarm not
only one another, but also all the Inhabitants of the four Elements, merely to
gratify our extravagant Desires and wanton Appetites, or furious Passions, and
all the while to suffer the friendly Law and good Principle of Gods eternal
Love to languish, sigh and groan under the burdens of those intolerable
Evils; in which state Man often finds himself in great Trouble and Discontent,
and wonders very much what may be the occasion thereof; not considering the
true cause, viz. That their Hearts and Souls do move in the fierce Wrath, and
that they do not do unto all as they would be done unto, nor live in Innocence
and Concord with all Creatures, which is the true Christian Doctrine. Therefore
to prevent all these Troubles, Dangers and Annixities, it will become us to be
wise and Innocent in our Laws and Customs, that our Youthful Settlements may be
a means to preserve us and our Posterity, and then our Childrens Children will
bless our Souls, and we shall as naturally attract the sweet Influences of the
Coelestials, and also the benovelent Aspects of all Creatues, as the Lodestone
does Iron; for every Like draws to its self its Likeness; for therein consists
its highest Joy.

III. A Third thing I would offer to your Consideration, is, That you will not
suffer it to become a Custom, or to be lawful for any amongst you to wear any
sort of Garments or Clothing, save only such, both Woolen and Linen, as our
own Country does or may produce; nor of any other Colors, but such as the
Woods, Seeds, Earths and Minerals of our own Land affords; By which we shall
encourage, not only all Ingenious People, but also our own Commodities, and
altogether discourage Foreigners. Also, let it be a Custom amongst us for all
our Superiors or Magistrates to wear White Garments made of Wool, which is not
only more serviceable, but natural, whereby they will be good Examples to the
lower sort, who in such things always take their measures from those above
them. Besides, such Clothings are easier procured, and Custom has stronger
Chains to hold the Multitude than the most severest Laws; And why should
Christians so much desire those Martial and Saturnine Colors? whereas White is
truly natural, the emblem of Innocence and Temperance, which God and Nature
gives us without labor or trouble, it being convenient for us who have in some
degree separated our selves from the Vanities of this World to choose all such
things as have the nearest Affinity to Simplicity, as well in Clothing, as in
Meats, Drinks and Exercises, by which we shall not only free our selves from
unnecessary Bonds, needless Changes, vain Fashions, burdensome Inconveniences
we have many Years labored under, but also teach our Posterity this important
Truth, That the fewer things we need, the Happier we are, and the more quiet we
shall lead our Lives; Superfluity and Extravagant Desires being the Mother of
all Need, Labor, Pain, Trouble and Diseases.

IV. We ought by all means to discountenance all Babylonical Letter-learn'd
Physicians, both for the Soul or Body; and on the contrary to direct nnd teach
every one to hearken unto their own Genius and the Voice of Wisdom in
themselves, which being minded, will teach every one the right Cure far better
than their Mercinary Prescriptions. It will be also very convenient that our
Superiors should accustom themselves to an higher degree of Temperance and
Self-Denial, which will have greater Influence on the meaner sort; and let them
be diligent in Labor and Industry; By which wholesome Laws and Customs it will
become a shame either to be idle, or addicted to Superfluities; Therefore let
their Meats, Drinks, Exercises and Clothing be according to their Age, and the
necessities of Nature, and no more; whereby the young and simple Ones will be
kept from despising the Children of the Poor, and the Poor from admiring and
envying the Rich; which will put a perpetual stop to the Carrier of Pride and
Covetousness, since then all will enjoy the Goods of the Creatures, as it were,
in equal Portions. Wherefore then should any strive, and sweat, and bustle so
furiously to arrive at great Riches, seeing that as they cannot be procured
without such great Care, Labor, Violence, Oppression, not only to a man's own
Body and Soul, but also to the whole Creation; so the Enjoyment of them
contributes nothing to our real Happiness, but rather leads us into more Snares
and Dangers than the Hazards and Turmoils of getting them did.

The chief end men seem now to propose to themselves in the Acquisition of vast
Riches, is, That they may eat of the best Lambs, Fowls, Fishes, etc. and drink
Wine and strong Drink to Superfluity, and to live in Idleness, and be clothed
with soft and costly Raiment; That they may be admired by the Multitude, and
dwell in sumptuous Houses, cramb'd with Rich and glittering Furniture, and such
like Vanities; All which puff up the Rich with a swelling Conceit of their own
Worth, and causes them in most Nations to despise, and count the Poor but as
Dogs in comparison of themselves: And on the other side, makes the Poor
secretly Hate and Curse the Rich; And hence usually proceed Tumults,
Insurrections, and most of the public Miseries and Desolations which happen
amongst the Sons of Men: And what can be more fit and prudential, more
necessary for the public Repose, as well as the Happiness and Content of all
Individuals, than that we should not only by our Laws, but also in our Examples
and Customs, cut off these Roots of so many Evils, by grubbing up all
Temptations to such Superfluity and Intemperance, and by so well cultivating
our Plantation, as to remove all the Matter whence these Mischiefs are
generated. And then we and our Children shall be free from those Disquietudes
which chiefly render man's Life uncomfortable; free from wasting Laborious Days
and Restless Nights in a greedy pursuit after Noxious Vanities, and half
killing our selves with cruel Carking Cares and Excessive Drudgeries; free from
Sharking Policies, Unmanly Frauds and Lewd Endeavors to supplant or circumvent
our Neighbors; all which proceed for the most part from an insatiate Desire,
either to gratify a Luxurious Paunch or please a vain glorious Itch, which
will never be contented; but makes it enjoyment of the greatest Abundance, only
a Step to Mount it self toward the grasping as some, yet higher
Extravagancies; and if it could become Master of all the Novelties the four
Worlds afford, would yet with childish Alexander be ready to sit down and cry
for more Bawbles and New Play-Things.

V. Let it be a Law and Custom amongst us, not only to abandon the use of all
Weapons of War, but also to avoid all Attempts and Beginnings of Violence, as
not to suffer any to use Cruelty unto, or to Hurrey and Oppress any of the
Inferior Creatures. This may seem a small and light things, but really the
Consequences of it are very great; for this will disarm the Rage of our Young
People, and give their greener Years a settled Tincture or Habit of Love,
Compassion and Concord. Have you not often seen in our own Country, little
Children, almost as soon as they are able to take up a Stone or any other
Weapon into their Hands, fling it at some Bird, or other innocent Creature, and
to take delight in hanging, drowning or tormenting young Cats or Dogs, or any
thing else that they can master; which evil Inclinations to Violence proceed
partly from their Birth, as being begot from Wrathful Essences, and the like
bad Qualities predominating in their Parents, and partly from Imitation; for
the daily Practice and Examples they behold of Cruelty and Violence offered to
all Creatures by their Fathers, stirs them up to do the like as far as their
Power* will reach to do Mischief. For this cause most Boys whilst they are in
tender years do delight in Drums Swords, and all Weapons of Violence, because
they see their Fathers and the Elder sort of their Sex do the same. But on the
contrary, Female Children delight themselves in sewing of Linen, Needle Work,
playing with Babies, making of Banquets, imitating Christenings, (as they call
them) and the like, in Imitation of their Mothers, whom they see much concerned
in such Affairs. Since therefore whatsoever you do, your Youth will certainly
endeavor to imitate; and for that there is as well a Possibility of awakening,
strengthening and encouraging Innocence, Compassion, Patience, Concord, good
Will and harmless Inclinations in all Youth, by the Practice and Custom of
Well-doing, as there is of breeding and encouraging Wrath and Violence by evil
Practices and Conversations: Therefore it will be good to season your
Children's first Years with Customs tending to Virtue and Innocence; in order
to which, nothing will be more Prevalent than good Examples.

VI. Let it not be lawful for any amongst us to use Scoffing, Jesting or Idle
Discourses, but let our Conversation always relish of Wisdom, humane or divine,
and help to instruct each other in the true knowledge of God, Nature, and our
selves; and let Tale-bearers (the Firebrarnds of Society, and Nurses of Strife
and Dissension) be punished with Servitude; nor let Riches, chance of Birth,
gay Clothes, nor any other thing be counted Honorable amongst us, but only the
true knowledge of God, Nature, and our selves, and acting pursuant thereunto.

VII. Let us resolve to relinquish that mischievous Custom of Marrying for
Wealth; and therefore let it be prohibited for any to give Portions or Dowries
with his Daughters; by this we shall discourage the Spirit of Covetousness and
Idleness in our Young Men, and prevent their making use of base depraved
counterfeit Kindnesses, which are but mere Complements, to bring their greedy
Desires to pass: Nor ought the diseased and deformed, who are not sit for
Generation, or to answer the end for which Marriage was instituted, be desirous
to press into that state: Also, all unequal Matches, as Young with the Old, and
Old with the Young (which commonly proceed from Lust in one of the Parties, and
Covetousness in the other) ought to be discouraged, and all such unnatural
Marriages branded with a Note of Infamy, and those Persons to be accounted most
miserable who commit such Intemperances.

IX. For the preventing of Theft, let it be ordained, that if any Person Steal,
he shall make fourfold satisfaction to the party injured, either by Money or
Servitude. And if any wilfully commit Manslaughter, then let such perish by
the same Sword or Weapon. And let all the Fellons that give themselves to
stealing be compelled, during all their time of Servitude to wear a different
Garment from others during their whole Lives, that all may know what they have
done. And to hinder such bad Practices in the Root, let none be exempted from
Working, but only Magistrates and Tutors.

X. It ought to be considered, understood and taught amongst us, That the
fragrant Herbs, Fruits and Grains were not only ordained by the Lord for Food
in the beginning, but also that the same are still much to be preferred for
their natural Excellency, before and above the Stock and Radix thereof. For is
not the Corn to be preferred before the Stalk it grows on for Food? And are not
all sorts of Fruits far more acceptable than the Trees whence they proceed? The
very same is to be understood of all Animals; Is not the Milk of Cows and Sheep
more pleasant to behold, and better Food, being varied by the House-wives Art,
than the Blood and Flesh of such Cattle? There being as great a difference
between the one and the other as there is between Fire and Light; the Fire
being of a consuming fierce Nature, but the Light thereof is of a most
delightful aimable Principle or Quality, and yet if there were no Fire there
could be no Light, the Fire being the Radix of all Light and Loveliness. Every
particular Creature and Fruit, be it ever so mean and simple, is an Image of,
and does contain the true Nature and Property of the whole. The Fruits and
Grains of all Vegetables, as also the Fruits of Animals, send forth a pleasant
Odor, and are delightful to the Sight and Palate, easy of Concoction,
affording Nourishment of a clean firm substance; but the Stock or Stalk, which
is the Father of the Fruit, is of an astringent harsh sower bitter Taste, and
an unpleasant Smell, not fit for Food; even so it is in Animals. For this cause
it will be highly convenient for us to put away from us all Intemperance and
Superfluity, and to prefer the eating of Fruits, Grains and Seeds, for fear we
should be precipitated into the Wrath before we are sensible of it, as many
Thousands are; for men's strong Inclinations to Flesh and Blood and to all
Beastiality, do too clearly manifest that they live in the Power and Operation
of the fierce Wrath and savage Nature of the wild Beasts of the Desert.

XI. The usual time of our Labor need not exceed Six Hours in a natural day;
for if every one performs that duly according to the Obligation which the Lord
has laid upon men in general, without exception, and content themselves with
innocent Fruits, Grains and Seeds, and observe the Rules of Moderation and
Temperance, you may assure your selves, that six hours Labor in a day will
plentifully supply us with all things necessary for Life, Health or Pleasure;
Not that the rest of our time should be spent in Idleness, much less wasted in
vain Gaming or Riot, but employed in meditating on the Works of God and Nature,
innocent and useful Conference, reading profitable Books, refreshing our
Spirits with the sweet Airs of Music, practicing curious and beneficial Arts,
as Planting, Inoculating, Grafting, studying the Science of Numbers, the Use of
the Globes, the Theory of Navigation, and all the parts of the Mathamaticks,
for those whose Genius leads them thereunto; Others to gain skill by Experience
in the Knowledge of Herbs, Plants, and other Vegetations, to distinguish them
by their Names, Shape and Virtues, take notice of their Agreement with, or
Antipathy to each other; and particularly to observe the Signature of each; for
on every thing God has engraven certain Mystic real Characters, fully
expressing its true Nature and Virtues to such as can obtain the skill to read
that Essential Alphabet; also reading of true and select Histories, wherein by
taking notice of the Revolutions, Confusions, Slaughters and Miseries men in
all Ages have brought upon themselves, by their Lusts and Pride, we may both
learn to detest their Ways which lead to those Confusions, and be excited to a
greater gratitude to God for his Mercies to us, in planting us under more happy
Circumstances.

XII. Let Sugar, Spanish Fruits, and all sorts of Spices be sold only at one
place in a Town, and be used wholly in Medicines, and not to mix with any sort
of common Food or Drink; for they are not only Superfluous, but prejudicial to
Health so to be used. Also, let our times of eating be about Nine in the
Morning and Five in the Afternoon, for you will find that much more agreeable
than a Meal at Midday, as commonly in use; for the central Heat or Eye of the
World being then in the Meridian, has great power to awaken the Natural Heat,
and also to evaporate it, and therefore at that time, most People, especially
in hot Weather, do feel themselves more hot and indisposed than either in the
Morning or Afternoon; besides, all that would preserve their Health, ought to
fast a proper time between Meals, that so the Stomach and Natural Heat may the
better concoct, and make a perfect separation, whence is generated good Blood,
and brisk lively Spirits; besides, a long Mornings-work or exercise, dulls and
wastes the pure Spirits, which renders Nature not so capable to digest a full
Meal of Meat and Drinks; And let this be a general Rule amongst us, That Nature
be always stronger than the Meats and Drinks, and not your Food stronger than
Nature; and then you will find your selves after such Meals refreshed, and not
dulled. And by observing these Rules and practicing Temperance, you will
prevent abundance of Diseases, so that I need speak the less touching Physic;
Only shall recommend to your notice and public use the following Poultice, for
the speedy and certatn Cure of Burns, Scalded Limbs, Byles, Fellons, or any the
like Sores, viz. Wheat Flour, Water and Milk simpered over the sire till it be
thick, and then add some Sugar and make it sweet, and apply this to the part
grieved 9 or 10 times a day, the oftener the better, and then anoint it with
fresh Butter to keep it subtle; for all these Ingredients do cast a friendly
Aspect to each other, and are of a Balsamic Nature, and therefore do soon
raise up the dismayed Oil or wounded Spirits, by meliorating, and asswaging the
awakned Poisons in such Hurts. Perhaps some good Houswife will be apt to
contradict me, and say, that Bread may do better than Flower: But give me leave
to tell her, that Bread has passed through a strong fiery Preparation, which
has, as it were, broken the very heart of it; besides, it does more or less
retain those sulpherous Vapors it received in the Oven, which are very
injurious; also Salt being generally mixed with it, makes it so much the worse,
Salt being of a sharp fretting Nature, apt to incorporate with the Venoms in
such Sores, and so advance and increase them.

What is said of Bread is clearly manifested by this, viz. Put what quantity
you will of Bread into Water or Milk, and it will not thicken nor become of so
strong a substance as it will do with a small quantity of Flower. For this
cause Milk and Water thickened with Flower, (provided it be not thicker than
Milk-Pottage, and do but just boil up) is one of the healthiest Foods in the
World for all Ages, but especially for Children and Old People; for it does not
only administer wholesome Nourishment, but naturally opens the Passage of the
Stomach, and powerfully carries the Windy matter downward, and causes it to
break away with ease. This sort of Food is good for all Women, but more
particularly those that are troubled with Fumes and Windy Vapors flying into
the Head; nor does it bind the Body, as some ignorantly imagine, though
sometimes it does prove beneficial in Looseness and Fluxes, but that does not
proceed from its binding Quality, but from its sweet friendly Nature, by
moderating those sharp keen Poisons that are by some Intemperance or Accident
awakened in the Bowels.

There are several other particulars which might be recommended to your
Observation and Use; but if you duly follow these, and continue to walk in the
strait Paths of Nature, your Eyes will be daily more and more enlightened, and
you will come to see and discern in all things what is good, wholesome, safe,
proper and natural, and the contrary, so as to choose the one and refuse the
other.

There only remains now one Objection to what I first proposed touching
avoiding the use of Weapons, viz. That if we shall do so, we shall presently
become a Prey, and be overrun by Foreigners.

To which I Answer; This Objection is somewhat like that of the Jews of old,
consulting whether or no they should put to death Innocent Jesus; If we let
this Man alone, cried they, the Romans will come upon us, and take away our
Place and Nation. Whereas on the quite contrary, for their Wickedness in
slaying the Lord of Life, God in his just Judgment brought upon them the Romans
indeed, who destroyed them with a Desolation, such as no Age can parallel; so
there is just Reason to judge, that the direct contrary to your Apprehensions
will happen in this case; for Innocence is a better Bullwark than Force, and
will more surely protests you than great Guns and Munition of War. And indeed
what Security is there in those things, since there is no Nation, though never
so well furnished with or skilled in the use of them, but one time or other is
subdued and overrun by the greater Violence of others? Whereas your Harmless,
Innocent, just Course of Living will disarm the Rage of your Neighbor Princes;
for nothing does so powerfully fortify a Nation or People as Virtue and
Well-doing. For all Wars are set on foot either for Covetousness to make
themselves Masters of great Treasure and Spoil, or for Ambition and vain Glory,
to boast of their Victories, or for Revenge of past Injuries. Now none of all
these will have any place in Relation to you. For first, you contenting your
selves with what is necessary, will give no temptation to their Covetousness;
nor can they derive any Honor by vanquishing those that make no Resistance;
nor pretend a Quarrel for Injuries received when you live at Peace wih all the
Creation: Which last, by a secret, yet powerful Magnetism will again draw all
things to a friendliness toward you. Whence come Wars and Fightings, (says
the Apostle) Is it not from your Lusts? Root out the latter, and you will be in
no danger from the former: Having once subdued our Inward or Home Enemies there
will be no fear of foreign Forces,
but all things shall work together for our good. Besides, good and virtuous
Examples will work far more upon our Neighbor Indians than Lip-preaching or
external Rites of Religious Worship; for the first does reach to the Root, and
touch the inwards of a man, the latter affect only the Eye or Ear; so that
nothing can effectually overcome the fierce Wrath, both in man and without him,
but only living in the Power and Operation of the pure innocent and friendly
Principle of God's Love, whence all Compassion and Well-doing proceed, that
being the true Protector and Defendor of our Faith, and in which alone is
perfect Peace, wherein we shall find rest to our Souls. But on the other side,
Intemperance and Superfluity do enthral Mankind, makes that their Masters which
was ordained to be their Servants, and exposes them to continual Dangers,
Troubles, Turmoils, Vexations and Miseries.

Thus in true Love to the Welfare of this our New Plantation, and to you all,
My Friends and Countrymen, I have laid before you those things which I
conceive tend to your Peace, Prosperity and Happiness: And may the good Spirit
of Light, Love and Innocence illuminate you to pursue and vigorously endeavor
what may conduce to these most Safe, Honorable and Desirable Ends.

CHAP. V. The Complaints of the Birds and Fowls of Heaven to their Creator, for
the Oppressions and Violences most Nations on the Earth do offer unto them,
particularly the People called Christians, lately settled in several Provinces
in America.
THough Nature has formed most of our kind for Harmony, and endued us with
Ravishing Notes, and the warbling Airs of Melody, yet we cannot but now for a
while forget our pleasant Singing, and in Sorrowful Tones sigh out our just
Complaints, from a deep sense of those Oppressions and undeserved ill usage
under which we groan. It Is not the severity of the Season, nor the harshness of
the Weather, that so much afflicts us; for to those Inconveniences of the
Elements we patiently submit; but it is the Treachery and Tyranny that we endure
from the hands of Creatures that call themselves Rational, and whom we never
injured, but on the contrary have many ways obliged, that enforces us to
remonstrate to all the Creation the Injustice of their Dealings and our
Sufferings.

Cruel and heard-Hearted Man! does this Perfidiousness and Tyranny of thine
toward us Inferior-graduated, yet Innocent fellow Creatures, look like thy
first Estate? Has not our Creator made and ordained thee his Governor and
great Vicegerent over all the Inhabitants of the lower Universe, to Rule them
with Meekness and Equity? and formed thee his Image, viz. to live in and under
the Government of the divine and friendly Principle of his Love and holy Light,
but you have disobeyed the Commands of our Creator, and despised the Voice of
Wisdom in your Hearts, and through Cruelty, Violence and Oppression not only to
one another, but to all the Host of Heaven, have precipitated your selves into
the fierce Wrath of God and Nature, whence have been invented all Guns, Powder,
Bullets, and other hellish Engines of Destruction, by which you do not only
plague and torment and butcher one another, but all other Innocent Creatures,
whom the great Jehovah has made for his Honor and Glory, and to sing forth
his Praise, by whose Power and divine Hand we are sustained; for he bountifully
gives us our daily Bread without labor of Body or perturbation of Mind;
therefore in our way and according to our nature, we joyfully chaunt forth
Hellelujahs to his Name, and rest satisfied with his good pleasure.

But depraved Man will not suffer us in peace or safety to go on with that
Employment for which we were made, but declares himself our Enemy, and
causelessly proclaims War against us, and by force and fraud, open Violence and
secret Stratagems endeavors, wherever he can catch or surprise us, to
deprive us of that Life which God has given us.

And we are more especially astonished to meet with these usages from those
that call themselves Christians, who of late years have found out and settled
themselves in the Regions and Countries of America, where before their Arrival
we lived in a very great degree of freedom and security. But now by this new
Neighborhood of those from whose, Profession we might promise our selves
nothing but Love and good Will, our Condition is much altered for the worse,
our Danger and Destruction is daily increased, and to kill and murder us is
become an Occupation and a Trade, for which purpose these peaceable Christians
(as they would be counted) have brought with them all kinds of Snares and
Engines of War and Violence, which never had before been seen, nor their
frightful hellish Noises heard in our Coasts. Now how absurd is it for those
who fly from Violence in one place, to begin it themselves on the Innocent in
those places where they take shelter? How much below the dignity of a Man are
those cruel and insidious Practices? How foreign from and contrary to the
Doctrine of that Christianity which you profess, where it is expressly declared,
That whoever uses the Sword shall perish by it: That is to say, he that by any
kind of Violence does awaken the Center of Wrath in himself, shall be
precipitated into it; and therefore your most holy Prophet, the first born of
the Sons of God, and in and by whom the World was made, says, My Kingdom is
not of this World, for then would my Servants fight. That is, My Kingdom, and
that state whereunto I bring my Disciples, does not consist in Wrath, Violence
or Oppression, but in Peace, Innocence, Love and universal good Will, doing
unto all as they would be done unto. And in pursuance of these Injunctions and
Instructions from that adorable Prince of Peace, we have been informed, that
diverse Christians in the Primitive times, at the first arising of the Day Star
of Gods eternal Light and Love, did deny themselves all the violent Sports of
Esau and Nimrod, and bore their Testimony against all Oppression and the use of
those devilish Engines of Destruction: and many in their own Country will not
to this day be seen to practice any violent Exercises, as Hunting, Hawking,
Shooting or laying of Snares and Traps to betray the guiltless Inhabitants of
the expanded Firmament, but make it a main point of Doctrine to disown
Fighting, and use of Arms, and Practices of Violence, as being contrary to the
divine Principle; and yet some of the same men coming into our Indian
Territories for the sake of a good Conscience, and that they might exercise
their Minds and Liberties in peaceable Well-doing, which the Sword of Wrath
disquieted and hindered them from enjoying in their own Country, did as lustily
provide themselves with hellish Engines of Wrath, Cruelty and Bloodshed, as
Guns, Swords, Powder, etc. as if they had been marching into the Fields of
Mars, rather than into a Land of Tranquillity and Repose.

But tell us, O Men! we pray you tell us what Injuries have we committed to
forfeit? What Law have we broken, or what Cause given you, whereby you can
pretend a Right to invade and violate our part, and natural Rights, and to
assault and destroy us, as if we were the Agressors, and no better than
Thieves, Robbers and Murderers, fit to be extirpated out of the Creation? Sure
we are, we have not made our selves more Rich than our Neigbours, nor
endeavored to establish to our selves a Tyranny over them: We have not taken
away their Privileges, nor laid Cities and Countries waste: We are not guilty
of Burning of Towns, nor Deflowring of Virgins, nor Ravishing Matrons, nor of
Slaying Old Men, or carrying away Captive the Young: We do not gather our
selves into Troops to destroy those of our own kind; nor have we at any time
Plundered them, or haled them into loathsome Prisons: Nor are we offended with
each other, because our Feathers are not all of a length or of the same color:
We eat not to Gluttony, nor drink to Excess and Ebriety, whilst some of our
kind are half starved: Others of larger Bodies or higher Fleight, do not
squeeze and oppress the Inferiors with hard Labors, whilst themselves surfeit
in Riot and Wantonness: We do not rob one another of natural Raiment, nor grow
proud with their Ornaments: Our Foods and Drinks are not the price of Blood,
nor do they smell of the Violence and Oppression of Egypt; but our Liquor is
pure Water, and our Food is given us by the divine hand of Providence: Our Love
to each other is neither partial nor dissembled; nor do we couple for Money,
Honor, or any private base Interest.

Consider therefore, O Man! our Innocence, and thine own high Birth, and sully
not thy natural Honor with an unjust pursuit to destroy us, but remember, that
all the Inventers of those Engines of War and Violence, which thou uses^
against us, have brought them forth from the Root of Bitterness; and know this,
that none can use them but from the Power of the same black Principle. How
unworthy the humane Nature, and how unlike Innocence is it, for thee, O Man,
that art made but a little lower than the Angels, to hang a great Iron Sword by
thy side, a huge Budget of stinking Sulphur and Nitro and leaden Pellets at thy
Girdle, and an heavy Gun on thy Shoulder, and thus laden with Violence within
and without, to run through thick and thin, over pleasant Plains and craggy
Mountains, playing at Bo-peep behind Trees, Bushes and Hedges, like a Thief or
Trepan, taking all advantages to betray Innocence, and unsuspectedly let fly
the fierce Thunderbolts of Mars, and the Poisons of Saturn, to deprive us of
our harmless Lives, to the great Amazement of all the Peaceable Inhabitants of
Heaven* and when all is done, the Sum Total of thy Exploit, and all the Trophy
and Triumph of thy Warlike Expedition, is but this, That with the expense of
much precious Time, and enduring more extremity of Toil, Hunger and Cold than
perhaps thou would have suffered to save the Life of one of thy wanting
Brethren, thou have treacherously Killed a poor Innocent Bird, whose Carcass
perhaps will scarce yield thee a Penny, whilst in the mean time and with half
this pains, thou might at thy own needful and lawful Occupation have gotten
to the value of six Pence or a Shilling, and yet oft-times the time, charge and
trouble of Dressing this thy unjust Prey, is double the value of it when it is
dressed; whereas one Pint of Milk of it self, or conveniently varied, would
give thee a much more wholesome and nourishing Meal.

Consider further, what an odd, dishonorable and Beggarly Baseness it seems to
be in Gentlemen and those of Estates, who live and spend most part of their
time in idle Wantonness, Gluttony and Excess, and whenever they have a mind
to exercise themselves a little, and disperse the thick Fumes of a late
Debauch, then out they must go abroad to offer Violence to some of their fellow
Creatures; and they that are content to hire lewd and obscene Minstrils, to
divert them at their Revels, with a rude scraping on a parcel of Cats-Guts with
their clumsey Fingers, are so far from returning us any thanks for that most
pure natural and ravishing Music that we continually afford them gratis, that
on the contrary, with the blackest Ingratitude they study our Destruction: And
this their Malice they chiefly execute when it is frosty snowy and severe
Weather, when the Sun, the Fountain of Light and Comfort is retreated to the
remotest Tropic, when the Earth is stripped of Fruits and Grains, and lies
bedrid and benumbed under the Bands of sullen Saturn, and the Heavens withdraw
their sweet and friendly Influences, then instead of relieving us in our
Extremity, and preserving us from the Rigors of the Season, and of the
Elements, they take their opportunity to add to our Miseries and Dangers, and
rather than fail to do us a mischief, punish themselves with Wet and Cold,
lurking in private Holes to circumvent and murder us; and he is the bravest
Fellow that can kill most of us, which serves them to boast of amongst their
Drunken Companions in their Riotous Feasts, when they make themselves merry at
our being buried in their insatiate Paunches.

But why should we wonder at this Violence and Unnaturalness of depraved men,
seeing that they do not scruple to do almost the same to those of their own
Species? Nay, we are informed, that in the more Populous Countries, where these
Killing Christians live, when there happens a very hard cold frosty Season,
there can hardly any little innocent Bird escape their bloody hands, but even
the Harmonious Blackbirds, the sweet Quavering Throshes, and the high soaring
Lark (who every Morning sends up a Sacrifice of Melody in the Suburbs of
Heaven, and whom all, not stupefied into Bruitality, are half ravished to hear,
such are their charming Notes) yet all promiscuously go to Pot, and fall
Victims to this unparalled Barbarity.

And so far as we can perceive, we shall quickly be but in little better
Condition, if the Trade of Violence, Killing and Inhumanity be encouraged, as
it has been hitherto; for the Europeans and Christians are far more expert in
the feats of Arms, and these Murdering Mysteries than our former Masters, the
Indians, whom the Christians and others do in contempt call Heathens,
Barbarians and Savage Wild People, which indeed is true, and in their Barbarity
they do as much Mischief as they can; but they had not wherewith to destroy us
in any considerable Numbers, neither are they such cunning Artists in the dark
Wrath and Devilish Practices of Killing, nor did they attempt us but to
satisfy their Hunger; whereas now they are encouraged to make a Trade of
selling our Bodies for Brandy, Rum and strong Liquors, which the Christians
give them in Exchange, though the same proves almost as great a Mischief to the
Indians as to us, and in the end will prove of as fatal Consequence to the
Christians themselves.

For by selling the Indians Guns, Powder, etc. they grow more expert in all
kind of Violence, and practice the same not only upon us, but oft-times on one
another, and in time, no doubt will attempt the same on those who furnish them
with these Mortiferous Tools, as by Experience is found they have done in other
places. Besides, the Christians bring them acquainted with the several sorts of
pernicious intoxicating strong Drinks, before mentioned, the use of which makes
them Mad, and tenfold more Devilish and Inhumane than they were before; for the
more savage, wild and brutish any Man is, both the more fond is he of such
strong Liquors, and the more mischievous Effects have they upon him; so that
rather than they will be without those abominable Drinks, after once they have
tasted them, they will travel night and day with all Pains and Cunning
imaginable, to hunt, kill and destroy us, and all other Creatures, not so much
(now) for Food, as for the Skins, Feathers or Carcasses to sell, that so they
may be able there with to procure those baneful Drinks; whereas before the
Christians Arrival they only were able to kill some few of us, and that too, as
it were, for Necessity, for Food, and Skins to cover them in the Winter; but
since they hunt Fish, and torment all the innocent Inhabitants of the Elements,
so that they cannot have any rest or security; for they will sell the choicest
of their Skins and Furs to procure a little Rum or Brandy, or a Gun, Powder,
Shot, and the like, which only tend to their own Destruction, as well as ours;
for as with the one they take away our sweet Lives, so with the other they ruin
their own Healths, contract various Diseases never before heard of amongst
them; and besides, put themselves to a World of needless Slavery and Toil to
procure to themselves these Mischiefs. And is it not a shame that it should be
said, (and too truly) that where the Christians come in new Plantations, they
instead of converting, have often debauched the old neighboring Indians and
Heathen-Natives, and rendered many of them worse than they were before?

But still, tell us (if thou can) O Man! wherefore do thou thus degrade thy
self to become a Setter, a Trepan, a Snare, a Plague and a Torment to all the
rest of the Innocent Inhabitants of the four Worlds, wherein yet thou plaguest
thy self more than any of them? Has not thy Creator made thee in his own Image,
endued thee with divine and human Wisdom, substituted thee Governor and
Deputy-Lievetenant over all, and bountifully enricht thee with a thousand
Privileges and Benefits, which we poor inferior Graduates are denied? And have
not thou power to command, by Understanding and Art, the lower Animals to serve
and labor for thee, as to plough up and till the stubborn Ground (but rendered
so by thy Sin) so that it becomes fruitful, and brings thee forth a great
number of various sorts of gallant wholesome nurtritive Seeds and Grains, which
being wisely ordered may make variety of curious Food? Art thou not endued with
Strength and Art to manure, cultivate and improve the Earth, also by planting
innumerable Fruit Trees, which will afford not only good Food, but likewise
several sorts of delicate and refreshing Drinks? Does not that brave Creature
the Cow, pay thee Tribute twice a day, by filling thy Pails with Nectar, which
of it self is a sublime Food, and being altered by Care and Art, makes several
sorts of excellent Dishes? Does not the bounteous Earth, out of her
ever-Teeming Womb, by Nature and the help of thy Art, present thee with a vast
Number of various sorts of beautiful, fragrant and virtuous Plants and Herbs,
proper both for Food and Physic? In a word, has not our benificent and
indulgent Creator freely accomodated thee with the Blessings of all the four
Worlds, which almost surpass in Number the utmost reach of humane Arithmetic?
Has he not appointed the Coelestials to distill continually their sweet
Influences upon thee? Do thou not command the fine soft Wool of that most
innocent and useful Creature, the Sheep, to cover the self-contracted Shame of
thy Nakedness, and keep thee from the Injuries of the Elements? Art not thou
possessed of all the stately Woods and noble Trees (wherein we are content to
spond our selves and build our Nests) but thou take liberty to cut them down,
not only to supply thee with Fires, but also to furnish thee with many other
Conveniences, both of Necessity and Ornament, especially to build thee Houses
therewith to secure thy self from pinching Frost, and violent Rains, and
offensive Winds, and parching Sunshine; and yet though we are thereby disseized
of our ancient Freeholds and Habitations, we have never been heard to murmur or
repine, who yet enjoy not a thousandth part of these Privileges and
Felicities: We pretend not to command over any of our fellow Creatures, nor
have the use of Fire, nor the benefit of Houses; we wear none but our own
natural Cloathings, and are continually exposed to all the Injuries of the
Elements; neither are we endued with Arts and Sciences, Crafts and Mysteries,
whereby to make any Advantages to our selves, so that we have nothing to trust
to but only the divine Hand of our Creator; when he gives us a Breakfast, we
know not where we shall have a Dinner, nor what it will be; so when we Sup, we
know nothing of what Food, or where we shall eat on the Morrow, but wholly rely
upon our Maker, who never fails to comfort and feed us; for a few, and simple
mean things sufficiently serve our turns, and relieve our wants, and therefore
we need not many; our Desires never wandering beyond the necessities of Nature;
our Food is innocent and our Drink simple Water, therefore we are not sick, but
live our appoint time in perfect Health.

Wherefore then, O Man! should thou lie in wait to shorten our days, to
disturb our Repose and interrupt our Harmony by the hellish Noise of thy Guns,
Arms, Snares and Stratagems? Or why do thou teach thine Offspring, as soon
as they are able to handle a Stone, to fling it at us, as if we were your
Enemies? Are not those of our winged kind, that inhabit the most sweet and
sublime Element, the Air, more Noble than any of the inferior Creatures, that
grovel upon the Earth, or hide themselves in the Waters? And do not all men
delight to hear our Melodious Consorts and Musical Notes, filling the Heavens
and Earth with our delightful Songs, which we chaunt forth in honor and praise
to our Creator, being free from Envy, Strife and Contention, from carking Cares
and Vexations, all places being our Home, and we go freely where we please,
except when entangled in thy treacherous Gins and Devices, for which there is
no pretense or provocation, nor the least color of Reason why thou should
envy our simple innocent Life, seeing we cannot by our Death contrib^te any
thing to thy Happiness, who ar^ already so plentifully stored with the great
and gallant Privileges and Advantages beforementioned. And, O! what a brave
noble wise Creature would Man be, and what Honor and Glory might his
Government bring unto his Creator, as well as Comfort and Happiness to himself
and all his Fellow Creatures, if he lived innocently, and did but as we poor
Creatures do, viz. answer that end for which he was made, and do as he would
willingly be done unto.

I have heard, that one of the cunningest of our kind, viz. a Iack-Daw, who
(like some pretended Christians) loves Churches, more for convenience and
shelter than Worship, having made a Nest in the Steeple, or some part of the
House, where a number of them use to meet for performing their public
exercises of Religious Worship, and by means thereof, often hearing a great
noise below, was prompted, by curiosity, to enquire the occasion thereof; so
listening attentively, he heard the men there met were a reading the
Commandments of God, where it is said, Thou shall do no Murder: To which all the
People answered, Lord incline our hearts to keep this Law. And afterward they
proceeded to read many good Prayers to God to forgive them their Trespasses and
Mis-deeds, all their Violences and Abuse of Gods Creatures, etc. Which
extremely rejoiced the poor Bird to hear; so he returned to his fellows, and
acquainted every Bird that he met with in the Airial Plains, of these glad
Tidings, That MAN, their Tormentor and vigilent Enemy did now repent of the
Evil of his Ways, and would now commit no more Murders, nor Acts of Violence on
the Innocent. Which was received with an universal Acclamation of the Volatile
Troops, and now with redoubled Notes began to sing louder Anthems of Joy and
Gratitude for so great a Blessing, which would give a general Peace to the
whole Creation. But their Mirth was but short-lived; for the very next day this
Daw, with some others was abroad seeking for Food, and there comes one of the
same Persons whom he had seen so devoutly praying in the Church, and lying in
ambush with a long Gun cramb'd with Brimstone and Nitre and murdering Pellets
of Load, as soon as he spied his opportunity, let fly at the harmless Birds,
and killed several of them upon the place, and wounded others; those that
escaped acquainted their Fellows what they had seen and suffered, and bid them
look to themselves, whatever fair words men might use; for they say, and do
not; they pray God would incline their hearts not to commit any Violence, and
yet the Profession, the very Trade of Killing is one of the most Honorable
Callings amongst them in their esteem: They with their Lips desire the Lord
would forgive them their Oppressions and Violences, and in their Hearts resolve
upon, and by their Practices continue the same Outrages. Thus vain and depraved
Men, through their wanton and extravagant Desires after those things which they
need not, nay, which are much more prejudicial than profitable unto them, do
draw upon themselves a deluge of Calamities; the more they have, the more they
need; for as their Possessions and Enjoyments are enlarged, so continually in
proportion are their greedy Desires augmented, like Persons in a Dropsy,
coveting after more Drink, because they have ingurg'd too much already; and so
through Transgression and Violence that Noble Rational Creature, becomes the
most miserable of all Animals, who was made in the beginning not only the
Supreme, but most Happy, and Wisest of all: And although we are daily subject
to all his Snares and Violences, yet still we would not for a thousand Worlds
be in some men's condition; for they have made themselves not only subject to a
thousand Miseries in this Life, but more especially in the World to come, which
has no end; whereas both our Joy and Sorrow terminates with this Life, and
extends not beyond the short horizon of Time: And though we do undergo great
Inconveniences, and often lose our dear Lives sacrificed to irrational and
ungodly Violence, yet let him know, That he himself is and shall be thereby the
greatest Sufferer; and therefore we advise him to be careful that he do not
awaken the fierce Jaws and ravenous Mouth of the Wrath, for fear he be thereby
in the end swallowed up, and there be none to deliver him.

Can thou, O Man! accuse us for breaking or transgressing Gods pure Law in
Nature? Are we guilty of Cheating, Lying or hearing false Witness, of Gluttony,
Drunkenness, or taking the adorable Name of our Creator in vain? Have we usurpt
upon thy Privileges, taken away thy Lands, or laid waste thy Houses? Do we not
abominate thy Uncleanness, and observe the proper times of our Couplings? Are
not our Males tender and loving, and our Females so chaste that they will not
admit the greatest Courtier amongst us to touch them out of their proper
Seasons? Are either of us ever jealous of each other? Where can thou find
amongst all the numerous Inhabitants of the four Worlds, so much Abstinence,
Love, Constancy and Chastity as in our kind, our Males taking the like care and
Industry as the most sober provident well disposed Man does for the
Preservation and Accommodation of his dear Wife and tender Children; for during
the time of our hatching and breeding up, they duly take pains to provide and
bring home Food for their Females, whilst they sit, and also for their Young
Ones after they are brought forth; neither do they visit the Nests of others,
but keep close to their first chosen Loves; therefore Anger, Jealousy and
Contention (those Thorns which render most of your Down-Beds uneasy) enter not
into our unbounded Habitations.

We contend not, nor wrangle about our Pedigrees, nor trouble our Heads about
Noble Birth and State; neither have we any Lawsuits for Rights, Privileges,
Lands or Inheritances; the whole expanded Ante-Court of Heaven our Creator has
given in common amongst us, not limiting us by any Landmarks; the vast and
spacious Air is our natural City, whereof we are all born free; nor have we
forfeited our Charter: The Composition and Elements of our Bodies are more
brisk, lightsom, agile and pleasant than any other Creatures, as coming nearest
to the Celestial Quires than the heavy dull melancholy Earth-creepers, or
Phlegmatic Inhabitants of the Ocean; therefore we can remove many Miles in a
very few hours, and mount our selves to the lofty Regions, and there behold the
wonderful Secrets of our Creator in the generation of Meteors, how soft Vapors
are cran'd up by the Suns strong Beams, and condensed into Clouds, and thence
distilled into Showers* to enable the Earth to afford us Nourishment; how
falling Drops being intercepted in their way, congeal into flakes of Snow; and
how hot Exhalations imprisoned in surrounding Vapors of a cold and contrary
Nature, force their Passage with bright Flashes and terrible Noises, which you
call Lightning and Thunder; whilst in the mean time, whilst we survey near hand
these Wonders, our fallen Prince [ Man] is confined to his Earthly Palaces,
nuzling like Swine in Dung and Dirt, or rather like Moles, always moiling, yet
always blind.

This Active Life, joined with our innocent simple Diet, preserves us from
being afflicted with Diseases; Your Agues are as unknown to us as their Causes
and Cures are to your Physicians; We have no Fevers, because we never burn
with unnatural Lusts, nor Dropsies, because we never drown our Faculties with
over-charg'd Bowls; neither are our Joints crampt with the Great Pox, nor our
Skins deformed with the Small; Our Young Ones are not tortured with the Evil or
Rickets, nor those of riper Age with Trembling Palsies, Putrefying Scurvies, or
any the like cruel Diseases: so that rarely any of our kind dye unnatural
Deaths (unless occasioned by the Treachery or Violence of Man) but we are by
the goodness of our Creator blessed with Health and long Life, not subject to
Distempers, slavish Labors, Cares, or any other Perturbations either of Body
or Mind, because we still continue in the constant Observation of that pure
innocent Law of God in Nature, in which we were first created, and do still
retain those natural Gifts and Self-preservations which we were endued with in
the beginning; for the Lord made all Creatures sound and healthful, and now if
any are otherwise it is because they have forsaken Gods pure Law, and depraved
themselves; the most fatal Instance whereof is Man, who was in his Creation
adorned with wonderful Gifts and Graces, both divine and humane, and in every
respect made more complete than any other Inhabitants of the material Worlds;
but behold now how miserably is he degenerated and shut up in Ignorance, Folly
and Blindness, by his stepping out of that innocent Law God had placed him in,
and giving way first to the Insinuation, and by degrees to the Tyranny of the
fierce violent wrathful poisonous Spirit, which has not only captivated his
Soul to all Evil, and exposed his Body to innumerable Diseases, but also
enslaved all the vast Multitudes of the four Worlds; for he being our Angel and
Governor, therefore we partake in the sad Consequences of his Transgression
and Fall; but none so much as himself, because none sinned, nor broke God's
pure Law but himself; for not only those of our kind, but all others (except
Men) do still retain that truly Noble and universal Language which our Creator
endued us with in the beginning; and though carried or voluntarily flying into
remote Climates, many hundred Miles distant, can as intelligibly understand
those of our own kind, as nearer home where we were bred; but it is not so with
our Prince [ Man] for if he travels but four or five hundred Miles, or shifts
three or four Degrees of Latitude, he must have an Interpreter, or else he can
no more comprehend the Language of those of his own Species than he can do
ours; And yet what a clutter does he make about Languages and Scholarship,
spending the prime part of his Life (which ought to be entirely employed in the
Study of Nature and Wisdom) in learning a few Canting words, of the Basis and
true Root whereof he knows nothing; whereas we need no tyrannical Schoolmaster
to lash us into the knowledge of Grammar, or teach us the use of Letters, since
we can by our Natural Tones communicate whatsoever is needful for the Relief or
Preservation of each other, still varying that Tone according to our
Necessities.

Do not therefore boast, O Man! nor grow proud of thy great Knowledge and
Parts, nor usurp to thy self a License to oppress and domineer over both the
weaker of thine own kind, and all other innocent Inhabitants of Air, Earth and
Sea: From whence did thou derive thy Authority for killing thy Inferiors,
merely because they are such, or for destroying their Natural Rights and
Privileges? Is it not from thy Fall? Has not Transgression been the occasion
thereof? And is it not the Effects of the fierce Wrath, where every form has
its motion and operation in Discord; And have not thou by adhearing thereunto,
and being governed by the Serpentine Nature, attracted unto thy self a thousand
Evils and Calamities? For what inferior Creature in the World is afflicted with
so many Diseases of Body and Perturbations of Mind as thou art? Also, art not
thou the most helpless and forlorn Creature of the Universe, and more subject
than any of us to receive Impressions from the Injuries of the Elements? For
art not thou beholding to the inferior Graduates for thy Clothing, and a great
part of thy Food? And art thou not continually assaulted with inward and
outward Enemies? with perpetual Plagues of Suspicions, Fears, Jealousies and
unsatisfied Desires? And do not thou fear those of thy own kind more than all
the fierce Savages of the Deserts?

What Authority do thou retain over the Elements? or what favor or kindness
will they show unto thee, more than to us poor Inferiors? When once they get
the Mastery, will not the Water drown thee, the Fire burn thee, and the Earth
swallow thee up? Nor have thou any more command of the Air; How have thou lost
those spacious Dominions the Creator invested thee with in the beginning?
Examine thy self, O thou Two-Leg'd unfeather'd unthinking Thing! What can
thou truly boast of now, according to thy common way of Living, more than we? A
Crane has a longer swallow, and therefore it is like takes more delight in
receiving its Food and Drink; and yet many of you make the pleasure of your
Throats your business, I may almost say, your godd: The Eagle can vastly outsee
you, the Vultur out-smell you, every one of us hear more nimbly; for Chastity,
our Turtles vye with the very best of you; for Paternal Affections toward
their Young, our Pelican exceeds you, and for returning Love toward helpless
Parents, our Storks may shame you. Dare any of your Songsters, Musick-Masters,
Choristers or Organ-Players compare with the ravishing Notes of a Morning Lark
or an Evening Nightingale? What more certain Knowledge have you of the Times,
or the changing of Seasons, or any the like secret Operations of Gods Power in
the internal and external Nature? Are not thy Astrological Predictions
generally false, and thy Prognostications of the Weather scarce so significant
or certain as the Chattering of our Magpies, or the Screaking of a Peacock? Are
not all thy Methods of Physic as fallible? And do thou not venture blindfold
at these things, by Guess and Chance?

Consider therefore, O Man! that thou art the unhappiest of all Gods Creatures,
and that thou do excel all others in Cruelty; for if thou had thy Will,
thou would hardly leave one of our innocent kind alive to sing forth the
Praises of our Creator, and to welcome in the great Eye of the World, and the
delightful Spring, at whose Approach all things rejoice, and chaunt forth Hyms
and Praise to the Creator, every thing according to its kind and nature ( Man
only excepted) whose Teeth are imbrew'd in Blood, which will not be for his
good, but has thereby broken the holy Commandments of his Creator, as the
Scriptures of Truth do testify, I will, says the Lord, cut off that Soul from
the Land of the Living that defiles himself with Blood. Consider also, O Man!
how unpleasing, dollerous and frightful would it be to thee in the pleasant
Months of March, April and May, when thou walk in the delightful Fields, if
thou should not hear the pleasant and refreshing Charms of those of our kind,
would thou not fear, say and think, that the Creator was angry, and that some
Judgment was near at hand? Why then do thou thus endeavor to bring all our
joyful Tones, Notes, Sounds and melodious Harmonies into Mourning and Silence,
and to root us from off the Earth, and that we should have no Being or
Habitation in the Elements, which are as much our Right by Elohim's great
Charter as they are thine* Also, how Monsterous, Cruel, yea, and every way
Ridiculous does Man behave himself to all those of our kind? for though many do
not, cannot delight themselves with the best Instrumental Harmony those of
their own Species can make, yet all men love and delight in our pleasant Tunes
and Harmonies; and yet neither our Innocence nor our Ravishing Notes will
appease his Fury toward us, but many of them in the hard and severe Winter
will rise betimes, and spare no pains to kill us, and on the other side, when
Spring comes, the very same men will rise as early to walk in the open Fields,
Groves and Meadows to hear our Melodious Songs and pleasant Harmonies. Oh!
manifest unparalled Contradiction and Cruelty! Does this look like Man in his
innocent estate, who was made but little inferior to Angels, and an Associate
with God himself, who endued him with both divine and human Wisdom? Alas! No.

Leave off then, O Man! for shame leave off thy Pride, and thy vain Glory, and
boast no more of thy Knowledge, and Dominion, and Authority; for in truth thou
art poor, and blind, and weak, and helpless, and miserably ignorant; sink down
therefore into Humility, and cease from Cruelty, first against those of thine
own kind, and then thou may come to see and abhor the Error of oppressing thy
Inferiors; for this is the way to retreive thine Honor and Dignity, to bring
back the Golden Age, and that Innocent Estate, which by oppression, cruelty and
violence thou have lost; for Mercy, Innocence and Well-doing are well-pleasing
to our Creator, and agreeable to the noble divine Principle, and attract the
sweet Influence of the Coelestials, so that the Merciful, and the Peacemakers
and Peace-Preservers shall be filled with all good things; for as Man was
created after the Image of God, so in him are contained the true Nature and
Properties of all Elements; and since God is both the Maker and Preserver of
all Creatures, there is no doubt but Man (his Vicegerent here below) ought to
imitate his Sovereign therein; but instead thereof he sets himself to destroy
not only those of his own kind, but also all other Creatures; so that through
Sin and Vanity he is become a professed Enemy to all the Host of Heaven. How
many thousands of our innocent kind have been murdered by Guns, Traps, Snares,
etc? and many thousands both of our Males and Females have lost their loving
Mates by the like Stratagems, and no Pity or Compassion taken by Man on our
miserable Sufferings, but rather they encourage each other to our destruction,
and cry, Hang th^se scurvey Birds, shoot them, destroy them, they are good for
nothing but to eat up our Corn: As if God that created us had done it in vain,
as if he intended us not a subsistence and Food? What right I pray, has Man to
all the Corn in the world? or why should he grumble and repine if we take a few
Grains to supply our Necessities, whilst he squanders away such Heaps upon his
Lusts?

Wherein I fear he has so much besotted himself, and by continual Practice is
be come so hardened, and has so powerfully irritated the dark Wrath in himself,
tha^ all our Remonstrances to him to move him to Mercy and Compassion, and to
forbear polluting himself with the Blood of the Innocent, will be but in vain,
and that we must still sigh and groan under his Cruelty and Tyranny, which at
long-run will return seven fold upon his own guilty Head.

The B -- ds Supplication.
OH, Thou Great and Immortal Creator! Cause of Causes, Fountain of Being, God
of Nature, Author, Preserver and Vpholder of this glorious Universe, Parent of
Angels and Men, and all other Animals inhabiting the vast Deeps, or the
spacious Earth, or the unbounded Air, Thou have given a Well-beeing and
Self-Preservation unto all thy Creatures; but Man, whom thou have made our
Lord, having cast off all Affection toward us, disobeying thy holy Commands,
has plunged himself into the Fountain of fierce Wrath, and therefore above all
things desires and delights in Violence and Killing; for nothing will satisfy
the hungery Wrath but Slaughter and Blood, (for every thing must be maintained
by its Likeness) so that his Rage is now grown so active, that we have no place
that can secure us from his Violence, but he continually pursues, seeking to
take away our innocent Lives. The ungrateful and ^errible Noise of his Guns
drowns our sweet Melody; the whole Air is infected with the stinking Fumes of
his murdering Powder; no place is free from his Ambushes, Nets, Gins, Pitfalls
and Snares, so that the sight of a Man is become most dreadful and terrible
unto us, whereby our Lives being always in danger and fears, are made grievous
unto us: Every Noise we hear we are afraid our fierce Hunter is near; And though
we cry and make our mournful Complaints, no Mortals will hear us or take pity
on us, but divert themselves with our Death, and laugh and sport at our
Destruction. So that we have no Friend, no Patron on Earth to help or
commiserate our miserable estate, and rescue us from their Treachery and
Cruelty; none to fly unto but thee, O holy Fountain of Light and Life, to whom
we send our dolorous Cries and mournful Complaints; for we proceeded from thee,
and thou art the Lord our Maker; preserve us, thy poor Creatures in that
natural Liberty and Safety wherein thou have placed us; restrain the hands of
Violence, inspire all that profess thy Name with the Spirit of Meekness,
Tenderness, Mercy and Compassion both toward each other, and all thy Creation,
that their Swords may be turned into Pruning Hooks, their frightful Guns into
Instruments of Melody, and there may be no more Fighting, Wounding or Killing
in all thine holy Mountain. Amen.

FINIS.
Advertisement.
THere is lately published by the Author of the Country-Man's Companion, a
Treatise entitled, The Way to Health, long Life and Happiness, or a Discourse
of Temperance, and the particular Nature of all things requisite for the Life of
Man. Wherein is contained, 1. A Description of the four grand Qualities, and
how every man may know his own Complexion, whether Chollerick, Sanguine,
Phlegmatic or Melancholy, and what Diseases they are most subject to; also
what food is most agreeable to Persons of every Constitution. 2. Of the
excellency of Temperance, and the Benefits of Abstinence and Sobriety. 3. A
Discourse of the several sorts of Beast, and of their Flesh in particular. 4.
The Proper and most Natural way of preparing, viz. Boiling, Roasting, Baking,
Stewing, Frying and Broyling of Flesh and other Food. 5. The Seasons of the
year in which most People are liable to Diseases and Mortality, and the Reasons
thereof, and what Food is best to preserve Health at that time; Showing also
the Seasons of the year in which most sorts of Flesh are unclean and aptest to
contract Diseases; and what times men may eat Flesh with least danger to their
Health. And of the Nature of Summer Fruits. 6. Of Waters, Ale, Beer, and
Tobacco; also of Clothing, Houses and Beds, and what great Benefits arise from
Moderation and Temperance in those things. 7. Of each particular Trade, as
Shopkeepers, Carpenters, Joyners, Seamen, etc. 8. Of Herbs, Fruits and
Grains, and the nature and operation of each 8. The Mischief of Variety of
Meats and Drinks, and the inconveniences of improper Mixtures; and on the other
side, what Foods are fit to be compounded. Of Colors, and how, with seven
perfect Colors, to imitate and represent all the Appearances and Colors in
the whole Universe. 10. The Reasons in Nature why Cities and great Towns are
subject to the Pestilence and other Diseases more than Country-Villages. 11. Of
Infection or Catching-Diseases, and how they are transferred from one to
another. 12. Of Women, their Natures, Complexions and Intemperances, etc. 13.
The cause of Surfeits, and how to prevent them, and keep the Body in Health:
The danger of drinking after superfluous Meals. And what it is that chiefly
breeds the Scurvey in the Blood. Of Suppers, and what sort of People may use
them without prejudice to their Health. 14. Of Windy Diseases, the Reasons
thereof, and why English People, especially Women, are so much troubled
therewith. The Evils of eating and drinking Food too hot. And Mischief of
eating and drinking between Meals. Of Fatness, and what sort of People are
subject thereto, as also how to prevent it. 15. Of Bugs, and from what Matter
they do proceed, and how to prevent their Generation. 16. The Vermin-killer,
being several easy sure Receipts to destroy Vermin. 17. A short Discourse of
the Pain of the Teeth, showing from what cause it does chiefly proceed, and an
experienced easy way to prevent it. 18. How to cure all Cuts, Wounds, Bruises,
etc. without Salves, Ointments or Plasters. 19. Of Marriage, and the
Inconveniences of unequal Matches, that they make no Harmony, and the Evil
consequences that follow, more especially for Young Men. With several other
most useful Observations, too large here to be enumerated; convenient for all
that are Lovers of Health and Strength to observe. To which is added, A
Treatise of most sorts of English Herbs, either Physical or fit for common use;
showing, 1st, The apt times to gather them Astrologically, when the Planet that
governs them is strong and well aspected, the same being there calculated for
19 Years: 2dly, How to preserve and keep them without losing their Virtues;
And, 3dly, The best way of using them in Posset-Drinks, Decoctions and
Cordials, so as not to destroy the pure spirituous of them. Printed and Sold by
Andrew Soul, at the Crooked Billet in Holloway-Lane, Shoreditch.


