THE SPEECH AND DEPORTMENT OF Col. James Turner At his Execution in
Leaden-Hall-street January 21. 1663.

Who was Condemned for Felony and Burglary, in Breaking up the House and
Robbing of Mr. FRANCIS TRYON Merchant, living in Limestreet, LONDON.

LICENSED.

LONDON, Printed by William Godbid for Nath. Brook at the Angel in Cornhill,
and Henry Marsh at the Princes Arms in Chancery Lane. 1663.

About Eleven a Clock Coll. Turner (attended with Mr. Ordinary of Newgate and
another Minister) was drawn in a Cart to a Gibbit erected in
Leaden-hall-street, at Lime-street end; where coming, Col. Turner called the
Execationer to him, told him that his friends were desirous of all his Clothes,
and that in Consideration thereof he gave him 50 s. and 2 s. 6 d. to drink; and
about 15 s. to the Sergeants and Yeomen, attending to see his Body and Clothes
delivered to one Mrs. Smith there. And standing in the Cart said as follows:
SIR Richard Ford, and you the other Mr. Sheriff, and all you Gentlemen: I am
come hither to pay that debt I owe, and that every man owes to Nature; it is the
just hand of God upon me for my sins, and there is no man has done me wrong in
it; and truly it is my Sins, and the Greatness of my sins (and that I am very
sensible of) has brought me hither; and the greatest sin that troubles me and
lies upon me (which I hope the Blood of Jesus Christ, nay, I am Confident the
Blood of Jesus Christ has washed all my sins away) is that sin which I was
much addicted to, and that was the sin of Profaneness; of Blaspheming God, of
taking his Name in vain. It is truth, I must not only accuse my self, but in
some sense give you the truth of my Conscience. I never heard any man or woman,
or what ever they were, swear in my life, but I did tremble to hear them. For
keeping of Company with Gentlemen of Honor (they were men of quality, though
that were an ill quality in them) was the occasion of it. I never kept Company
with any poor base inferior People; with any Theif, or any such like base
person in all my life, but fled from them, and avoided them, till this
accident; truly those poor men engaged in it, I must free them; I brought them
into this business clearly and freely; and I beseech you, Mr. Sheriffs, as I
am a dying man, that you will help those people in this business; Poor silly
men. As I was telling you, for that great sin of Swearing: Keeping Company with
persons that did swear, I did get a habit of swearing, though I hated it and
loathed it, when I observed it in my self, and yet may be did it again,
forgetting presently and not observing, being of a hasty nature. It was my
rashness and my inconsiderateness that has brought me hither: Gentlemen, it
is expected by all the City, and by all the world that knows me, that I should
make some great and notorious confession; It is Truth, I must, and freely do
here confess, as I said before, that it is my sins in General, and that sin of
Blaspheming God's Name; I do charge my self particularly with that as the
occasion of bringing me hither; as for the Fact it self, I do tell ye it was my
own act, my own contrivance, and the poor souls that are yonder, knew nothing
of it.

Gentlemen, you will live when I am gone, there is my two Sons, I here declare,
as I expect mercy by and by, at the hands of my Savior and my God, they are as
innocent as any person that looks upon me: For the youngest, my Son Ely, he
never knew or heard of one penny of the money or business at all; therefore he
is clear, he was in his bed that night it was done, and in the morning it was
removed from my house; for the Elder, he never knew of any moneys, or any thing
of it, only I did tell him, that it was a Merchants money that was broke, and
that I would secure it for his Wife and Children; so that he was clearly
innocent of any thing of the Fact, of the Robbery of the House, knew not that
it was Mr. Tryon's Money; but did carry that Money with me to Tower Hill, as I
bid him; so that he is as innocent as the Younger; You understand me, Mr.
Sheriffs; if you bid your Servant take so much money, carry it, and dispose of
it, as you direct him, what is it to him how you came by that money? So that I
say, this elder Son, he is (I speak in the presence of God) as free as the
other.

I do beg and beseech you (Mr. Sheriffs) in the bowels of tender mercy and
compassion, that you would go to the Lord Mayor, to the Court of Aldermen, that
these two poor young men may be discharged; let them not lie there until the
next Sessions among Theives and Murderers, for they will be utterly undone.
They are come from the Loins of good Parents, my Father was an ancient
Reverend Divine, a Parson within a 11. miles of this Town, a godly Minister, 40
odd years Minister of one Parish, no man more beloved then he, a man of charity
and for peace, never suffered them to go to Law; he was Justice of Peace
amongst them, Mediator for them; if any poor wanted any thing they came to him,
he relieved them, he did all the Poors business, and composed the differences
of the rich likewise; I am the Son of that Father, though an unfortunate Son.
My Wife was a Gentlewomans Daughter in Dorsetshire, her Mother had a great
portion, and is yet living; they are of the Family of the Foyles, 8000 l. the
old King had of her Uncle, which was lent: they were persons of quality. I say,
these Children, they came from the Loins of good persons. This I speak, in
reference that you will take that fatherly care that these two poor Boys may be
turned out of Prison. Their Mother has nothing to support them; suppose it
your own Wifes case; add not affliction to affliction; restore her Children to
her this Night; let me beg it, that God may be praised and glorified in the
truth of all things. Will you promise it, Mr. Sheriffs, that you will endeavor
it?

Sir Richard Ford. I do; I have been ready at all times to promise you any
thing which was in my power to perform: but ask not that which is not in my
power to grant; you desire they may be discharged to night.


Turner. That Is but comparatively, as soon as possible.


Sir Rich. Ford. I do promise you that this that you have declared concerning
your Sons, shall be communicated to the proper Judges, and I will endeavor that
they may be put out of our Goal.


Sir Richard Rives. And I will use my endeavors in the thing.


Turner. Pray do, they know nothing of it, pray put them out, my Wife will want
them, she has no comfort left, and this will ruin her.


Sir Richard Rives. We will do our endeavors; proceed on.


Turner. I have done, that is for the Children; then for William Turner, what he
did, he did at my instigation; he acted this at my entreaty, it was wholly by
my direction, therefore let the poor man be likewise discharged, if there be no
other thing against him but this fault.


Sir Richard Ford. We will promise that we will take all occasions to give an
intimation to the Lord Chief Justice what you have declared, in extenuating of
his crime, as he was a hireling of yours.


Turner. I have told you that it was my sins that has brought me hither; and
truly I must deal really with you, this Nation is very full of sin, of crying
sins, of sins, that without Gods wonderful mercies the Land will suddenly mourn
by his hand; I have every year expected the sweeping plague to come and take
away two thirds of the Nation for the sins that lie upon us; and truly
notwithstanding the Ministers of God do preach, and call, and cry aloud, yet
no body regards them. Truly from the Magistrate to the very Peasant there is
abundance of neglect to the true Service and fear of God, that my Soul has bled
and groaned within me as I have gone up and down the Streets, and as I have
lain in my bed. And I must ingeniously confess to you, that I have not once or
twice, nor a hundred times, but a thousand times, wished my self dissolved, and
in another world. I have been sick of it, not for any want, but with the mere
trouble, the dislike that did so displease me, to see all manner of business
in Tumults and Disorders, and sin, and all manner of wickedness: That truly I
have had no pleasure these latter years in the world; indeed I have not. I have
to my poor Wife said many a hundred times, Lord God that thou were in thy grave
and I too, were it not for these poor Children; truly I could beg it of God,
seeing all people are in Combustion, none tied in love and amity. When I was a
Boy there was no such doings; my Father, I told you, was a Minister, there was
eight or ten Gentlemen, adjoining Families, who kept a house of Hospitality,
loving friendship, peace and quietness; but now there is no such thing in the
world. It is a new world, a world of malice and difference; and it is too blame
that Brethren do not hang together in unity.

It is expected that I should declare here, as a dying man, somewhat to free my
self from those Aspersions, Accusations, and Calumnies that have been laid upon
me; those marks with black coals that People have laid upon me; I do declare to
you, there is a great many of scandals that lie upon me. I shall not Justify
my self at all, but rather accuse my self, that I am, as St. Paul says, The
greatest of Sinners. But for those things that are laid upon me, I must clear
my Family and my Reputation, as I can before God and in Jesus Christ. It is
laid upon me that I should take 200 l. of Dr. Hewyt's Lady for to assist her in
the helping her Husband, that was, in the getting him a Pardon or Repreive. To
that I answer (I know not whether I showed you, Mr. Sheriffs my Ladies
Certificate or no, I heard not of this business till within these two nights)
I never heard of her nor her Husband in such a manner; no, I would not have had
that sin mixed with my blood, not for ten thousand worlds; I should have
thought when ever it had entered into my Cogitations, I should have thought my
self eternally lost. But about that I sent Mr. Gray of Blackfriars, who rode
32. miles the other night, and he has brought a Certificate under her
Ladyships hand to the King; which Certificate if they will go to my Wife, they
may have it and Print it. She writes showing it to the Kings most Excellent
Majesty, that she was informed that James Turner Gent. a Prisoner in Newgate,
is accused for taking 200 l. of her toward the Repreiving of her Husband; she
does declare she never knew him nor heard of him, therefore she is bound in
Conscience to free him; and so she humbly takes her leave; this is attested by
that Gentleman, with an Affidavit under the hand of Sir John Brampston Knight:
She got a Letter from Secretary Thurlow, wherein he writes, and sets forth all
the business, that one Col. Whetton had 235 l. of my Lady Hewyt to procure
this business; and that Whetton did pretend that he had given Thurlow a
hundred pound of it to that purpose, which he there under his hand denied, that
he ever received one penny directly or indirectly; so that Whetton was the
person clearly accused; and she sent me word she is suing him for the money; So
for that I hope I have vindicated my self before God and the World.

In the second place, there is another calumny thrown upon me, and that is,
that I should cozen or deceive the King that now is of some money when I was
beyond Sea with him; truly, it is well known to thousands of the World, I was
never out of England, never beyond Sea with the King, never cozened him of a
penny; that I have served Him and His Father with all the substance that I had,
with my blood, and with all my fortune and goods, as a hearty Subject should,
and I pray God receive my Soul but with a drop of his mercy, so sure as I
served the old King, and prayed for him, and loved him.

The first Commission that ever I had, was eldest Captain of Horse to William
Marquess of Newcastle in his own Regiment; I gave him the Troop, fourscore and
seventeen men well Horsed, I never received one penny advance for the said
Troop, and but one Weeks pay for my self and Officers, and three Weeks pay for
my Troopers in all my Life, not a penny more; I served him faithfully four
years or thereabouts; I was a Prisoner at London-house, at York, in the Tower,
at the Council of State, the Court Marshal, the Council of War of Oliver's; I
was a Prisoner at Luton in Bedfordshire; bringing the King up from Newark to
Oxford I was wounded, shot in the Neck, and taken Prisoner; and it is very well
known by Mr. William Cotton, who is one of the Gentlemen Harbingers of the
Kings, he is the ancientest to this King, and has served his Father in that
Office, it was his fortune to be hard by when I was shot, who was then a
stranger to me; but he being one of the Kings Servants, and hearing a Lieut.
Col. of the Kings was slain, he came in; after I was shot I was crept into a
hedge among briars and thorns, so deep that he was forced to cut a way to come
at me, and so drew me out, or I had dyed there: I was Prisoner at Luton, so to
St. Albans, where I lay in Cure in the Compter, till it cost me my first penny
reckoning 60. odd pounds in gold; they trusted me and took my word, till I
could send to York where my wife lived, nineteen miles beyond York; when I was
able to ride I was brought to Town, put into London-House, where I abided and
paid my Ransom, no exchange would be allowed; the King that is dead (of blessed
memory) sent three exchanges for me, His own Trumpet, Sir Marmaduke Langdale's
Trumpet, and my own Trumpet. The Committee at St. Albans returned the
Trumpeters word that I was dead, for my wounds were mortal, and so I believe
they did think I was dead. Afterward I had command of more then one Troop, and
I was Lieutenant Col. to Sir John Preston, and was eldest Captain to the
Marquess of Newcastle.


Sir Richard Ford. I have no pleasure to interrupt you, if you have any thing
to say that may fit you for your change, as marks (for avoiding these
inconveniences) to the people --


Turner. I have done, Sir Richard.


Sir Richard Ford. I do not apprehend this a proper work for a dying man, in
good earnest, methinks it is not a proper work for you to give this Narrative
now of the Affairs in the Army.


Turner. I have but a few words more, I have wholly told you that it was my own
contrivance, and no bodies else that I come hither, and therefore I do justly
suffer here by the hand of God and justice and I do desire all Christian People
that either hear me, or see me, or shall hear of me, that they will take
warning by me; it is the first offense of this nature that ever I had to do
withal in my life, God is my witness; as I said before, I never knew a Thief or
dishonest man but I avoided them: But I say, and I could wish with all my soul,
and I desire it earnestly, that all people would take warning by me this day,
and to avoid as much as may be, all sins in general; and I must declare to you
likewise, that if it had pleased God that two of the Officers had not met me,
and arrested me in St. Mary Axe between two and three of the Clock, and carried
me here to the Hoop Tavern, where they staid me, Mr. Tryon had had every penny
worth of his Goods and Money, and not lost a farthing, nor a hair of his head;
but God forgive them. A great deaf of blame has lain upon me about those
Villains, who where half drunk, and beat Mr. Tryon: I say he had had all his
Goods again; God above, that heats me, knows my soul, it was not intended to
rob him or to hurt him, it was to engratiate my self; the reasons I told him
yesterday. He is the worse man the best part of 10000 l. since his Wife dyed,
and I had lately discovered which way and how: I have told him of the person,
but this is not a pla^e to name him, or speak of these things; I hope God will
give him wisdom to avoid dangers, and to make good of what I told him
yesterday; a worse thing will come; for he will be robbed indeed if he have not
a care: He should have been robbed about a year since, and he did employ me to
enquire after it, and discover it. I have given him warning several times: He
is an honest brave Gentleman, a good Christian, and an honest charitable man.
But, Mr. Sheriffs, assure your selves, so sure as I am going to heaven, I shall
be there in glory, so sure had Mr. Tryon (if I had not met with these two
foolish timorous Officers) have had his goods and money again, there never had
one word of this business been known: 'Twas a sad fate, that these two fellows
out of a little fear should be the occasion of my coming hither; but God
forgive them; Stubs and Lion I mean; these two villains, I have no body to
thank for my blood but them; and yet do I free them, and freely forgive them:
and I forgive the whole world, as freely as I desire God and Christ Jesus
should forgive me. Mr. Sheriffs, are you satisfied in this? would you have me
say any more touching the fact?


Mr. Sheriff. It is satisfaction to us, if you are satisfied your self.


Turner. This morning as I was coming out of the Prison, to add scandal to
scandal, one came and charged me I should clear my self about a fire in
Lothbury in the new buildings, whether I had any hand in that; the Lord Jesus
Christ knows my soul, till even now they asked me the question, I never thought
of it, but was then heartily sorry, and in my bed when I heard of it.

Anorber sent me a Letter, but I tore it, one John Marshal, touching some money
that was lost in Coleman-street; he might as well have asked the person to be
born, as to have asked me, for I knew not of it. And one brought a Deed of one
Katharine, I forgot her other name, alack I know nothing of it. There was
another large paper put into my hands, touching a man that dyed in my house,
one Turner a tall proper Gentleman, a Clothier of Kent, he came to my house and
desired me to furnish one Daintry with Five hundred pounds, which he had a
place at the Custom House for; this Turner was a stranger to me, only a
namesake, it is thought as by the paper was hinted, that he should have
something put in his drink, which should occasion his death; he drank nothing
at my house more than what my Wife and self, and two or three honest Gentlemen
that were there. He told my Wife once, Cousin (says he) I am very ill, pray
give me a cup of your water; he had drank a glass or two of Wine, there was but
one Bottle among five of them; and soon after, this Gentleman fell asleep with
his hand on his cheek, and never waked again; he died of an Appoplexy or
Lethargy, as the Coroner found it; I must clear my self of this, because I have
received a Paper, it was at the end thereof hinted, whether I did know if
Daintry was not concerned in this business; the man could not put any thing
into our drink sure; I have heard of your Spanish tricks, but I must free
Daintry of that, according as I understand it: He was to do Daintry the
courtesy, and surely he would not so reward him. I believe Daintry was as free
as anybody; but the Jury and Coroner did return that he died of Gods
visitation, a natural disease, and I hope I have satisfied the world of that.


Mr. Ordinary of Newgate. Pray Col. Turner know you nothing of a glass jewel
delivered to the Countess of Devonshire in the room of another.


Turner. I know nothing of such a thing; I never had any Jewels of her in my
life; she is an honorable person, she will not speak of such a thing.

I will now give account of my Faith. I have been bred up a true Protestant of
the Primitive Church of England; my Father bred me, and instructed me very
strictly in the Law of God; I will not tell you when I came to Prentice, I Will
let that alone: I am free of the Company of Drapers; and I have lived civilly
and honestly in St. Martines, at the upper end of Cheap Side; I am sure there
is a thousand sorrowful souls, and weeping eyes for me this day.


Sir Richard Ford. Pray put that little time that you have to spend here to
good use, and leave off these relations.


Turner, Have a little patience, let me satisfy the World of some particulars;
I was a constant Churchman, it is well known to my Parishioners; I never durst
see a man in the Church with his Hat on, it troubled me very much: If a man
comes before a Judge on Earth, he is not suffered to wear his Hat, much less
should they before the Magistrate of Magistrates, the God of Heaven.


Sir Richard Ford. Hear me one word: those Reverend persons about you, methinks
they should admonish you to leave off these discourses.


Mr. Ordinaay. We press to the condemnation of a man's self, that he might be
justified in Gods sight.


Turner. Mr. Sheriff, I will hold you but a very little while longer* I do here
truly confess that I have been, as I have said, a very great sinner, guilty of
all the sins in the world.


Master Ordinary. Speak to some particulars.


Turner. Pray be quiet, can ye? -- Especially that of Profaneness; I am truly
sensible, heartily sorrowful for my sins; and I do beg of God of his infinite
Mercy, through the Mer^ts of Christ who died for me, to wash away all my sins,
and all the sins of this people here present, and all the sins of the whole
world. I do beg, that God will open the heart of any man that staggars in
Faith, to confirm him. I do say, and pawn my Salvation upon it, That no man
dare gain say that Jesus Christ died for sinners, of whom I am chief. That man
that lays hold upon Christ by Faith, the Gates of Hell shall never prevail
against him. Truly, I am thought to be a great Drinker, a Company-keeper: my
occasion* did call me to Taverns, but I bless God, I think there is no man,
(pardon me, for I will not speak it with ostentation) I hope no man ever saw me
disguised in drink, to my knowledge, except it was when I was a Boy. I am truly,
heartily, and sincerely sorrowful for my sins: I do confess them before my God
and the whole world, that the least of my sins are able to throw me into Hell;
but that the blood of Jesus Christ that does wash away the sins of the whole
world, has purged and cleansed mine. I say, I do here heartily, solemnly and
wholly confess my sins, and am truly sorrowful for them: that is my confession,
with more trouble of soul then I am able to express. Here I have made my true
and faithful confession. in the second place, I have made restitution so far as
in me lay; the Gentleman has every one of his Jewels again, every
farthing-worth, nay he has two thousand pouds worth more then he missed,
therefore there was no intention of Felony; but my sad fate in meeting with
those two sad Officers (God of his mercy everlastingly forgive them)


Mr. Ordinary. Express your charity as to the world.


Turner. Do not put me out of my way, I must go step by step. First, I have
given you my confession; Secondly; I have made restitution, I have restored,
all to my power: the third thing that is behind of a Christian is my true and
unseigned Repentance, and my Charity to the whole world; that God that is the
searcher of all secrets, that tries the reigns, that knows all the inner-parts,
knows my soul, that I long and desire to be with Jesus Christ in glory.


Mr. Ordinary. Which is best of all.


Turner. I am in perfect charity with the whole world: It is expected by some
that I should fall upon some persons to recriminate on them; I shall not do it,
the Lord God of his infinite mercy forgive them. It was reported te his
Majesty, that on Sunday last I was drunk and that I abused this reverend person
Mr. Ordinary; this news was brought me by some that were present when the King
was told such stories, that I was drunk, and ranted, and swore God (...) God
sink me, and that I had five thousand pounds, and I would (...) pardon, and
cared not for the business, and would have ^ pardon when I please. This great
reproach was thrown upon me to the King, and that with some other scandals has
taken off the Kings affections: but this is altogether false; for Mr. Hicks my
Landlord can tell, that on Sunday morning he would have had me drank my
mornings draught, I told him No, I would not drink: I only drank one small cup
of Cider in the morning, two little glasses of Sack, and one glass of Clarret
at dinner. I went to Church with this reverend Gentleman, where I received a
great deal of comfort for my Soul* for which I thank him: he made a sound
Schollar-like Sermon, and fit for persons in our condition. I did perceive they
wanted a Clark, and I took upon me to officiate as Clark, and I was happy I had
that opportunity. I came home, and remained in my Chamber. About eight or nine
a Clock, justice Stringer in Chancery Lane, and two or three Knights and
Persons of Quality, eight or nine in all: they had one bottle of Sack among
them, of which I drank one little cup. And for the swearing of those Oaths, I
did not do it, I hate them, they were untruths, and the Lord forgive them that
raised that scandal.

Sir, I must desire that you would now join with me in Prayer, but I have
forgot one thing, it is short, That night the Sessions broke up, I was put in
the Hole, it is a most fearful, sad, deplorable place, Hell it self in
Comparison cannot be such a place; there is neither Bench, Stool nor Stick for
any person there; they lie like swine upon the ground, one upon another,
howling and roaring; it was more terrible to me then this Death; I would humbly
beg that Hole may be provided with some kind of boards like a Court of guard,
that men may ly down upon them in ease; for when they should be best prepared
for their ends* they are most tormented, lying only upon the ground; they were
better take them and hang as soon as they have their Sentence.


Jackson the Keeper. Seventeen out of nineteen made their escapes out of that
Hole, they having only a Form there.


Turner. I did with these poor Souls pray heartily; none were able to pray poor
creatures, two were dying; I prayed with them, comforted them, assisted them,
and gave them five shillings when I came out of the Hole: now pray join with me
in Prayer.


Sir Rich. Ford. If I did think there were a Reprieve to come for you, I could
be contented to spin out the time thus; but in good earnest I expect none,
unless you had an apprehension, you were not to die, you would not thus run to
so many impertinencies, that methinks cannot fit you for death.


Turner. Truly, I expect none; pray join with me in Prayer.


HIS PRAYER.
O Lord God Almighty, and Everlasting Father, Maker of Heaven and Earth, and of
all mankind, and all things therein contained. I thy wretched, miserable
Creature, make bold here to prostrate my self at thy Footstool; humbly
beseeching, that in the dolorous Passions of Jesus Christ, thou would blot out
my Transgressions. O Lord, I am covered all over with sins and iniquities, as
with Leprosy, from the crown of the head, to the sole of the foot; and who
shall deliver me? but the Blond of thy Son Jesus Christ. O Lord God, I have had
a fear of thy holy Name, a true and unfeigned love toward thee; but, O Lord,
thou know when I would do good, evil is present with me. I am laden with
Transgressions, and the weight is too heavy for me to bear: O Lord, make my
yoke easy, and my burden light. O Lord God, thou can as easily do, as speak
it; say but the word, and it is done. O Lord, for thy Son Jesus sake, bless
with the eternal and everlasting Glory in the World, and in the World to come,
my Gracious King, Queen, Queen Mother, the Duke of York, and all that Family:
And that thou in thy great mercy, would make them glorious in this world, and
the world to come. I desire their poor souls may be happy with thee in glory. O
Lord, bless all his Magistrates, from the greatest to the least; endue them
with thy fear, put the Sword of Justice into their hands, that they may eschew
evil, and do good; root out covetousness out of their hearts. O Lord God, I beg
this for thy mercy sake, to strike them with such a perfect fear, that though
they have many of them done amiss, that thou will forgive them, and let them
never do so again. O Lord my God, bless the Gentry, Nobility, Magistrates of
this City, as of the whole world all in general. That thou would be pleased
to bless the Commonalty, guide them in the path of Jesus Christ; if they are in
Christ, they have all in all. Pray God bless the Tribe of Levi, the Clergy
throughout the whole World, from the greatest to the least; from him that sits
on the Throne, the Archbishop, to the least inferior Ministers and Parsons.
Give them into their hearts, a true love, that their lives may be answerable to
their Doctrines, and become good examples to all them that hear them. And now,
O Lord, I beg of thee, that the Ministers that thou have bestowed upon this
Nation, and others that profess Jesus Christ, may daily increase more and more;
and that they may grow and live, and have blessings showred down upon them,
that their hearts may be filled with good things. Lord, I have known when I was
a Youth, that there was not a tenth of that wickedness that is now committed;
none heard of them; now we should have grown better, we have grown worse. Call
them back, O Lord, it is as easy with thee, as to speak. Good Lord, bless this
Parish wherein I live the Minister and Lecturer, and all my Neighbors; and pour
down a double Blessing of thy Spirit upon them: For my poor Family in this
Parish, I humbly beg in the Bowels of thy Son Christ Jesus, that thou would
be a Husband to my wife, a Father to my childr^n; a Guide, Protector, and
Director, to them all in general: Guide them, strengthen them in those comforts
which last night I gave them; and that my Wife may not afflict her self, but
rejoice, that God has called me in his due time; that I am not taken away by
any suddon death, which I always prayed against. O Lord, I have but a short
time here, but it is thy mercy that I have had time hitherto; I have deserved
none, O Lord. Thou too est away a Gentleman the other night, o^^ Mr. Snell, a
Gentleman at the Cock in Lumbard-street, a Common Council man, who was well at
dinner, and died the same night. O Lo^d, he had shorter warning then I: I am
bound to thee for it, although I had but a da^. I humbly beseech thee, to stand
by me in this my day of trial, and moment of tribulation. O Christ, come in
unto me, I do lay hold upon thee; I do beg that thou that have promised, That
whosoever shall repent of his sins, thou will blot out his transgressions.
Lord, I do repent with an unfeigned repentance, never to be repented of: And I
beseech thee, good God, that in and through Jesus Christ, who has washed away
all my sins in his Blood, that thou will freely receive my soul, when it goes
from hence into blessedness.

Some private Ejaculations.
LOrd, I have often wished to be translated to thee, and thou have granted me
my request: I give thee humble and hearty thanks, O Lord God. Give me, I humbly
beseech thee, a true unfeigned sight of my sins: O Lord God, they are grievous,
I loath them. Lord God, thou know I believe, and I trust and depend upon
thee; I rest upon thy Son Jesus Christ, and his Sufferings. I have none in
Heaven but thee, and there is none upon Earth, that I will seek after, besides
thee; there is no trust nor confidence to be put, but in thee, and thy Son
Christ Jesus. I commit my soul and body into thy arms: Lord God, guide, direct,
protect, and keep, and everlastingly preserve me. Pour down thy mercies upon
all these thy people, and sanctify my afflictions to them, that they may set a
watch upon their mouths, and their eyes, and that their tongues speak no guile.
Good God, forgive me that sin of taking thy Name in vain; make up my loss to my
Wife and children, with thy merciful pardon and forgiveness of their sins: I
shall be with thee in Paradise. O Lord my God, thou did feed my soul in the
Sacrament, refreshed me, comforted me in that blessed Ordinance. O Lord, take
not thy Spirit from me, but go on with me still; and Lord Jesus receive my poor
soul. O Lord God, what shall I render unto thee for all thy benefits? In
Sacrifices thou delightest not, but in a broken and contrite spirit; O that is
acceptable unto thee. The pangs of death are not terrible to me; it is thy
mercy, that I am not afraid of it, nor ashamed of it. Christ died upon the
Cross too; O sanctify this affliction; make me truly sensible of thy mercy,
and let me have an assurance of thee. Hear thy servant in distress; for thou
have promised, that if a sinner knock, the door shall be opened; if he seek, he
shall find, Lord, I do beg in the Bowels of thy Son Jesus Christ, for thy
mercies sake, for thy go^dness sake, for all thy attributes sake, that thou
would receive this poor soul of mine; for thy Son Christ Jesus sake, who has
taught me further to say, Our Father which art, etc.

Here Mr. Weldan, the Ordinary of Newgate, joined with him in Prayer. Mr.
Ordinary. The Lord Jesus have mercy upon thee.


Turner. Mr. Sheriffs* God be with ye: Pray remember my duty and respects to my
Lord Major, and to all the Aldermen, and to all their Families.


Turner. Executioner I charge you meddle not with my Clothes.


Sergeants. Col. Turner, we'll take care of them.


Turner. Lord, I am assured to be with thee in glory; I do rely and depend,
all in all, upon Christ: Refuse not my soul at the last hour* I have none in
Heaven, nor none in Earth, nor any thing but thee to rely upon; and therefore
into thy hands, both now, and for ever, I commit my soul, my body, my spirit,
in sure and certain hopes of a joyful Resurrection at the day of Judgment where
I must appear and give account for my sins; but Jesus Christ has washed them
away in his Blood. Pray Doctor, let me beg you to read th^se Verses in the
Second of the Heb^ews, to comfort me; being the 14, 15, 16, 17, and 18, Verses.
For as much then as the children are partakers of flesh and blood; he also,
himself likewise took part of the same, that through death he might destroy him
that had the power of death, that is the devil; and deliver them who through
fear of death, were all their lifetime subject to bondage. For verily be took
not on him the nature of A^gels; but he took on him the Seed of Abraham.
Wherefore in all things it behoved him to be made like unto his brethren, that
he might be a me^ciful and faithful High Priest, in things pertaining to God,
to make reconciliation for the sins of the people: For in that he himself has
suffered, being tempted, he is able to succor them that are tempted.

After this he gave Forty shillings to a Minister, to be given to the poor of
that Parish, and Eighteen shillings six pence more, to be delivered to his
Wife, to be given to his young sons School Master.
Turner. Mr Jackson, God be with you: Remember me to my Landlord, and all
there. My two children, I hope, will be freed. Mr. Sheriff, must I hang all day?


Sir Rich. Ford. You will be cut down, as soon as you are dead.


Turner. Pray tell me true, Mr. Sheriff.


Sir Rich. Ford. You will not hang above half an hour.


Thereupon he directed the Executioner to take off his Halter from his
shoulders; and afterward taking it in his hand, kisses it, and put it on his
neck himself: Then after he had fitted his Cap, and put it on, he went out of
the Cart upon the Ladder. The Executioner tied him up* and pulling the Rope a
little, says Turner, What, do thou mean to choke me? Pray fellow give me more
Rope; What a simple fellow is this! How long have you been Executioner, that
you know not yet how to put the knot?


Mr. Secker, Minister, out of a Window near. Mr. Turner, have you remembered
those four things I spoke to you of?


Turner. I have done them.


Mr. Secker. I trust this hour of heaviness, will be an hour of happiness.


Turner. I am assured of it.


Mr. Secker. A living Christ in a dying hour, is the best of all. The Lord be
with you, and the Lord carry your soul safe through the jaws of death, to the
joys of life.


Turner. I doubt not, but through a dark cloud, I shall see a bright Savior.
Executioner, look ye turn me not off, till you have the sign from me, which
shall be by laying my right hand on my left shoulder. The Lord God forgive
thee, I do.

In the midst of some private Ejaculations, offering to pull down his Cap, he
espied a Gentlewoman at a Window nigh, kissed his hand, said, Your servant
Mistress.

-- His Cap being pulled down, he lifted up his hands, and said, I disclaim any
desert of mine own, there is nothing in me; look upon me through Jesus Christ.
Lord Jesus receive my soul;

and thereupon giving the sign, the Executioner turned him off. And after some
short time, he was cut down, and his body conveyed to a house near, there to
rest for a space, till they provided for him decent burial,
The confluence of people from the Gaol, to the place of Execution, was very
great, beyond the memory of any upon the like occasion.

During his imprisonment, and to the last breath of life, his carriage was very
undaunted.



An Advertisement.
THere is now in the Press, ready to be published, An Exact Relation of the
Life and Conversation of Col. Turner, as it was imparted by himself to an
intimate friend, as a full satisfaction to the world of his Actions and
Deportment. Whereunto is added, the manner of his Execution; lively represented
in a Copper Plate, in Quarto, the price 6 d. Sold by Nath. Brook and Hen.
Marsh; at the Angel in Cornhil, and the Prince's Arms in Chancery Lane.

The Second Part of the New Survey of the Turkish Empire, containing, first,
the extent of his Dominions, when, and by whom conquered; secondly, an account
of the Tartars; thirdly, the life of Mahomet the Impostor; fourthly, their
Militia; fifthly, their Government, Civil and Ecclesiastical; sixthly, the
continuation of the History. Being the most absolute and compleatest piece that
ever was written of that Nation. Sold by Henry Marsh.

An Advertisement of Remark.
THe true and impartial Account of the Arraignment, Trial, Examination,
Confession, and Condemnation of Col. James Turner, for breaking open the House
of Francis Tryan, Merchant in Limestreet, London. With the several Trials and
Examinations of John Turner, William Turner, Mary Turner, and Ely Turner,
Confederates. At Justice-Hall in the Old Bailey, London, the 15, 16 and 19 of
January, 1663.

Sold by Nathaniel Brook, and Henry Marsh. Price 1 s.

Licenced by Roger L'Estrange.


