TUDOR, A PRINCE OF WALES. An Historical Novel. In TWO PARTS.

LONDON, Printed by H. H. for Jonathan Edwin, at the Sign of the Three Roses on
Ludgatehill. 1678.

Licensed.

Feb. 1. 1678. ROGER L'ESTRANGE.

TUDOR, A PRINCE of WALES.
An Historical Novel.
The First Part.
IT was about the Time when the War which had continued for so many Ages
between the English and Welsh, seemed to be put to an end; and that these
latter were believed for ever unable to retrive their losses, or defend their
pretensisions; That Owen Tudor, one of their Princes, and whose Lineage they
deduced from Cadwalladar an ancient British King, endeavored to mount the
Throne. He found it no difficult matter to persuade the Welsh to rise in Arms;
and that people dissatisfied with their new Masters, were ready to shed the
last drop of their Blood in attempting to shake off that Yoke. Tudor was glad
to find them so well inclined to the Execution of his desires; but their Aid
seeming too weak fully to support his hopes, he betook himself to the
Protection of the Kings of France and Scotland, who resolved to second him in
his enterprises.

Henry the Fourth, newly Crowned King of England, no sooner understood of the
powerful League that was formed against him; but that he on his part prepared
vigorously for War; and having raised an Army of Forty thousand men, he marched
toward Scotland at the head of it, where he met the enemy drawn up on the
Borders. He offered them Battle, which was accepted; but the Scots had the
worst of the day; Tudor was fain to fly for it; and the Earl of Doughlas, who
commanded the Scots, was made Prisoner by Henry. The loss of that Battle put
the Affairs of the Welsh Prince into a bad condition; and finding no other
support but in the friendship of Charles the Sixth King of France; he retreated
into his Dominions: where that Monarch received him more favorably than he
could have expected in his adversity. The Grandee's of the Kingdom imitated
their Prince, and had so great respect for the merit of Tudor, that their
civilities were sufficient to have made him forget all his losses, if he had
proposed to himself any thing but Glory. But it is very hard for such Souls as
are born to command, to find satisfaction any other way than in the submission
and obedience of Provinces; and that Prince would have willingly preferred the
Crown of Wales, to all the Favors and Civilities which he received at the
Court of Charles. Wherefore, he did all he could to procure from him
assistance: But France was not at that time what before it had been; and after
the unlucky accident which befell their King, and is mentioned in History, the
Kingdom was so rent by the different interests of the Princes of the Blood,
that it had enough to do to maintain it self.

Tudor thus crossed in his designs, bore his misfortune, but not without much
impatience; yet that was not all: Fate had new troubles in reserve for him; and
he had never been sensible of the utmost effects of ill fortune, if he had not
felt the pains which commonly attend a great but hopeless Love.

Charles had several Children by his Queen Isabell of Bavaria; and Catharine
his youngest Daughter was justly esteemed one of the greatest Beauties, and
most lovely persons that has ever been. The Luster of her presence surprised
all that beheld her; and her Actions were accompanied with so many Charms, that
no heart was proof against her merit: Her Body was not inferior to the
Beauties of her Countenance; and in a word, she seemed to have been framed on
purpose to inspire into Hearts the tenderest of Passions.

Tudor at first beheld her with admiration; but seeing his Fortune had no
Conformity with high designs, his reason at that time retained its authority;
and that Princes thoughts were taken up as much at least with the sense of his
Calamities, as with the Consideration of the perfections of Catharine. However
he had a Heart like other Men; and he must needs have been of a very savage
disposition; if seeing daily the Princess, he had not been affected by her
Beauty. He began to be a little more Melancholic than he used to be; or to say
better, he changed his Melancholy into a sweet and restless pensiveness, and
such as men commonly fall into when a great passion begins to seize them. He
well percieved in himself this change of humor, and was displeased thereat;
yet not so much as he would have been, had he fully known the cause of it.
However he made some reflections on the complaisance that he had for the
Princess; and seemed indeed to have touched the right string, when he helped to
beguile himself: In effect, after so many marks of goodness as Catharine had
showed him, he thought there could be no great danger in those little offices
which he rendered her; and which he believed to be rather testimonies of
Gratitude than Love; but the effects which great obligations produce, are
easily known; and though they make deep impression on generous Souls, yet all
things have their limits; and it is no hard matter to distinguish that which
flows from Love, from the effects of a Heart that is only grateful. Neither did
Tudor long continue in his error; and the earnest desire he had to be in all
places where Catharine was, convinced him that civility did not commonly lead
men so far; but that some extraordinary matter must needs have invaded his
thoughts. That consideration made him afraid; so that endeavoring to prevent
the troublesome consequences that might ensue from it, He employed all means to
stifle his Affection in the Birth; and proposed to his own Imagination every
thing that might represent to him the fatal effects of that attempt. But none,
but such as have never been in Love, can think that from such like enterprises
any success is to be expected; and experience does too plainly evince, that
Love is like to those snares, wherein the more men strive to get out, the more
they entangle themselves.

Tudor had the same Fate as others have had; and all his reasonings served only
to render him more Amorous. The Charms of Catharine presenting themselves in
vast numbers to his memory, he conceived so agreeable an Idea of the Princesses
perfections, as suddenly got the absolute Victory over his weakness. He found a
Thousand delights in the conversation of that fair one; and in her Company he
so much forgot the thoughts os all his misfortunes, that his greatest care was
how he might appear agreeable to her Eyes. He was no more Tudor whom ambition
tormented Day and Night; and that Passion which had so cruelly racked his
Heart, since the first time that he had given way to it, gave place to those
Sentiments, which to tender and affectionate Souls have far greater charms than
the most glorious and magnificent Crowns. But how, said that Prince sometimes
to himself: Do thou consider, Tudor, what thou art about to do? what course
is this thou art like to follow? Do Conquerours propose to thee this way to
subdue thine enemies? what a shame is it for a Prince continued he, to give way
to his pleasures, when his chief care should be to remount the Throne; and what
a Joy will it be to Henry, when he shall understand that Tudor delights in
servitude, at the same time when all his endeavors should be to shake off his
Fetters. But thou art mistaken, Owen! replied he immediately; thy desires are
not to be condemned; and may not there be as much Policy as weakness in them;
if they be rightly considered? is it not natural to implore the assistance of
Neighbors when strength is wanting at home? and where can thou imagine to
find greater support than in an Alliance with Charles, if thou could be so
happy as to obtain it?

But these thoughts were not so well confirmed in his mind, as to banish all
his troubles and distrust. He began to reflect on the greatness of Catharine,
and his own misery; and was not so blinded with selflove, but that he knew very
well that such a Princess as she was, merited all that he could pretend to,
though he had been actually possessed of Ten Provinces; each of them as great
as that for which he had taken Arms. He resolved therefore to suffer without
speaking: and as there is nothing so bitter as desires without hopes, so it is
not easy to conceive the pitiful estate to which he was reduced. He resolved
oftener than once to retire from Court; but having cast his Eyes upon all the
places whither he might convey his wretched Fortune, he found every where so
little security for his person, that necessity obliged him to remain where he
was.

It was soon perceived that his sadness was extraordinary; but every one knew
the condition of his Affairs: and they were desperate enough to hinder any from
suspecting other grounds of his discontents, than what were visible to all men.
All made it their business to comfort him; and Catharine her self, who felt a
kind of affectionate pity for that Prince, which she had never before felt for
any, told him, that one should not be so much dejected at the accidents of
Fortune; seeing daily experience made appear, that nothing was more fickle and
unconstant, and that he should be persuaded, that she often heaped her favors
on him whom she had immediately before oppressed with afflictions.

Tudor answered as he ought to that obliging Discourse of the Princess; but
being resolved not to discover to her the secrets of his heart, thought it
enough to hint to her in the general, that his troubles were far different from
what she believed; and that the greater ambition one had for high matters, the
more lamentable it was to see ones self out of hopes of attaining to them.

Their conversation was not very long; but as it served to poison the wounds of
Tudor, so it began to work strange effects in the Heart of Catharine: for
seeing pity does insensibly accustom us to tender Sentiments, that Princess
did habituate her self to a gentle compassion for Tudor; and thought her self
only affected with his misfortunes, when she became sensible of his merit. That
Prince was indeed endowed with most engaging qualities; for besides the
excellent Beauty and Comeliness of Body, he possessed a gentile and pleasant
Wit, which easily insinuates, and contributes as much to the Conquest of
Hearts, as all the sparkling Luster of the World. The Princess on her part fell
likewise into a kind of pensiveness; and if Tudor had taken that opportunity to
speak to her of his Love, she would certainly have heard him with pleasure; and
that wretched Prince would have found some comfort to his miseries, in the kind
usage that he might have received from her. But he flattered not himself so
much, as to venture on speaking; and thought it enough to give evidence of his
passion by his Assiduities and Services. In the mean while the Princess took
particular notice of his deportment; and I cannot tell whether Tudor were more
amorous, or Catharine more grateful. But their procedure added more than one
half to their affliction: and they had long felt all the pains of Love, without
tasting of it is sweetness, if the death of the King of England had not given
them occasion, by that which happened afterward, to make known to one another
their mutual Sentiments.

After the death of that Prince, his Son Henry the Fifth succeeded to the
Crown. He set himself at first to the procuring of his Subjects quiet; and
having ordered all things at home, resolved to make War, or else to establish a
good and solid peace with France. He sent Ambassadors to Charles, with
propositions of some accommodation betwixt them, concerning the differences
that his Father had always had with him during his Reign; and at the same time
demanded the Princess Catharine his Daughter in Marriage.

The Ambassadors were no sooner arrived at Paris, but that all people knew the
cause of their coming. Tudor took the alarm very hot; and the Princess was so
troubled at the overture, that she could not forbear to make appear her
aversion to the Marriage. She was observed to weep incessantly; and one day
when Tudor went to pay her a visit, he found her upon the Bed, overwhelmed with
such grief as could not be matched. He saluted her with much respect; and
drawing near, What is the reason, Madam, said he, of so great dejection? and do
these lovely Eyes think it time to look sad, when they ought to sparkle with
the glory of their Conquests? It is true, continued he, all the Crowns of the
Earth have nothing that comes near your merit: Nevertheless there are Charms in
a Diadem; and a Princess may rest satisfied with the Crown of England, without
fear of being suspected to want a noble Ambition? Were I like Tudor, answered
she coldly, I know very well that I should sacrifice all other interests to
Ambition; and that the concerns which one ought to have for Relations should
not much perplex me: But seeing my temper is different from his; neither can I
agree with him in opinion; and perhaps Mine -- Ah, how are you mistaken, Madam!
in thinking so, said the Prince interrupting her; and how little do you know
Tudor, if you think that the desire of Reigning is all his Passion? I confess,
continued he, the time has been, when I was only ambitious; but there happen
many changes in ones life; and it is very hard amidst the Beauties which are to
be found at the Court of France, to entertain no other desires but for glory;
or rather it is very difficult not to forget it absolutely, when one begins to
feel an inclination for a lovely Lady. You do indeed surprise me, answered the
Princess; and I should never have suspected that you were in love. One is often
mistaken, replied Tudor; but I intend to undeceive you, and make you acknowledge
that I am much more to be pitied than you think of. You know, Madam, continued
the Prince, that the misfortune of War having obliged me to fly for refuge to
the Court of the King your Father; I was no sooner arrived here, but that I
found what I had never seen elsewhere. The men appeared to me extremely civil
and well bred; and the Ladies (to my Fancy) performed all they set about with
so good Air, that I thought other Countries destitute of the Politeness which
was to be found in France. I made it my work to observe things more narrowly,
that I might from them frame to my self a pattern for my conduct; but how
dangerous is it so attentively to consider objects of great worth! I saw a
lovely Brown, who ravished me with her charms, and robbed me of my Heart:
Pardon me, Madam, if I tell you not all her Amiable qualities; for it is above
my power: and nothing but my Heart is able to tell it self, how many are her
charming perfections. I will only assure you by the by, that never was Lady
more Beautiful, nor Witty; and that as there is none in the World so
accomplished, so never was Passion more respectful and sincere than the Love I
have for her.

With these words the Prince held his peace; and the Princess, who had Love
enough for him to make her conceive some jealousy by that Discourse, being
desirous to discover who that Rival was: I perceive said she, Tudor, you are
discreet in your Amors; for having told us the perfections of your Mistress;
you are pleased to conceal from us her name, and your own happiness. It is not
for the reason that you imagine, Madam, answered Tudor, that I tell you no
more. I understand my self; and that was enough to keep me from having farther
proceeded with the person of whom I spoke. In effect, so great is the
difference betwixt her merit and the defects of Tudor, that I think he will
never so much mistake himself as to dare speak to her of his passion. That Lady
must needs be of great quality, replied Catharine, (being desirous to engage
him to declare himself) that a Prince stands in so great awe of her; and for my
part, I know none that should oblige him to so great a reserve. I am not of
your opinion, Madam, replied Tudor; and to my grief, I know one who deserves
that one should do greater matters for her. But what do you mean by that?
replied the Princess. I mean, Madam, answered Tudor, that my actions should
make her sensible of my Love rather than my words; and my satisfaction would be
great, if by all the ways of respect and submission, I might ever engage that
fair one to pity me.

The Princess who imagined not before, that Tudor designed her by his
Discourse, began now to suspect it; and being willing to inform her self:
Prince, said she; this way of reasoning is not just; if I were in your place, I
should take another course; and a Lover that by his silence can work upon his
Mistress, never disobliges her by declaring his Love, when he does it with all
civility and respect. In this, Madam, answered the Prince, I have some doubts
of your sincerity; and perhaps you would be the first to take it ill, if such a
thing happened.

These words confirmed the Princess more and more in her suspicion; she was
desirous to have no more ground of doubting; and speaking again: Tudor, said
she, I perceive you know me not; I never speak but what I think; and the
aversion that I have made appear to the Marriage lately proposed to the King my
Father, ought to convince you that I am an Enemy to all kind of dissimulation.
That Discourse made Tudor change his design of concealing his Love; he found
that he could never meet with so fair an occasion of declaring himself; and
laying hold of the opportunity offered him by Fortune, Well then, Madam,
replied he, I must believe you; for indeed it would be too hard for me to keep
my self longer under constraint; and it is my duty to acknowledge my rashness,
in declaring that I adore you; and that none but the Princess Catharine could
ever touch the Heart of the Prince of Wales. Believe it, Madam, this Heart is
immovable to all but your self; and it is my Fate that a King of England
should strip me of all my felicities: but let him freely enjoy the fruits of my
overthrow, provided he suffer me to enjoy the sight of my dearest Princess.

Tudor said no more; but made appear to Catharine so much Love in his Looks,
that she could no longer listen to the residue of an expiring stateliness,
which would have obliged her to disguise her Sentiments. She made known to him,
by a Glance, the Flame that was in her Heart; and at length overcoming her own
humor: Alas! why did you not speak sooner, said she; and why have you delayed
so long to discover to me a matter which at another time would have pleased me
so well? Believe it, Prince, continued she, I would willingly have heard you;
and perhaps had I never known you I should not have had so great an Aversion to
match with England. But after so free a confession, entertain no sinister
Judgment of me; make use of it only to break off my Marriage: consult your
Friends, and so manage Affairs that there may be a stop put to an Alliance,
which if it take effect, will cost me the quiet of my whole Life. Ah! Madam,
answered Tudor; how happy do you make me, by the goodness which you show me!
but how short will this happiness prove by the obstacles I foresee therein! For
in a word, what can I do in this conjuncture? you know that the House of
Orleans has at present the advantage of that of Burgundy, to which I have
addicted my self; and that I have no authority with those that determine
Affairs of that nature. But have you your self no power left, continued he, to
oppose that which thwarts your inclinations: and must you demand assistance
from one who expects his relief from you? What would you have me do, replied
the Princess; and are you so ignorant of the duty of Persons of my Quality, as
not to know my Inability? No, Tudor, expect no more from me; I have an esteem,
and perhaps something more for you; but I shall suffer my self to be led to the
Sacrifice, if it be so resolved; and I had rather have it said, that Catharine
is Unfortunate; than that she should be accused of failing in her duty. Well
then, Madam, replied Tudor, it is your pleasure that I die; I must obey you;
and that is indeed the only ease I find in my calamities. Oppress me no more,
replied the Princess; it is not well done to increase my sorrows: Bestir your
self rather, if you Love me. Love has many secret ways of succeeding in
enterprises, and there is nothing impossible to those who truly feel it.

Here ended the Conversation of those two Amorous Persons; they parted fully
satisfied with one another; but with small hopes of a better Fortune. In the
mean time Tudor spread reports at Court, that the Marriage of Henry and
Catharine, was no ways advantageous for France, That that Prince was but the
Son of an Usurper; that the House of York, which was dispossessed of the Crown,
was still strong enough to regain the Scepter; and that in Fine the last words
of the dying King to his Son, should make him rather think of giving back what
he had gotten, than of demanding such ridiculous matters as were proposed by
his Ambassadors. I cannot tell whether these rumors that were in every bodies
mouth, made any impression on the Counsel; or that the pretensions of the King
of England seemed not very reasonable. But in a word, his Ministers returned
without effectuating any thing. It is hard to imagine how great the joy of our
Lovers was; but they failed not to make it known to one another in its full
extent; and by mutual assurances of Love began to forget their past troubles,
when of a sudden they found themselves more than ever exposed to the cruelty of
Fortune.

Henry incensed at the refusal of giving him Catharine in Marriage, leavied a
powerful Army. He landed in Normandy, where he put all to Fire and Sword; and
having taken some places by the way, he marched toward Callis. He fought a
great Battle at Agincourt, and obtained the Victory: afterward he wasted all
Picardy; laid Siege to the City of Roan; and there was no doubt but that he
would have carried it, had not they who had the Administration of the Affairs
of France, being surprised at so many Conquests, endeavored in good earnest to
find means to put a stop to that Victorious Prince. And finding no more ready
remedy for the Calamities that threatened their Country, than to appease the
Rage of the Conqueror; Ambassadors were sent to his Camp to beg Peace of him,
and to offer him Catharine.

This was a cruel Blow for our Lovers; and the sorrow that appeared on their
Countenance, gave signs enough, if it had been observed, that both were
extremely troubled. Well then, Princess, said Tudor one day to Catharine, now
is the time come that I must lose you; and Fate has only given me a little
Reprieve to let me know the greatness of that felicity which it had appointed
for another? Why have you not been altogether Cruel? Continued he; or rather
why are you but kind by halves; and how can it be that one tenderly Loves, as
you profess, and in the mean time resolves to forsake the beloved object? Ah!
Tudor, be sparing in your censures, replied the Princess; my afflictions are
too great that I should need other pressures; and your reproaches are too
unjust that I should suffer them, and survive my grief. Let us be unhappy, if
Heaven has so decreed; but let us not contribute any thing that may make us
lose the esteem which we have for one another: You in giving me Counsels that
go against my Reputation; and I in listening to them. I am already but too much
inclined to believe you, continued she, to make me distrust my strength; and I
have so often represented to my self the pleasure that I might have had in
living with you, that I am much afraid I shall project to my self nothing but
horrors with all besides your self: if you still persist to bring them to my
mind. Help me rather to overcome my self; and believe, Prince, that this is the
occasion wherein one really deserves pity; seeing, after all the effects of my
Virtue, I stand in need still of assistance to overcome my weakness. I confess,
Madam, answered the Prince, I must admire you for these Sentiments, and grant
them to proceed from the most generous Princess that ever was; but grant me
likewise, that if I have not so great a Soul, yet I have perhaps more
tenderness than you have. I am in the wrong, added he, to press you so much;
and it is misbecoming a Prince who has no other Fortune but in his hopes, to
desire to snatch from a Princess a Crown which is in her offer: it has
certainly more charms than one is aware of; and it must needs be of small
value, if it were to be forsaken for the forlorn estate of Tudor.

These words which he uttered with some sullenness, made the Princess sensible
he was jealous; she was willing to cure him of that fatal passion; and looking
on him with an obliging Aspect, What is it, Prince, said she, that you suspect
me of; and what signs of Ambition have I given you, that you should think me so
much inclined to it, as you make me to be? Banish such thoughts far from you,
if you love your own repose; and if you will give your self any trouble for
mine, hinder the success of that Treaty which is to be set on foot at the
interview of the two Kings. You may do somewhat in that matter; and you are in
so good terms with the House of Burgundy, which is now again restored to the
Government of the State, that with the help of that Family you may hope to
succeed in your undertaking. These words reassured the Prince, who casting
himself at her feet, Pardon, Madam, said he, an Unfortunate Lover, who knows
not whom to blame for his Calamities; and consider that it is very difficult to
be deeply in Love, and not to be a little jealous. Believe me, my dear
Princess, I shall employ all the Friends I have to hinder that fatal Marriage:
and I have so great interest in it, as may, I think, make you believe that I
shall omit nothing which may contribute to it is repture.

At the same time he took leave of her, and went straight to the Palace of the
Duke of Burgundy; where he found that Prince more afflicted for the Calamities
of France than he expected; and perceiving him resolved to employ his utmost
endeavors to hinder its ruin, I rejoice, my Lord, said he, at your good
intentions; and doubt not of the Kingdoms safety, now that you make it your
care: But remember that there depends much on diligence in preventing a
disadvantageous Treaty, to which the weakness of the King will it may be oblige
him; and which will not be easily remedied if once concluded. You have reason,
Prince, answered the Duke of Burgundy; but there are many things to be done
before I can be in a condition to act as I should. What greater matters are to
be done then, replied Tudor; and if you were reconciled with the Dolphin, might
ye not Unite your Forces, and make head against the common Enemy of your
Country? Yes, answered the Duke; but the difficulty will be, to bring us to
good terms together: I shall endeavor it, if you please, replied Tudor; and am
persuaded that I shall not meet with so many Lets in it as you imagine. You
will thereby oblige me, replied the Duke, and I shall be always ready to do all
that my honor and duty can allow.

Tudor thereupon left him that he might go to the Dolphin; and having found him
in the same disposition that he had left the Duke of Burgundy in, he made them
Friends in appearance, and retarded for some time at least his own misfortune.

The reconciliation of these two Princes put France in some hopes again: Yet it
hindered not but that the two Kings upon a cessation of Arms, attended by the
chief of their Court, met in the Park of Meulan; where they resolved to have a
conference for facilitating the peace. The Queen followed after, and carried
the Princess with her. The English beheld her with admiration; and there were
but few of them that found not by experience how dangerous it is too narrowly
to consider an amiable person. But amongst all those who admired her Beauty, no
man was certainly more sensibly smitten than the Duke of Gloucester; that
Prince, who was Brother to the King of England, and, by his Rank and Quality at
Court, had the greatest share in the management of Affairs, no sooner viewed
Catharine, but was charmed by her perfections. He resolved at first to acquaint
her with the Sentiments he entertained for her; and seeing the marriage of the
Princess was to be one of the first Articles of the Treaty then in agitation,
he thought he had no time to lose in taking a good resolution. And therefore
having rendered a visit to the Queen, he discoursed with Catharine in a place
where their conversation could not be overheard. It is so hard, Madam, said he
to her, to see you, and not to feel some particular emotion; that I think I
shall not much surprise you, when I tell you, that you have before you a Prince
who is absolutely at your disposal. It is not, added he, by the multitude of
words that I pretend to make good what I say; my actions shall far better make
known to you my Sentiments, than all the discourses that I can make. Consider
only, Madam, wherein you think fit to employ me; and believe that I have so
much authority in the Conference that is held to day, as to sway matters to
what side I shall incline.

The Princess was surprised at that Compliment; and having expected no such
thing, nor well understood the meaning of it, she was for some time put to a
plunge, what answer to make to the Duke: But having at length paused upon it a
little, Really Prince, said she, you are the most obliging person alive. It is
seldom found that enemies offer to turn their arms against themselves; however
you run no Risk on this occasion, I am none of those that will, to your cost,
make advantage of your civilities, and study the interest of my Country by an
action which would somewhat diminish your glory. I perceive, Madam, answered
the Duke, that I have not expressed my self so as to be understood. It is not
in favor of the King your Father, that I have offered you my Services in this
place; and I am less concerned for the Interests of my Princes Crown, than for
those of his heart. It is needless, I think, to explain my self more clearly:
consult about that which may affect yours; and if the designs which Henry has
on your person, have nothing in them that can flatter you; I make no
difficulty, Madam, to tell you, I know how to satisfy you; and a Prince who
would give his life to contribute in the least to your content, will not find
great difficulty to divert the blow which may render you unhappy. I am still
more obliged to you than I thought, replied the Princess; since you confine to
me alone the Sentiments which I extended to others. But in fine, Prince, though
my inclinations were contrary to the Alliance that is in agitation to day, you
know that it would be undecent for me to discover them, and that a Princess of
my quality ought with pleasure sacrifice her self to the public good. Have a
care, Madam, of being mistaken, replied the Prince, and embrace not the shadow
of virtue, for virtue it self. I know very well, added he, that when one has
once made a choice, all pains are to be endured rather than to give any mark of
repentance; but the case is not a like in a matter that is not as yet
concluded: and until it be finally ended, we may forbear such things as would
cost us the repose of our Life, if we did them contrary to our inclination.
There is nothing, Sir, ananswered Catharine, which is inconsistent with the
inclination of a Princess; and the hearts of Persons of that quality should be
of the nature of Wax, whereon Princes may stamp all that they judge
advantageous for the grandeur of their Crowns. These are indeed brave
Sentiments, Madam, replied the Duke of Gloucester; but Destiny sometimes opposes
so great generosity; and seeing it inspires into us Love and Aversion,
according as it pleases, we find often in our selves hatred for that which is
appointed for us; and have often also an inclination for the thing we are
denied. It were far better, Madam, added he, to render your self Mistress of
your own fortune, and without seeming to affect any thing in particular, as you
may do to day; to make use of the assistance that is offered you, that you may
perhaps thereby prevent your own misfortune. How Prince, replied Catharine;
have I nothing but appearances to answer for; and can a Princess be satisfied
with her self, when she can upbraid her self with such an escape? In fine,
Madam, answered the Duke, I see you are not to be convinced by my reasons; and
that it is as easy for you to overcome me in conversation, as it was to
triumph on my heart: but consider a little what I have said to you, and think
not that so small a matter, from which you are to expect all the happiness or
misery of your Life.

As he made an end of these words, he rose; and having made a low reverence,
retired to the Camp, and left Catharine in a musing fit; into which the
discourse of that Prince had cast her. She bethought her self what it might be
that could make him speak in that manner; and making no doubt but that it was
some small esteem, that he had for her, She found her self in great perplexity
what course to take in that conjuncture: For on the one hand, she would not
have been vexed, if there had been no progress made in the Conference; and on
the other, she would have been glad to have had no obligation to the Duke; and
not to have been exposed to a complaisance which he would certainly have
expected from her; if he had once found himself in a condition of doing her
service. She would not trust her own Judgment, as to the resolution which she
ought to take concerning that; but writ an account to Tudor, who was obliged to
stay at Paris, of the conference she had had with the Duke. Though that Lover
had ground to praise the carriage of Catharine, yet he could not forbear at
first to fall into some jealousy: But giving way at length to his Reason over
his Chimerical Fancies, he not only advised the Princess to make use of the
Dukes offers, but prayed her likewise not to spare her prayers, (if there was
need of them) to incline him to break up that Conference which put him into
despair. Catharine having had the consent of Tudor, made no more scruple; and
was resolved to make her thoughts known to the Duke, the next visit that he
should be pleased to render her.

However that Prince was not so fully determined what to do, as the Princess
was; and though she had given him no ground of diving into her thoughts, yet he
judged that glory was more the cause of the resistance she testified, than any
inclination she had for the King his Brother. And deliberating afterward if it
would be more to his advantage, that she should Marry that young Prince, or
that he should start difficulties to obstruct the Alliance; he at first
resolved to suffer the matter to take its course: And thought it his interest
rather to see Catharine Queen to his Brother, than to leave her in France, and
be for ever deprived of the sight of her; but seeing men commonly are not apt
to renounce their hopes so long as they have any ground to entertain them; the
Duke of Gloucester took suddenly a resolution quite contrary to the intention he
seemed to be in a little before. He considered with himself that he was not far
from the Crown; and backing a great deal of Love with a little Ambition, he
imagined that he might hope to enjoy himself, what he was about to abandon to
another, if he suffered the Conference to proceed too far. That consideration
was enough to make him play his part; but though in that he had a greater
respect to his own than the interests of the Princess, yet he was willing to
give her the honor of it; and having rendered her a Visit: Well, Madam, said
he, (after the usual Ceremonies that pass between persons of that quality,) Do
you still continue in the opinion you were in the other day; and do you believe
that one is obliged in Ceremony to do the quite contrary of what they desire?
You have had time, added he, to think on it; and considering your natural
perspicacity, Give me leave to tell you that, it would be a headstrong
obstinacy, still to continue in the same thoughts. You press me too hard,
replied the Princess; and cannot you permit, Sir, that people should satisfy
their duty, without putting of them in mind what it may cost them. I was
willing to follow mine without looking back, if you had not stopped me in my
Career; and Catharine had not known what it is to declare her will, if a civil
and obliging Prince had not persuaded her that it is necessary for her repose
once in her Life to do so. Yes, Madam, I tell you once more, answered the Duke;
and I thank Heaven that, in so important an action as this in agitation, your
eyes are opened. Reflect a little upon the Crosses you were about to expose
your self to, by affecting a false virtue; and how many times you would have
accused your self of being the cause of your own pains. How much is a Princess
of your disposition to be pitied, when she is constrained to put on the Fetters
that Policy has made; and how much do I blame, as to that, the actions of the
greatest men in the world, who without minding their own inclination, daily
sacrifice themselves to a weak reason of state. How dear do they buy, added he,
that vain glory, which they are willing to purchase at the cost of their heart;
and how often do they blame themselves for having deprived their own
satisfaction of the delights that are to be tasted in an happy Union. Ah!
Madam, continued the Duke, is there any thing more sensible than these secret
rebukes that men give themselves: and when Persons have a right frame of
Spirit, and Discretion, should they not pursue that sole pleasure which is to
be found in a sincere and affectionate engagement? Ah! Sir, replied the
Princess, let us not, I beseech you, condescend on so many particulars; I am
afraid, for a reason that concerns my self, that I shall come off with trouble;
though there were not a great many more that might make me condemn my conduct;
which probably I may be the first my self to dislike. We should not too much
reflect on things, to which our inclination rather than duty moves us; and the
way to make us again embrace them, is to be convinced that we have unseasonably
forsaken them. I distrust not, Madam, the Justice of my Cause, replied the
Duke; and I can maintain it against all men living: but I shall say no more.
For your part, Madam, I only beg of you to consider that in the way of
procedure that I intend to follow in respect of my King, I ought not to be so
much blamed as I shall quickly be, because the Rules of Duty, and Interest of
Blood are of no value, when a Man is smitten with so lovely Eyes as yours.
Believe it, Madam, the Intrigue of the Conference proceeds from them; and if
the Duke of Gloucester had never seen them, he would have had no other thoughts
but to facilitate a good accommodation, and to hinder the streams of Blood that
will flow from this Rupture. Ah! Good God, Sir, cried the Princess, let matters
continue as they are, rather than I should be the cause of so many Calamities.
The disorders that will follow, Madam, are not to be imputed to you, said the
Duke; for the Duke of Gloucester has the greatest hand in them. It is his
affection that will suddenly be the cause of that which shall be seen by all
Europe; and his Love is so great, as that of himself he would have produced
these great effects, though you had never given your consent to it. I recall
it, Sir, replied the Princess; and I had rather spend my days in Sorrow, than
suffer so many people to become miserable for the Love of me. Would to God,
Madam! answered the Prince, you had as much compassion for the Duke of
Gloucester, as you have for those you know not; and that what I really suffer
might move you to as much pity, as an Evil which is no where as yet but in the
Imagination. How willingly should I expose my self to troubles, and how well
should I be rewarded for it, if the Princess Catharine might be one day heard
say, It is for my sake that the Duke of Gloucester has sacrificed his Country,
and he would have always considered the Interests of his Prince as his own, if
he had never loved me; But I am in the wrong, added he, Madam, to desire
rewards, seeing as yet I have deserved none; and I should be inexcusable, were
it not that, by an anticipating Idea, all the Services I intend to render you,
are so conspicuous and present in my Imagination, that I flatter my self to
have already obliged you to some kind of acknowledgment.

Having so said, he held his peace; and the Princess by his silence being put
to a plunge, knew not what to answer, till after some little force that she put
upon her self; at length she spoke to him in these terms. It is needless, Sir,
to render me all the services whereof you speak, to engage me to that which I
owe you; and considering the way how you have behaved your self toward me, I
must needs be very ungrateful if I acknowledged not my obligations to you. Time
will afford me means to give you Testimonies of my gratitude: In the mean time
believe it, Prince, I have no such inclinations as can move me to forget the
favors I have received. The Duke thanked the Princess for the Marks she gave
him of her goodness; and having told her a thousand things concerning his
passion, he took his leave, that he might go and bestir himself about the
matters he had promised. He omitted nothing; and wrought so well upon the minds
of those with whom he had to do, that the English having added new demands to
those which they had already made in the beginning of the conference; it was
finally broken up. Afterward both parties prepared themselves for all the Acts
of Hostility that War can admit of; and the Duke of Gloucester having seen the
Princess, and given her new protestations of Love, followed the English Camp.

Our Lovers being thus delivered from the disquiets into which these long
Negotiations had put them, consulted what measures to take for their future
security; and after much deliberation, they thought that to set them above
fear, they should Essay all means to make their designs approved; and then
agreed betwixt themselves about the course they should take to accomplish what
they projected: So that at length it was resolved, that Tudor should use his
utmost endeavors to get into favor with Madam de Giack, who was one that had
the ascendant upon the Duke of Burgundy, and whose friendship the Dolphin
courted also secretly. Tudor found no difficulty in gaining the good Opinion of
that Lady; but she thought it not convenient to speak of his Love as yet; the
times seemed unfit for Marriages, whilst all the Kingdom was in Confusion. And
she had reason indeed; for what ground was there to give new occasions of fury
to the King of England. Would not that have been to have put all France in
Fire, which was but already too much Harassed, by giving Catharine in Marriage,
after she had been refused to a Prince, whose Love had perhaps contributed as
much to the War, as his Ambition? Madam de Giack brought Tudor to consent to
her Opinion; and promised to him that so long as she had any credit with the
great men, there should be nothing done in prejudice of his interests.

These Assurances gave the Prince some comfort; who acquainted Catharine with
the success he had had with that Lady. They rested both satisfied, finding that
it was impossible for them to do better; but the small tranquillity which they
enjoyed, was shortly disturbed by great troubles. Tudor who persisted in
rendering Visits to Madam de Giack, and in the prospect of his Affairs, omitted
nothing that might oblige her; did suddenly, in the Opinion of Catharine, do
too much. To increase the Jealousy of the Princess, she was told also that the
Prince was in Love with that Lady; but that he lost no labor, and that she had
at least as great a kindness for him as he could have for her. These reports
wrought the effect that one may expect; and seeing the Princess had a tender
Love for Tudor, she resented cruelly his pretended infidelity. He quickly
percieved that something troubled her mind; and being conscious to himself of
no Disloyalty, he accosted her with a Countenance that spoke the Integrity of
his proceedings. How, Madam, said he; are not we crossed enough by Fortune? And
must we, during this small Interval of Tranquillity, create to our selves
troubles and afflictions? Whence arises this change that I observe in the Looks
of my Princess; and knows she not that the least sign of melancholy that Tudor
percieves there, is enough to embitter the greatest felicity of his Life? He
said no more; nor expected any thing less than reproaches, when the Princess
with a fierce aspect; Do you still pretend, said she, to abuse me? and do you
think that I am so ill informed of your treacheries as to believe your words?
How, Madam, replied Tudor; does my Princess accuse me; and can she suspect me
guilty of any thing contrary to my Love? Ah! Madam, continued he, then is all
my comfort gone; and it is enough that I have once displeased you, to deprive
me of all Joy for the rest of my Life. These words which he feelingly uttered,
put Catharine into some trouble; and seeing she earnestly desired that he might
Justify himself, she was willing to give him the occasion; so that resuming
her Discourse, How, Prince, said she, I am in the wrong then; and do you take
it to be a great sign of Love, to forsake me for Madam de Giack? Is not she the
cause that you have almost forgot a Princess, who (had it been at her own
choice) would have left all to have followed you? There is nevertheless, I
think, a great difference between her and me; and the most indifferent heart
would make distinction betwixt a Frisking Lady, and a Princess who knows not
what cunning is.

Tudor had much ado to forbear interrupting the Princess; but perceiving that
she had ended her Discourse, How, Madam, said he, all in surprise; do I Love
Madam de Giack then? Upon what ground, I pray you, have you conceived such a
suspicion? Have I so much as a thought but for my Princess? and the
indifference which is observed in me for the rest of Womankind, makes it not
sufficiently appear that you are the sole Mistress of my Soul? You know, Madam,
continued he, that you obliged me to Visit Madam de Giack; and though you were
not in my Eyes the Loveliest Princess that ever was, Do you believe that I
could be smitten with a Lady who is known to be otherwise engaged; and that
Tudor is not so ambitious as to despise a Heart which he must share with the
Duke of Burgundy. A great deal of Policy with a little Love, replied Catharine,
are many times ingredients in the Actions of Princes; and you shall see one
that appears in the Eyes of many to be very passionate, who at the Heart is
only filled with ambition. Banish that Opinion, answered Tudor; no body can
answer that Article better than my self. I know all your greatness; but if I
suspected that you gave Ear to any one who might speak of Love to you, I should
value you no more; and in the lowness of your Soul should find enough to make
me forget the perfections of your person. Why then, replied the Princess, do
you blame me; if I take it ill to see you entertain commerce with two Women at
one and the same time, and may not I be as nice as you are? Ah! Madam, answered
the Prince; are you afraid that the Wound you have given me is not dangerous
enough, unless you open it afresh? I have already told you that I should never
have waited on Madam de Giack, but by your order; and if you had not, as well
as I, thought it convenient for our Affairs, it should never have entered into
my thoughts to have rendered her a Visit. But since, upon so weak a pretext as
that, you take occasion to break up with people, you shall Judge by the
Consequences what concerns I had with that Lady. I desire not to break with
you, replied immediately the Princess; and, so far from wishing you were
guilty, I shall never have greater Joy than to find you innocent.

They told one another besides a Thousand tender and passionate things; but at
length came to an Accommodation, and parted afterward in as good intelligence
as ever they were. However the Prince would not Visit any more the Lady who had
been the cause of their falling out; and he refused so long to do it, that it
seemed he foresaw the mischief which he was to meet with on her account. But
the Princess began quickly to regret that she had broken a commerce which was
so necessary to their designs. She was the first that prayed Tudor to renew it;
and it was only for fear of another misunderstanding, that the Prince
condescended to Visit Madam de Giack again. Two days after he rendered her a
Visit; and needed not much time to regain the place that he had had in her
esteem. She reposed even greater confidence in him, than she had ever done
before; and seeing he had concealed nothing from her of what most affected his
Heart, She resolved to do the like with him; and imparted to him the secret
Love that she had for the Duke of Burgundy. Tudor was ravished to be entrusted
with that secret; and believed it might prove a means to oblige these two
Lovers to concern themselves the more in his Affairs. He did them many times
great Services in some little Janglings they had together; and the Duke of
Burgundy to repay his friends kindness, had a special care also to do him good
offices with Catharine; and took all occasions to persuade the Princess that he
would employ all his power, that nothing might be done to the prejudice of
their Love.

They lived all with content enough, when that accursed passion which had
already wrought so much trouble to our Lovers, completely ruined their hopes.
Madam de Giack was passionately in Love with the Duke; and as it is the
property of Jealousy to take Umbrage at every thing, That Lady believed that
this Prince had a Passion for the Countess of Foix; and she interpreted the
marks of Civility which he rendered her, to be Testimonies of Affection. She
began even to think him indifferent as to her; and it cannot be expressed what
havoc these thoughts made in her Soul. She fell at length into a furious
Jealousy; and thinking that the Duke ought to sacrifice all things to her, she
carried toward him with so much haughtiness, that having taken him up very
briskly on several occasions; the unhappy Lover was fain to leave off visiting
her, without being ever able to know the cause of his misfortune.

Tudor was no sooner acquainted with these transactions, but that he labored
earnestly to reconcile them; but he found all things so festered on both sides,
that when he spoke of it to the Duke, he could draw no other reason from him,
but that Madam de Giack was an ungrateful Lady; nor had he better success with
that Lady, for all the answer she gave him was, that he knew not his friend,
and that he was a very Traitor. He endeavored to mitigate her anger, but
without effect; and was obliged to retire without other information, but that
he knew them to be at extreme variance. However he was not much surprised at
all this; and being acquainted with the ways of Lovers, he thought that a few
days would make them friends again; and that all that was to be done was to
give them time that themselves might rub up again the affection that they had
mutually for each other. He failed not to visit them daily; but spoke not a
word to them of their Quarrels, believing that an interview would be more
proper to reconcile them, than all that he could say.

In the mean time matters continued as they were; and Tudor beginning to be
apprehensive that their differences might prove harder to be adjusted, than he
had imagined; thought it not fit to suffer these Lovers to accustom themselves
to Indifference, and took the resolution the sooner, because he knew that the
Duke and he were that very day to depart upon a little Journey. He went to
Madam de Giack; and accosting her with a Countenance full of heaviness: And
why, Madam, said he, will you still keep your friends in so much trouble? and
though you had no esteem for them, can you see a Prince whom your cruelty
brings to despair, suffer any longer? The Duke of Burgundy is no more himself;
and it is to no purpose for him to affect a counterfit Serenity; all the
Sentiments of his Heart are to be seen through his constraints; and it is no
hard matter to Judge that he can have no content in his Life, if you take not
quickly other measures with him. You are mistaken, Sir, answered Madam de
Giack; the Duke is not so passionate as you think: Observe if, after that he
has cruelly offended me, he has made the least step to appease my anger; and
what would you say if you were in the place of a Lover, who upon the point of
haughtiness should find that one stood it out with you? I would say, Madam,
replied Tudor, that such a Lover were passionately in Love with me; and being
out of all patience that I should have wrongfully accused him: he was unwilling
to come to Justifications, which are an usual sign of guilt. You lose time,
Sir, answered Madam de Giack; and what pains soever you take to excuse your
friend, you shall never persuade me that he Loves me; seeing after that he gave
me his promise to see Madam de Foix no more, he still continues his pretensions
to her with greater assiduity than ever. Ah! Madam, replied Tudor, is that all
the hurt that the Duke has done you? how can you think that he can deny the
civilities which the quality of Madam de Foix requires? and is not he also
obliged to that, upon the account that that Ladies Husband has always stuck to
his interests? And does he owe nothing to me, answered Madam de Giack; and
which of the two Houses, that of Foix or mine, has done most for him? Monsieur
and Madam de Foix, added she, have adhered to the Duke of Burgundy, because
they found it to their advantage; and I have renounced the friendship of my
Husband, and the duty that I owed my self; only that I might follow his person.
I know, Madam, replied Tudor, that the Duke is obliged to you; but I am
likewise assured that he is not wanting in his acknowledgments; and if you came
to a clearing, you would be the first to confess that you have taken the Allarm
without ground. Only make a Trial, continued he, if I speak Truth; and you will
see that you shall have no sooner made one step, but that the Duke shall make
another. How, answered Madam de Giack; must I advance first then? Really,
Prince, hitherto I took you for my friend; but I know not what to think on it
now; and you give me a Counsel that makes me doubt of it extremely. I have told
you, Madam, replied the Prince coldly; what I would do, if I were in your
place: you know that those who would entertain a Commerce together, must
condescend and accommodate themselves to humors: You know the Duke of Burgundy
well enough, not to be ignorant that he can hardly yield, when he thinks he has
no reason; he is persuaded that you are in the wrong on this occasion, and that
it is your part to redress it.

How cruel a thing it is to be in Love! answered Madam de Giack; and must our
Wills be forced for a few pleasures which consist only in Fancy? Well then,
Prince, I must believe you; and shall disown nothing which you shall tell the
Duke in my name, as you are together upon your Journey. That is not enough,
replied Tudor; you should write to him; a Lover believes not always all that
his friend tells him of his Mistress: and in the matter of Janglings, every
thing that comes that way is suspected; he often imagines that his friend would
disguise his misfortune; and all the circumstances that can be alleged, if
not backed by a Letter, persuade him far more of the friendship of him that
speaks, than of the sincerity of her that puts him into despair. You desire too
much, Prince, said Madam de Giack; and that I may use your own words,
condescend to people, and consider that it is enough on a Ladies part to do as
I do. I grant it, answered Tudor; but seeing you have already won so much
ground upon your self, boggle not at the rest, Madam, which is but a trifle;
and give that satisfaction to the Duke of Burgundy who adores you. There need
no more words, Prince, replied Madam de Giack; and you should require no more
of your friends; they have done enough, if people be reasonable; and it is
according to their conduct alone, that they may expect other marks of my
complaisance.

Tudor made some more attempts to bring her to what he desired; but seeing all
was to no purpose, he took his leave of her, praying her to consider seriously
what he had said. He was no sooner out of her House, but that she began to muse
upon it, and quickly repented her haughtiness; thinking with her self that
Princes expect not to be treated as those that are inferior to them; and that
there are no Intrigues to be managed with such persons, unless one have a
design to be subjected to a thousand little things which may be avoided in
other engagements.

These thoughts had greater influence upon her mind, than all the Conversation
that she had had with Tudor; she called for Paper and Ink; and had already
closed her Letter, when the Gentleman of that Princes Horses, hearing that his
Master was at her House, came to inquire for him. Madam de Giack by chance
looked out at the Window at that very instant; she asked who the Gentleman was;
and being informed that he belonged to Tudor, she gave orders to invite him up;
and it being her desire that the Prince might have the Letter, she gave it to
the Gentleman to be delivered to him.

He presently returned to his Masters Lodgings; and not finding him there, he
thought he might hear News of him at the Princess apartment; he found her just
going to take Coach, and was about to retire again, when she knowing him to be
one of Tudors retinue, and having percieved that he looked for some body,
caused him to be called, and asked him who he desired to speak with.

The Gentleman frankly confessed that he had somewhat to say to his Master; and a
Letter for him from Madam de Giack. These last words pierced the Princess to
the Heart; she found at that minute all the jealousy which that Lady had
formerly occasioned her, revived a fresh; and being desirous to know if she had
good ground for it or not, Leave that Letter with me, said she to the
Gentleman. Tudor is not here; he is just now gone with the Duke of Burgundy:
but I shall take care that the Letter be sent to him by a Post, who is to be
dispatched to them by and by. There it is, Madam, said the Gentleman, putting
it into her hand; it will ease me of a great trouble, seeing I could not carry
it my self, without delaying a Journey that he has ordered me to make about his
Affairs. The Princess gave no signs of that which troubled her mind; she would
not so much as return into her Chamber, least that Letter should give occasion
of some suspicion; but having performed a short Devotion in the Church whither
she was going, she returned to her Lodgings: And as soon as she was come, shut
her self up in her Closet, where she took the fatal Letter out of her Pocket,
and having opened it, found it conceived in these terms. THE LETTER OF Madam de
Giack TO THE DUKE OF BURGUNDY.
IF extreme jealousy be a sign of an infinite Love, nothing certainly can come
near my passion; but who can arm themselves against suspicion, when they have
as much ground for it as you have given me? and what Lady could forgive the
pretensions you make to another? pretend not to reassure me by reasons of
Policy wherewith you have already endeavored to satisfy me; that is not
current Coin with a Lover so sharp sighted as I am.




The End of the First Part.
TUDOR, A PRINCE of WALES.
An Historical Novel.
The Second Part.
THat Letter which had no direction, had almost killed the tender and
affectionate Princess with grief. She made no doubt, but that it was addressed
to Tudor; and lying under the lashes of Jealousy, How, Traitor, cried she
immediately, is this the way that you repay the sincere friendship that I had
for you? and were the Testimonies of Love, which with so much solicitude you
gave me, but Artifices then, to impose upon me with greater severity? Are
these, Villain, the effects of the promises you have made to me? and what is
become of the Oaths which in this I thought so pleasant, that they gave me the
Assurances of a constant and perpetual Love? I ask not of you, unthankful Man,
added she, that you should have a regard to these Obligations which any else in
your place would have thought himself bound in to me: I will only convince you
by the tenderness of my heart; and that tender heart which you have now
deceived, will make appear to you that your carriage denotes a Cheat beyond the
usual Knavery of Men. She said no more; but in her Countenance there appeared
so great signs of sadness, that it was easy to be perceived, that her grief
was not in the least abated. She pretended some little distemper, that she
might not be interrupted in her thoughts, and then renewed her complaints
against Unfortunate Tudor.

But if that Letter made so great an impression on the Heart of that tender
Princess; yet she alone suffered not all the cruel effects of it. Madam de
Giack, who knew not what was become of her Letter, expected daily an answer;
and the least Noise that was made in her Antichamber seemed to her to be a
Messenger from the Duke of Burgundy. It was long before she could think that he
had forgot her; but at length hearing no News from him, she began to be
persuaded of his Inconstancy; and was so confirmed in her suspicions, that she
fully abandoned her self to Jealousy. She broke forth in as many complaints at
least against the Duke, as the Princess had made against her Lover: but she
stopped not there; and seeing she thought that she had extraordinary cause to
complain of him, to which she added the resentment of the slight which in this
last occasion she imagined he gave her; she fell into thoughts altogether
contrary to the Character of a Woman that is in Love; and entertaining them
with more pleasure than she ought, she quickly hatched strange designs to
obtain the revenge which she resolved. It is true, that the Love which she had
had for that Prince came often into her mind, and it seemed that sometimes she
upbraided her self for the fatal resolution that she took against him; but
these considerations at length wrought no great effect, and the memory of these
last offenses carrying greater sway with her, than the remains of an almost
extinct passion; she listened to nothing but her own Resentment.

In the mean time the Dolphin had notice of the misunderstanding that was
between these Lovers, and was willing to make advantage of their quarrels; upon
which design he managed some secret interviews with Madam de Giack. They fell
both quickly into one Opinion; and seeing the Dolphin thought he had reason to
be ill satisfied with the Duke, and that his too great power gave him some
Umbrage; he frankly declared himself to Madam de Giack, and made appear to her
what pleasure he would have if he could ever meet with an opportunity of being
revenged on him.

The Sympathy of humor begot a strict Union betwixt them; so that they
suddenly resolved the ruin of that Prince, and busied their thoughts only about
the means to accomplish their design with greater facility: that put them for
some time into a puzle; but at length the Duke himself gave them the occasion.
He was as much in Love with Madam de Giack as he had ever been; and being
impatient to live any longer without seeing her, he thought himself obliged to
pass by all that she had done to him. He wrote her a Letter wherein he
expressed so much passion, as might have changed the Mind of any other; but
Madam de Giack was still so possessed with the Opinion of that Princes
Inconstancy, that she had not the least regard to all that had passed between
the Duke and her. She read the Letter however that she had received from him
two or three times over; and stopping at that place where he prayed her to come
to him: Yes, yes, Traitor, said she, I shall come to thee as thou desire; but
it shall be with a design to imitate thee, and to revenge my self on thy
Treachery. She sent immediately to entreat the Dolphin to come to the place
where they used to meet when they had any thing to Communicate to one another.
The Prince failed not; and Madam de Giack putting into his hands the Letter
which she had recieved from the Duke, the occasion, Sir, is fair, said she, to
catch that Traitor; he must be satisfied, and I Will go to him; I have cunning
enough to use him as he has dealt by me. Believe it, Prince, I shall strain my
humor so that he shall suspect nothing of my designs; and it is your part,
while this commerce lasts, to find some pretext to draw him into what snare you
please. I shall so order matters that he himself shall run his head into the
Noose; and though he had a thousand suspicions of what may befall him, I know
how to remove them; and without much trouble I shall give you an occasion to
free your self from the anxiety that he may put you into. That Treason at first
seemed horrible to the Dolphin: he had indeed a Pique against the Duke of
Burgundy, but he thought that way of revenge too base; and it is certain he
would never have embraced it, had no body but that Lady persuaded him. But she
got those whom she knew to have greatest influence upon him to back her
proposal. They spoke to him of the Dukes Ambition, and of his design that he
had always had of Supremacy: Afterward they put him in Mind of the Murder of
the Duke of Orleans, and the carrying away of the Queen, when she was at Tours;
and persuading him that all these Actions had no other aim but the Crown, they
so far prevailed upon him, that he condescended to all they desired.

It was resolved then that whilst Madam de Giack was with the Duke, the Dolphin
should cause an interview be proposed to him under pretext of Affairs of State;
and that they should take that occasion to dispatch him: As soon as the Plot
was laid, that Lady went to him. He received her with much Affection, and,
without any clutter of Reproaches, admitted her to the same place that she had
formerly held in his Heart. Madam de Giack desired not to come to
Justifications, and, unhappily for the Duke, she said not a word of the Letter
which she thought he had received from Tudor; for there was no appearance that
she would have persisted in her cruel resolution, had she been convinced that
he had not done her that last indignity which filled her Heart with so much
rage. Two days after came a Courier from the Dolphin to the Prince, as it was
agreed upon. The Duke opened the Packet; and finding that he desired a
Conference at Montereau, he found himself in some perplexity how to make him an
answer: For though he was sufficiently disposed to grant what he desired, in
prospect that it might tend to the good of the State; yet some just fears made
him cautious, seeing he was not ignorant that he had given him cause oftener
than once not to be well pleased with him. He thought it then unsafe to trust
that Prince; but Madam de Giack came in purposely to dissipate all his
apprehensions. She gave him to understand, that he would be accountable for all
the Evils that might happen to France, if upon idle apprehensions he refused an
Interview, which would be of great advantage to the public; and that in fine,
he did wrong to distrust the Dolphins word, who being reconciled to him in good
earnest, might probably break off again; when he percieved that he had to do
with a Jealous and diffident Prince. These words wrought more upon him than all
the Counsels that his friends gave him to shun the Resentment of that Prince.
He sent him a Courier by whom he gave him advice that he would not fail to come
to Montereau-fautyonne the day prefixed; in effect it was his destiny which he
could not avoid, and with some Guards he took his Journey; but it was sadly
fatal to him, for he was killed by some of the Dolphins Servants just as he
alighted to Salute that Prince, who waited for him on thc Bridge.

All France was surprised at the death of the Duke of Burgundy; for which the
Dolphin was generally blamed by all, and by the great disturbances that upon
that occasion happened shortly after; he well percieved how dear it cost him,
for having followed so bad Counsels. Madam de Giack was ravished to hear that
her revenge had so well succeeded; but Unfortunate Tudor, who foresaw the
consequences of that accident, was no sooner informed of it but that it struck
him to the Heart; he had not left the Duke of Burgundy until he went to
Montereau, and he took that time to go see the Princess; to whom he had written
twice without receiving any answer. He could not Imagine the reason of that
silence; and desiring to know the cause of it, he went to her Apartment so soon
as he came to Troyes where the Court was then. He found the Princess alone in
her Closet, and expected his usual Reception; when Catharine, looking fiercely
on him with eyes that darted out the anger that she was in; Begone, Traitor,
said she, and go take your advantage of the death of the Duke of Burgundy: He
will no more now interrupt your Amorous engagements, and I am much afraid that
the hinderance he gave to your pleasures, has cost him his Life. It is
impossible to express the effect that these words had on the Soul of
Unfortunate Tudor: He was long without knowing where he was, or what was become
of him; but coming a little to himself again, he desired to know of the
Princess what she had to lay to his charge; but she gave him no time to ask the
question; for, rising from her Couch, Once more begone, said she, and know that
I will reason the Case no more with you. At the instant she opened the Door,
and that passionate Lover, seeing himself thus banished by his Mistress, was
obliged to obey her, without being able to persuade her to hear one word for
his Justification. The truth is, the sad condition that he was in spoke enough
to have convinced the Princess of his Innocence, had she not been prepossessed
with an Opinion of his Infidelity; but she had by her that which was enough to
overcome all the Scruples that she might have had on that matter; and on a time
when she was a little too much urged by him, she pulled out of her Pocket the
fatal Letter that we have spoken of; and casting her Eyes upon it: All this,
said she, is written to my sincere Lover; and at the same time that he gives me
the greatest Protestations of kindness, he endeavors to persuade another, that
all his Carriage with me is but a design of Policy. No, no, Traitor, you shall
deceive me no more; and least I may be again surprised by your Artifices, I
know I should distrust my own weakness; and that the surest way to Guard
against it, is to break off all farther commerce with thee.

Whilst the Princess persisted in such like Discourses, and Tudor gave way to
despair, Philip Duke of Burgundy, who succeeded his Father, contrived a
terrible revenge against the Dolphin. He called together all that he thought
favored him, and having taken Counsel of the most judicious, he sent one of
his confidents to the King of England, to negotiate the League with him; which
put France within a Fingers breadth of utter ruin.

Most of the Grandees sided that way, and were the more easily inclined to it;
in that the Duke made use of the Kings name to authorize his actions. The truth
is, he disposed of that Prince according to his pleasure; and made it very well
appear by what he undertook, and accomplished sometime after: For he not only
concluded the Marriage of Henry with Catharine; but was likewise the cause that
the King declared the Dolphin incapable of succeeding to the Crown: and to
complete the Dukes revenge, that King banished his own Son, by a Decree of
Parliament, and acknowledged the King of England for his lawful Heir.

After these astonishing and furious proceedings, Henry came to Troyes, where
the Court was; he took upon him the Government; made sure of Paris and the
chief Cities of the Kingdom; and afterward prepared for the Marriage of the
Princess, who procured him so much grandeur. Tudor sometime before was
advertised by the Duke of Burgundy of all that passed; and knowing how little
power he had to hinder it, he desired to be comprehended in the Treaty; and
seeing as he lost the hopes of his Love, he set no value upon all the
advantages of Fortune; he chose rather to remit his pretensions, than to see
himself obliged to leave those places where he might still hope to enjoy the
sight of his Lovely Princess.

He led as sorrowful a Life as can be imagined; but when he himself was a
witness of the Marriage of Henry and Catharine at Troyes, no despair was like
to his; and all that I can say of it would be far short of the severity of his
sufferings. He was almost dead for grief; and he had never outlived his
affliction, if it were not evident by daily experience, that the greatest
Crosses have indeed power enough to over-burthen us, but seldom the force to
end our days.

In the mean time Catharine was in as bad a Condition as Tudor; and though she
was haughty enough to Curb the Sentiments that she still entertained for him,
yet she could not look upon him when they met, without speaking many things in
his favor. Yea, and sometimes she thought that she had done amiss in judging
him guilty; and to her it seemed that the Melancholy he was in, since the time
that she had used him so ill, might serve far more to justify him, than the
Letter we have spoken of was able to condemn him. But she was much more
confirmed in her thoughts, when she saw that that Prince continued no more
commerce with Madam de Giack; and that so far from retaining any esteem for
her, he could not hear her named but with horror. All these considerations put
her many times in trouble: but virtue at length triumphs over weakness; and at
least it contributed to make her reject her resolutions which sometimes she had
to listen to a clear information.

In the mean time Unfortunate Tudor found by degrees that his Crosses were too
hard for him; and there is nothing truer than that at length they would have
ended his days, had not an accident happened which revived in him some small
hopes: For some Months there had been at Court an Italian called Pavini, who
ventured at Fortune-telling, and whose Reputation was in so much Vogue by many
surprising things he had told to most part of the Nobility, that he was looked
upon as a person of extraordinary knowledge. He cast the Horoscope of the King
of Enggland; but that Prince had no cause to be pleased with it; and that I may
not trouble you with all the accidents of his Fortune, it is enough I tell you,
that he assured him his Life would prove short, his death extraordinary; and
that though he should not be killed, yet he should have thousands of enemies to
fight with, who should never leave him till they put him in his Grave.

The Duke of Florence, Brother to the King, had the same curiosity as his
Brother had had, and his Fate was not more happy than Henry's; he was to lose
his Life in the first Battle that he should fight. These Princes were not well
pleased with such fatal predictions: But as the Prophecy of the Italian
concerning the Kings death seemed foolish, so they were not much troubled
thereat; and they had no great apprehensions, but when they considered that
most of the things which he had foretold others were fulfilled.

But in a short time Pavini was fully believed; for the Duke of Clarence* was
killed in an engagement which happened in Anjou between his Forces and the
Troops of the Dolphin commanded by the Earl of Buchan, whom that Prince had
made Constable of France.

That accident made the knowledge of the Italian to be admired; all people
consulted him, and Tudor who had slighted him was one of the first that heard
him with greatest confidence. This man increased the confidence that Prince
Tudor had in him, by some particular things which he told him; for being
together in a Chamber, and he having cast his figures, and done all that his
art required: Seigneur, said he, I know not what to think of this figure; you
must needs be naturally inconstant, and Fortune is pleased to treat you
according to the disposition of your temper: For I find that at this very
instant there is a considerable Cross which puts you into despair; and I see
that you forget it immediately, though no extraordinary alteration happen in
your Affairs; but there is an odder thing still that I must tell you, you are
betrayed by a person who loves you, and who is so far from forsaking your
concerns, that that person cleaves as close to them as ever. Pavini made some
pawse afterward before he spoke again; but then renewing his Discourse, Here is
a thing, Seigneur, said he, which much abates my wonder; you have lately had a
great Cross, and yet not from your enemies; for the person that is the cause of
it takes it as ill as you do. Unriddle this your self, added he, if you can;
for I confess for my part, I understand nothing of it; all that I can tell you
plainly, is, that you are much in Love with some thing, and that though you
have lost all hopes of possessing it, yet you shall, though you expect no such
matter: But by that you are in danger of shortning your Life, and have a care
also that your death be not fatal.

Pavini told Tudor no more, but what he said was enough to make him ponder
matters; for who could not be surprised; and setting aside the point of
Treason, was not the rest so conform to that which had already happened, that
it might be easily understood? He began then to promise himself better Fortune,
and that faint beam of hope finding a place in his mind, it was quickly
percieved that he had lost one half of his Melancholy. Queen Catharine took
notice of it as well as the rest; She would needs know the cause thereof, and
having information that Pavini told all people that he had no more Skill in the
Stars, and that he lost all his measures in the Case of Tudor; the Queen was
curious to know what he had told that Prince, thinking that it must of
necessity be from that that he had taken comfort. She sent for Pavini when she
was all alone, and having commanded him to inform her of that Princes Fortune;
he frankly confessed that it put him to a puzle, and that he found great
difficulty to conceive the meaning of the Figure he had cast for him. He told
her likewise all that he had said to Tudor; and she could have interpreted a
great part of it her self, if she had pleased; but she discovered not her
thoughts to him, and having employed him in something upon her own account, she
dismissed him.

Her Conversation with Pavini gave her occasion to reflect on his great Skill;
and persuading her self that he was infallible, She found her self divided
between discontent of having unjustly accused that Prince, and Joy of knowing
that he was not to be always Unfortunate. But there were a great many things
that suddenly thwarted that weak satisfaction: She called to mind the Letter
which she had, and finding therein more appearance than in all the Skill of
Pavini, she reckoned his art sometime foppery, and many times accused her self
of too much credulity. However she was in danger of taking the Princes part,
before she could wholly Sacrifice him to her suspicions; if her virtue had not
come to her Assistance, and had not made her somewhat scrupulous in all that
concerned him. That thought alone made her absolutely condemn Tudor; she was
willing for her own Repose to think him guilty, and for that bout she resisted
all temptations that she had, to come to a clearing with him.

But Pavini gave her suddenly occasion of obtaining another Victory over her
self: He cast the Horoscope of that Princess, as she had ordered him; he had a
Mind to discourse with her, and taking his opportunity for an audience without
interruption, Madam, said he to her, if I was amazed at the strange accidents
that I found in the Fortune of Tudor, I must freely tell you, that I know not
what to say of the things I have observed in yours; for every thing in it
appears to me more extraordinary than another. But who would not be surprised
as well as I, when I see the greatest Princess in the World unhappy amidst her
Grandures. Yet that is nothing, continued he; and there are so many others who,
in a Condition not far from that you are in, have had the like thoughts, that I
should not much trouble my self with that Circumstance; if it were not
accompanied with many others, which seem to me directly opposite to common
sense: For who will not blame you, Madam, for contributing alone more to your
own Crosses, than all others that are conconcerned in them? Yet after all that
you endeavor not your own ease; and I percieve that you oppose the means which
might give you satisfaction. Yet you will not be always in the same opinion;
and one day or other you will leave off to be cruel to your self; but as it is
fatal to you to do evil to that which affects you most, you shall be the cause
of the death of the only person whom you passionately Love; and which puts me
in amazement without recovery, you shall not have the least trouble at it.

The Queen would hear him no longer, she retired into her Closet; and there was
she forced to struggle with her humor that she might stifle a Thousand
thoughts which declared in favor of Tudor. All that Pavini had told her seemed
to furnish her with weapons against her self; but at length she conquered her
own weakness, and began to taste the quiet that she had acquired by her virtue,
when she found her troubles again renewed by a superveening accident.

The King her Husband made War vigorously against the Dolphin, he took from him
the Towns of Meaux and Compiegne; and was going to the relief of Cosne which
was Besieged by the Army of that Prince, when he was taken sick at Melun, and
was forced to stop. But his Disease rather increasing than abateing, he went to
the Castle of Vincennes, where he was hardly arrived, but that his distemper
fulfilled the prediction of Pavini, and carried him out of this World. So
terrible a death occasioned certainly much grief to the Queen; but it is not to
be thought that she was so much afflicted, as she would have been, had she
married that Prince for Love.

In the mean time Tudor was not in the least sorry for it; on the contrary he
thought that by that means his troubles might come to an end; and trusting as
much to the prediction of Pavini as to his own Innocence, he flattered himself
with the hopes that the Queen would reflect on his Love, and that at length
after so many Crosses, she would perhaps reward him for all the pains that she
had made him unjustly suffer. He was not altogether mistaken; for that Princess
who had nothing now to object against the passion which she felt for him,
suffered her self gently to listen to every thing that spoke in his favor; and
if she desired some little clearing, it was only because she Judged it
necessary to convince that Prince that she had reason to treat him as she had
done.

Matters being so well disposed on either side, the Queen went to England;
Tudor followed her: and these Lovers began then to look on one another with so
passionate Eyes, that it was easy for them to percieve that their
reconciliation would not be difficult. But though Tudor knew that the Queen was
all sweetness, yet he could not so far prevail upon himself as to speak his
mind: And he had already found many occasions to discourse to her of his Love,
without being so bold as to venture on it; yea, and he had long pined away
under the pain of a bashful and constrained passion, if that Princess had not
afforded him the means of disburdening his Heart: On a day when he was alone
with her, and after a long discourse concerning the State of the War, I
believe, said that Princess to him, that when all is done we shall very shortly
lose the hope of preserving the Kingdom of France; and the Fortune of War is so
favorable for the Dolphin, that there is but little appearance we can long
resist his progresses. I daily hear that those who Espoused the Interest of the
Late King my Husband, forforsake us, and I see nothing but Treachery on all
hands. There is no Trust to be given now adays, Madam, answered Tudor; but to
such as we know perfectly well; and yet we see that for most part the very same
fail in their promises as well as others; and there is so little sincerity in
the World, that they who make most Protestations are commonly the people who
least mind their word. You are well acquainted with some of that Character,
replied the Queen; but though you seem to disapprove their procedure, yet I am
confident you are too much a friend to them to wish them any punishment. You
have reason, answered Tudor, with a sigh; and for all the Crosses I have met
with yet, I find that my Heart is so tender as to adore those who have cruelly
used me. That is to say, replied the Queen, that you have so good an Opinion of
your own Conduct, as not to be willing to Condemn your self. It is to say,
Madam, answered Tudor, that notwithstanding your Rigor, you are in my Eyes
still the same as you were when you were no more but Princess Catharine; and
that then I might have flattered my self that to her I was not altogether a
thing indifferent. Put me not in mind, replied the Queen, of the ground you
gave me to be displeased with you; and none but one of my goodness would look
upon you after all that you have done to me. Say rather, Madam, answered Tudor,
that none but one of so much cruelty as your self, would punish people with so
great severity, and still conceal from them the Pretext which you take to
render them miserable. Pretexts are never used, replied the Queen, but when
reasons are wanting; and it is to no purpose to invent when one has so good
proofs as you have furnished me with. Ah! Madam, replied Tudor, not to offend
you; I have not the gift of knowing thoughts, and I ought indeed to be guilty
to find out the cause that makes you accuse me. I know, answered the Queen,
that Tudor will not be convinced without evidence; The must be satisfied, and
here it is, continued she, giving him the Letter that we have spoken of; what
can he object against this? the Prince took the Letter; and having read it all
over: Well then, Madam, replied he; and what is this to me? How, Prince, said
the Queen; should you ask me that question: and is it not your part to declare
to me how far your Intrigues went with Madam de Giack; if you think fit that I
should know any thing of it? I am not at all concerned, Madam, said he, in what
you see; nor can I give you any account of it: And you know better than I,
added he, giving her back the Letter, that this concerns the Affair that the
Duke of Burgundy had with that Lady.

However she wrote that Letter to you, answered the Princess; and I had it from
the Gentleman of your Horse. The Gentleman of my Horse had no Letter for me,
replied Tudor; and when, I pray, did he give it you Madam? Immediately after
you went away upon your Journey with the Duke of Burgundy, answered the Queen.
Ah! Madam, replied Tudor after a little musing, that may very well be; I just
left that Lady when I came to take my leave of you, and I urged her so much to
write to that poor Prince, with whom she had quarrelled, as to incline her to
write that note. Why did she not give it to your self before you left her?
answered the Princess. She would do nothing, Madam, replied Tudor; and she
thought perhaps better on it after that I was gone out of her House. But what
does she mean, said the Princess, by that Jealousy she speaks of; and explain
to me what she intends by these reasons of Policy.

It is no hard matter to satisfy you Madam, answered Tudor; She was Jealous of
Madam de Foix, and she was so far from hearing any reason as to that matter,
that she would never give ear to what I told her concerning the Civilities
which the Duke was obliged to show that Lady. These are the Politic reasons
whereof she complains; and wherewith she says that he would have satisfied her:
and that is also the passage which has made me suffer so much, said the Queen;
and which would have created you much trouble, if it be true that you have an
esteem for me still; but seeing you knew your self to be innocent, Why did you
not undeceive me? and is that the way to Love, to leave people to those
disquiets which rob them of their repose. Ah! Madam, replied Tudor; it is I, if
you please, who have cause to complain; and to ask you, if that be the way to
esteem one, to banish him as you banished me out of your Closet? I thought you
guilty, answered the Queen; and could I give you greater evidence that you were
dear to me, than by testifying the resentment that I had of your inconstancy?
And could I, replied Tudor, make appear the respect that I had for you any
better way, than by obeying your commands. Ah! Tudor, answered the Princess;
who is she that would not have dealt as cruelly as I, upon the Ground that I
had to be displeased with you? No, Madam, replied Tudor; another who had Loved
better would not have been so ready to condemn me: She would have reflected on
her own Sentiments, and finding that she had no passion but for her Lover, she
would have likewise thought that he could have Loved none but her. But what
could one think, answered the Queen, when there were so many appearances
against you? But what should become of me, Madam, replied Tudor, did I but
listen to all that makes against you? You have nothing to say against me, said
the Queen, of equal force to that Letter. You cannot reproach me, answered
Tudor, with any Marriage that gives a sign of ambition. Ah! Tudor, replied the
Princess, how can you urge me on that account: and though there had been no
misunderstanding betwixt you and me, had I right to oppose my self to a thing
that was concluded by my Father, and on which depended all the peace and quiet
of the State? You were always, Madam, answered Tudor, in a Condition of
speaking one word to me; and though nothing can give comfort in adversities of
that nature; yet it is no small matter for a Lover to have some cause of being
flattered that nothing but the Interests of a Crown would have out-voted his
Love. Could not you have told your self that, replied the Queen; and did not I
on Thousands of occasions give sufficient signs of tenderness to make you Judge
that I could esteem no Man besides your self. It is hard, Madam, said Tudor, to
believe things which we see visibly overthrown by other matters so repugnant to
them: And Imagine not that I give much credit yet to these marks of goodness
which now you are pleased to show me, if you pretend they should be attended
with so fatal a destiny as that wherewith you have already tried me. No, no,
Tudor, answered the Queen; you have nothing now to fear upon that account, I
have paid my duty to my Country, by the Sacrifice that I made to it of my
Heart; and it is enough that once I have Married against my Will; now I think I
have reason to please my self: Since I have found you Innocent, I have again
placed all my affection on you; and if you continue in the same Sentiments that
heretofore you were in, it shall be your own fault if I give you not ground to
lay aside all doubts of my real esteem for you. Ah! Madam, replied Tudor,
casting himself at her Feet; how little should I value the evils that I have
suffered for so good a Princess: and how shall I ever be able to make appear
how much I adore her? No, Madam, continued he, that is not to be expressed; and
if you knew the State of my Heart at this very hour, you would not in the least
doubt but that it is more tender and affectionate than ever.

I not only accept of the favor you bestow upon me, said he; but I accept of
it with Resentments made up of Joy and Respect; and if you would have me to be
the happiest of men, hasten only the day wherein I may enjoy so great a
Blessing. Then shall I make appear, Madam, that I have all that I can desire,
by the possession of my Amiable Princess; and that with such a Happiness, I
would not change Fortune with the greatest Princes in the World. I am glad,
answered the Queen, to find you in that Opinion, and be persuaded that it shall
be none of my fault if you be not very shortly satisfied.

Tudor, as duty obliged him, thanked the Queen; and these two Lovers parted so
fully content with one another, that they thought no more upon all those Evils
which by their own fault they had endured.

Tudor found his Fortune at that Pitch, to which nothing could be added, or
more desired; and the Queen thought that People should be satisfied when they
are assured of the Affection of those whom they intimately Love. Nevertheless
she found her Joy somewhat troubled, when she reflected on what Pavini had told
her; and she could not comfort her self when she considered that the kindness
which she had for Tudor, must cost him his Life.

She discovered sometimes her fears to her passionate Lover; but he endeavored
still to reassure her, and used all Arguments to persuade her that such kind of
Blades did more frequently miss than hit the Mark; and that they were indebted
to mere chance when they find their predictions verified. On a day when they
had entertained discourse on that Subject, Mind me, said the Queen to him; I
cannot but give credit to the sayings of Pavini, and all that he has said is
fulfilled so plainly according to his predictions, that I am extremely
apprehensive of what he has spoken as to you. It were far better, added she,
that we should still ^^ain the fame mutual affection for one another, without
proceeding farther; and that I should by that means preserve one who is dear
unto me, and not expose him to the destiny wherewith he is threatened by my
embraces. Ah! Madam, replied the Prince; if any of the two ought to tremble, it
should only be Tudor, and he it is that must die: but he sets no such value on
Life, as to refuse to give it, if it be by that Sacrifice alone that he can
deserve so great a Blessing as that which you have promised him; and I should
not pay enough for that I prise, though I should end my days an hour after that
you had given me real proofs of your kindness. Ah! Tudor, answered the Queen,
put me not in mind that I am to lose you; that is a thing that represents it
self so cruelly to me, that I cannot but at present feel the sensible effects
of it; and can one be separated from what they Love, and survive their grief?
Have you still these thoughts, Madam; and do you believe the predictions of
Pavini? replied Tudor: Do you not remember that you are not to be the least
troubled at my death: I am not so unjust to my Princess as to believe it; and
considering the goodness she has been pleased to testify to me, I am persuaded
on the contrary, that her Fate would depend on mine; and that, if she should
not die by the same blow that sent me to my grave, she would at least lie under
so great affliction and sorrow, that such a Life as she would afterward lead,
should be reckoned a real death. You do me right, Tudor, answered the Queen,
and what you have now said to me fully confirms me. No, Pavini is Dim-sighted
as to the future, and the Prince of Wales cannot meet with the least
misfortune; but that I shall resent it as bitterly as he. Let us complete what
Destiny intends for us, and let us endeavor to render our Fortune happy, by
preventing those things which may replunge us into Crosses, such as those that
we have lately past.

Whilst the Queen was so well disposed for Tudor, Fortune prepared new
impediments to their Love. The Duke of Gloucester who was still taken up in the
Wars since the conference at Meulan, was chosen for the Command and Government
of Affairs in England, during the minority of Henry the Sixth, his Nephew, who
was but as yet an Infant in the Cradle. That Prince accepted the Commission
with Joy; and the more willingly inclined to the Journey, in that he retained
still for the Queen the same Sentiments that he felt at first sight of her. In
effect, he no sooner saw her again, but that his flames were powerfully revived
in his Breast: She seemed more beautiful to him than all that ever he had seen;
and seeing his quality of Regent obliged him to speak frequently with her,
these many Conversations made him quickly passionately in Love.

He prevented that Princess in granting all that he thought she might desire;
and became in a word so civil and obliging, that it was very hard not to
entertain an esteem for him. Nevertheless, the Queen was so far from being
pleased with that complaisance, that she was much troubled at it so soon as she
discovered the cause; and she observed such a Conduct with him, that she always
endeavored to avoid the occasions which he sought to discourse to her of his
Love. But all that Circumspection was unprofitable; and on a day when they had
had a conference concerning some matters of State, wherein the Queen told the
Duke that he had very well discharged his duty: You give me, said he, Madam,
praises which are not due to me; and I have contributed far less than you, to
the success of what I have told you. The Queen not knowing what to make of
that; How Prince, replied she, unfold to me that Riddle: and what hand can I
have had in a matter whereof I did not so much as know? That hindered not,
Madam, answered the Duke, but that you wished that it might succeed as it did;
and it was enough for the Duke of Gloucester, knowing your intentions, fully to
comply with them. I am much obliged to you, replied the Queen; but I shall
refer all that, if you please, to the Zeal which you have for the Service of
the King, and I shall like it as well. You are in the wrong, Madam, answered
the Duke, not to take it as done for your sake alone; and you should believe
that Love will be always more powerful in my Heart, than all the Sentiments of
Nature and Duty. I am forced to tell you, continued he, that I am nothing
changed from what you saw me at Meulan: But be not alarmed at this, Madam, I
have no thoughts that may give you cause of complaint; and I know very well
that that which has happened since my fatal departure, hinders me from having
any thing to pretend to more. However I Love you not with less Sincerity than
if I had ground to believe that you would one day render me happy. Pity so
wretched a Lover, Madam, who though his Passion be so violent, yet is still so
respectful as to conceive nothing contrary to the virtue of a Princess whom I
shall adore with such Sentiments as long as I live. These words gave the Queen
some comfort; and having considered a little what answer she should give him,
she at length in this manner broke her silence. You ought not to doubt, Sir,
but that the knowledge you give me of your passion causes me much trouble; and
you oblige me to have so great an esteem for you, that I cannot forbear to wish
you a better Fortune than that to which you expose your self: Consider what it
is to Love without hope; and I am assured that if you reflect upon it as you
ought, you will ease your self of a great many troubles that you are about to
create both to your self and me; if you persist in that unhappy passion. I am
not now, Madam, replied the Duke, to make that reflection; I have used all
arguments with my self to overcome my own weakness: But, to be short, it is too
hard for me; and after a Thousand attempts, all that I can gain upon my self,
is to admire you as a Lover full of tender affection; and to speak to you as a
man who is hindered by sacred ties to tell you all he thinks. Believe it,
Madam, I can reconcile most respectful words, with most languishing looks; and
nothing but my Eyes shall ever testify to my Princess, that the Unfortunate
Duke of Gloucester is born to love her with extreme Passion. Ah! Prince,
answered the Queen, banish those Sentiments which abuse you; and do you not
percieve that you already begin a discourse contrary to the resolution you have
taken; and that you declare your Love at the same time you promise me never to
speak more of it. I had not been aware of it, Madam, replied the Duke, if you
had not given me notice; but I shall for the future be more punctual in keeping
my word. I shall not so much as complain of your cruelty, how severe soever you
may be to me; and I know but one thing that may make me lose the measures which
I intend to observe in so tender and respectful a Love. Ah! Prince, have a
care, said the Queen; your Passion wants the respect you speak of, if you think
that you can ever dispense with the silence to which you oblige your self; it
is that promise alone which makes me to day suffer a Conversation that is so
contrary to the duty I owe my self, and which renewed once more, would make me
lose all the esteem that your civil carriage has gained from me. These
Sentiments, Madam, wherewith you flatter me are too precious, than that I
should not preserve them at what expense soever; and if the Duke of Gloucester
never find that you intend to make some Man else happy, whilst he suffers so
much, he shall perhaps convince you by his carriage, that he deserved the
blessing himself; if a Brother had not been before possessed of that happiness,
and had not for ever deprived him of the hopes of it.

These words made the Queen conceive how great difficulty she was like to meet
with in the design she had for Tudor. She was troubled on this consideration;
but being willing to dismiss the Duke before she gave her self wholly to these
thoughts: Prince, said she, either think of putting in execution what you have
promised, or resolve never to see me more; for, to be short, I find my self too
much to be blamed for entertaining such discourses with you; and it is not
enough to have good intentions, we must likewise do our duty. It is true,
Madam, replied the Duke; and I know that as well as you: Wherefore my whole
study shall be to satisfy you; and I Will tell you no more that I Love you,
because you are displeased with such discourses. However, I pray you believe
that my passion shall neither be more nor less, what countenance soever I put
on; and the Fate of the Duke of Gloucester indispensably obliges him to the
Service of the most lovely Queen in the World.

So soon as he had said so, he withdrew and left the Queen in an inconceivable
trouble. Tudor came in at the same instant, and finding that Princess in a
condition that suffered none to doubt of her grief, What has befallen you,
Madam, said he presently; and has destiny still new Crosses in reserve for me?
Yes, Tudor, replied the Queen; Fate is ready again to make me suffer; and the
Duke of Gloucester opposes my happiness and the satisfaction I intended to give
you. At the same time she told him of the Conversation she had had with him,
and then renewing her discourse: Consider, Prince, said she, to what I expose
you; if I follow my Inclination which bids me content you; and is not that the
way to make Pavini's word true, so to deliver you up to the rage of a despised
Lover? What can he do, Madam, replied Tudor; and besides does he not give
evidence of so much virtue, as that we need not fear he will dishonor himself
by any base Act. Ah Tudor, answered the Queen; that shadow of virtue which
beguiles you, does not so much deceive me; I have dived into the very heart of
the Duke through all his disguises, and he puts on that counterfeit Cloak of
Civility, that he may only fetch his first blow, and wheedle me, if I may so
say, to listen to the discourse of his passion. Consider what is to be expected
from one who thinks himself slighted, and whose power in this place can
accomplish what ever he intends. What has my Princess then resolved to do?
replied Tudor; to Love you as long as I live, answered the Queen; but rather to
die a Thousand times than to be to you the cause of those calamities, whereof
the very thought chills me with horror. But is it not, Madam, said he, to
expose me to the most cruel of pains, always to delay that which might render
me happy; and what more can I expect from the wrath of the Duke of Gloucester?
Good God, Tudor, replied the Queen; urge me no more to that: You know my
weakness, but your preservation will be far dearer to me than all my pleasures;
let us join both together, if it may be done, answered Tudor; and seeing you
have so much goodness as to have so great care of my life; let us find out a
remedy to cure you of these obliging fears, and which may at the same time
afford me the satisfaction that I should meet with in the accomplishment of
your promises. That is impossible, replied the Queen; not so much as you think,
Madam, answered the Prince; and if an expedient could be found, would you be
against it? No, Tudor, replied the Queen; and so far from refusing it, I would
consent to it with all my Heart. Consider then, Madam, if you can resolve to
marry me secretly.

There is no necessity that people should have so many witnesses of their
happiness; and we may find some so faithful, as we need not fear that they will
publish our secret unless we give them leave. But are there no consequences to
be feared, said the Queen? and were there no other but the effects of Marriage;
have not I reason to be circumspect? Can we want persons to whom we may trust,
answered Tudor; and can so small a matter as that make you scrupulous? the
Queen stood sometime speechless; but shortly after speaking again, I perceive
at length, Tudor, said she, that I must grant your desires; and indeed it is
impossible for me to deny you; but remember what I do for you. The Prince cast
himself immediately at her feet; and being as sensibly affected as one could
be, he told the Queen all that a strong passion, and extreme gratitude can
suggest to a tender, faithful and generous Lover.

The Princess put forth her hand to raise him; and that happy Lover falling on
that fair hand, kissed it with such Transports of delight, that it might be
easily Judged how great pleasures he was to taste in the possession of so
Lovely a Princess. In effect no Man was so happy as Tudor, some few days after;
and in the Marriage of that great Queen, he found matter enough of Comfort for
all the Evils that he had suffered so long.

That Lovely union which was Ushered in by so many Crosses, was attended with
all the Contents that this Life can afford; and difficulty, which seasons
pleasures, made these Lovers find a Thousand charms in the secret of their
Marriage; which perhaps they had not met with, if they had enjoyed one another
publicly, and without Intrigue. Their Commerce lasted long before it was
perceived; and the Queen so well concealed her Big-belly, that she was Brought
to Bed oftener than once before the matter came publicly to be known. But as it
is hard always to decieve a Lover, and a Lover that is Unfortunate; the Duke
began to suspect that Tudor had a greater share than he in the favors of the
Queen; and though that Prince knew nothing but what his suspicions made him
conjecture, yet he grew fearfully Jealous.

He never met Tudor but that he beheld him with threatening looks; and at length
he observed so few measures in his Resentment, that our Lovers easily
percieving it, redoubled their Circumspection to conceal their Marriage. But
Fortune which delights in Inconstancy, was weary of showring her Favors on
them, and resolved to make them feel her cruelty; after that she had Crowned
them with her kindness.

The Duke of Gloucester entertained many spies in the Country; and these Blades
who observed all things with great care, could not hitherto find any thing that
might confirm their Master in his thoughts. Sometimes he upbraided them with
Carelessness, sometimes with Treachery; and that they conspired with the Queen
to deceive him.

In the mean time all these Reproaches being unprofitable; he resolved to set
to Work himself, and labored to corrupt the Loyalty of those whom he knew to
be most Privy to the Secrets of the Queen: But he found them all so firm to
their duty, that he began to lose hopes of succeeding in his designs; when Fate
alone in a Trice completed that which the Duke could not perform with the
Assistance of all whom he had employed.

The Queen made use of one of the Chamberlains of her House, to send her
Letters by to Tudor; she had entrusted him to carry one to him; and that
faithful Servant who was glad punctually to discharge what he was ordered to do
by the Queen, waited till Night, that he might go securely to the House of
Tudor, and so soon as it grew Duskish he took his Journey that he might perform
his Message.

He was not far from the House, when he found himself set upon by Six Robbers:
He defended himself as well as he could; but the Footman that was with him
having forsaken him, he received suddenly several wounds, which made him fall
dead upon the place.

In the mean time that murder was committed with much Rumor; and the Lackey
who fled called together a great many for his Masters Assistance, with whom he
came back, but too late; for the Murderers had already saved themselves. Some
went in pursuit of them, and the rest carried the Body of the Gentleman into
the next House, where making an Inventory, according to the good Custom of
some, of all that the dead Man had about him, they found there the Letter which
he carried to Tudor.

They presently knew the Queens Signet; and seeing the Letter had no address,
and that they doubted not but that it was of consequence, The Constable took
the charge of it, and went instantly with it to the Regent, to whom he told
what had happened.

The Duke presently dismissed him; and having looked upon that Letter Three or
Four times, without daring to open it, at length he broke it up and found these
words in it. THE QUEENS LETTER TO TUDOR.
ALL that can be done is done to discover if I love you; and there is nothing
omitted to draw from my Servants a Confession of what they might know of our
Secrets: but they have not falsified the Opinion that I had of their fidelity,
and our Jealous observer shall keep watch long in vain, if I mistake not. At
present I find some abatement of my fears; come as soon as you can, my Dear,
and make your advantage of the Serenity we now enjoy, and I shall give my Dear
Tudor proofs, that I Love him more than my self.




THe Duke grew stark staring mad upon reading of that Letter; he was sometime
before he would resolve what to do: but at length having uttered great threats
against these two Unfortunate Lovers, he resolved to show them what a slight
was able to produce in the Breast of a Man prepossessed with a strong passion.
He imagined every thing that might animate him to revenge; and when he found
that some remains of Affection put a stop to his rage, Is it for that infamous
Princess then, that thou do solicit me; and art thou still so base as to be
willing to observe measures with one who, not content to put me into despair,
stains likewise the honor of the Royal Family by a shameful Commerce which
she holds with a Prince so far beneath her. Ah! too happy Tudor, cried he
immediately afterward, thy death must expiate the Crimes that thou committest
against the Memory of thy Prince; and the Duke of Gloucester shall revenge him
at the same time that he resents the Indignity that you offer to his Love. He
was at least an hour in making such useless complaints; and thinking that he
would receive great ease if he might utter in the Queens presence what he had
been saying all alone, he went to her appartment. The Queen was surprised to
see him at that time; but she had far greater reason to be so, when that
Prince, after a terrible look, I am not at all amazed, Madam, said he to her,
at the trouble I put you in; when one expects to see a Lover, and finds a
furious man, one has reason to change color; but I shall be exceedingly
changed my self, if I produce not shortly more surprising revolutions, and I
hope that the deceitful Eyes which I behold, shall shortly weep for the same
things that have hitherto made them laugh. What do you mean, Prince, replied
the Queen half angry at that discourse; and half shaking for fear. I mean,
Madam, answered the Duke, that to see you, one would never have believed that
you could Join such modest looks with so bad and Irregular a Conduct. But I
know your secret practices; and it is no time to dissemble when I have so good
proofs to confound you. Here is the thing, continued he; (showing her the
Letter that we have mentioned) that will put you out of your measures; and
ought you not to blush at these shameless words whereby you express your
passion?

If the Queen was astonished at the Dukes discourse; ye may Judge what case she
was in when she saw her Letter in his hand. She stood sometime speechless; but
finding that it was no longer time to dissemble, By what means, Prince, said
she, have you come by my Letter? I see not what right you have to censure my
actions; and may not I write to my Husband what I think good, but that the Duke
of Gloucester must find fault with it? Tudor your Husband! Madam, said the Duke,
immediately interrupting her. Yes, Prince, replied the Queen; Tudor is my
Husband: and I would have you know besides, that I have Three Children by him.
These words almost killed the Duke with despair, and renewing his discourse
after he had made some reflection on what the Queen had told him, A Queen of
England, said he, Daughter of a King of France, has Married Tudor, and has
Three Children by him! Ah! Madam, added he; think not by that Pretext to abuse
me; it will be to no purpose for you to think to stop my revenge; and let it be
as you will have it, that too happy Tudor shall die; and he shall pay for the
freakishness of Fortune, that appoints some to so much happiness, whilst
others wrestle with the Torments of a wretched life. He presently went out with
the Mine and Gate of a Man who was to be feared. The Queen could not behold him
in that condition without Trembling for Tudor; and at this instant she felt a
shivering that never left her till she died.

In the mean time the Duke of Gloucester sent some of the Guards to apprehend
that Prince; but they narrowly missed him, for he was gone a little before to
wait upon the Queen, upon the news he had received that their Confident was
Assassinated. He entered her apartment unseen of any; and finding the Princess
in a Posture that might have drawn Tears from the most obdured hearts, it was
long before he gave any sign of sorrow by words; but instead of that, he made
appear in his Countenance the utmost effects of extreme affliction. Afterward
he looked tenderly on that amiable Princess, and speaking to her fully as much
with his Eyes as Mouth, What is the news then, said he, my dear Queen? and what
should I think of the cruel condition wherein I see you? Ah! Prince, we are
undone, answered the Queen, and the Duke of Gloucester has discovered our
secret; he has intercepted a Letter which I sent you to day by my Chamberlain,
and in a word, we are betrayed. That faithful Servant is dead, Madam, replied
Tudor; and was murdered hard by my house. I am come purposely hither to pay my
duty to my Princess, and to know of her, if she had heard of that fatal
accident. Alas! no, answered the Queen, and I began almost to suspect him of
Treachery; but at length I am convinced of his innocence, and who have been his
murderers: There is no doubt but the Duke has committed that crime; and not
satisfied; with the death of that Wretch, he threatens also the Life of my dear
Tudor. At the same time she told him all that had passed between the Duke and
her; and had no strength to speak any more: about the end of her discourse she
fainted away, and came not to her self again till half an hour after; but was
feised on with so burning a Fever, that she alarmed all that were with her.

In the mean time Tudor was in no better condition; and he could not behold
these sad Marks of kindness which his, Princess showed him without the
bitterest Agonies of grief; but he had shortly occasion to be overwhelmed with
sorrow: For the Queen understanding that the Duke of Glocester's Guards had
been at the Princes house to apprehend him, and that he was sought after in all
places; she thought him utterly undone, and that nothing could save him from
his rage. She obliged him to suffer himself to be shut up in a Closet behind
her Bed; but that circumspection delivered her not from her fears, and her
Fever got immediately up into her Brain and made her Lightheaded; which in two
days time brought her to the last extremity. It is hard to tell the sufferings
of Tudor when he saw the Queen in that condition; nor can I even tell which of
the two was most to be pitied; he looked upon her with all imaginable
tenderness, and had no other way to express his grief but by a flood of Tears
which streamed from his Eyes.

The Queen was sensibly affected at his pains; and striving against her
distemper, that she might again speak to him, Prince, said she, if you would
oblige me, be not so much afflicted; consider you have Children, and that for
them you owe your preservation: Take no care of the Mother; and reserve for
these dear pledges which I leave to you of my kindness, the Testimonies that
now you give me of your Love. Having so said, she embraced Tudor; and mingling
together the Memory of his pains and Love, breathed out her last between his
Arms, leaving all in an uncertainty whether she died for Joy or Grief.

The Unfortunate Tudor melting in Tears, stretched himself upon the Body, which
he endeavored to warm again by his embraces; but finding it cold and past all
sense, he was at length convinced of his misery. He continued long in a fearful
ecstasy; but so soon as he came to himself, he resigned all his contents to
despair. Ah! Pavini, cried he, your knowledge is great; and you have to the
least circumstances foretold my unhappiness. My Queen will not now be troubled
at my death, seeing that Illustrious Princess is gone. He said no more; but
leaving the Chamber, went straight to the Duke of Gloucester. He accosted that
Duke with the resolution of a Man that fears not death; and having cast a
disdainful look upon him, Make an end, barbarous man, said he, of the Tragedy
you have so well begun; and seeing my lovely Princess is by your cruelties now
expired, why are you so slow to make me feel the same measure of Injustice, and
to reunite above what was so well Joined here below. The Queen is dead! replied
the Duke in a great surprise; is it possible, good God! do I hear that fatal
news, and do not I die for grief? With that he fetched several sighs, and
turning to Tudor in the height of rage: Yes, yes, Traitor, said he, I shall
speedily grant your desire, and your blood shall supply the Tears that you have
made me shed. He called his Guards immediately, and having ordered them to
carry him to Prison, he locked himself up in his Chamber, where he mournfully
lamented his destiny. But he quickly changed his Love into fury; for within a
few days he caused a Scaffold to be erected, where he commanded Tudor to be put
to death. The poor Prince was led to Execution as if he had been guilty; but
instead of complaining of the Dukes cruelty, he prayed a certain friend to
thank him in his name, for the favor he did him, because by his means he hoped
shortly to see his lovely Queen again. He laid down his head to the
Executioner; who having by one blow divided it from his Body, showed the
Spectators by that Memorable Catastrophe, how little there is between the
highest bliss and the lowest misery.

FINIS.
A Catalogue of some Books Printed for, and Sold by Jonathan Edwin, at the
Three Roses in Ludgatestreet.
THe Commentaries of C. Julius Caesar, of his Wars in Gallia, and the Civil Wars
betwixt him and Pompey, Translated into English, with many excellent and
judicious Observations thereupon; as also the Art of our Modern Training, or
Tactick Practice; by Clement Edmunds Esquire, Remembrancer of the City of
London. Whereunto is adjoined the Eighth Commentary of the Wars in Gallia, with
some short Observations upon it, together with the Life of Caesar, and an
account of his Medals: Revised, Corrected and Enlarged, in Fol.

The History of the Reigns of Henry the VII. Henry the VIII. Edward the VI. and
Queen Mary, the first Written by the Right Honorable Francis Lord Verulam,
Viscount St. Alban, the other Three, by the Right Honorable, and Right
Reverend Father in God Francis Godwyn, Lord Bishop of Hereford, in Fol.

The Countess of Pembrokes Arcadia, written by Sir Philip Sidney Knight, the
Thirteenth Edition, with his Life and Death; a brief Table of the principal
Heads, and some other new Additions, in Fol.

The French way of Exercising their Infantry, as it is now used in the Armies
of his Most Christian Majesty, in Fol. stitcht.

Parthenissa, that most Famed Romance, the Six Volumes complete, composed by
the Right Honorable the Earl of Orrory, in Fol.

Roman Forgeries, or a true Account of false Records, Discovering the
Impostures and Counterfeit Antiquities of the Church of Rome, in Octav.

The Comparison of Plato and Aristotle, with the Opinions of the Fathers on
their Doctrines, and some Christian Reflections; together with judgment on
Alexander and Caesar, as also on Seneca, Plutarch, and Petronius, in Octav.

Observations on the Poems of Homer and Virgil: A discourse representing the
Excellencies of those works; and the perfections in general of all Heroic
Actions, in Octav.

The Causes and Remedies of the Distempers of the Times, in certain Discourses
of Obedience and Disobedience, in Octav.

Songs and Poems, by Thomas Flatman, the Second Edition, in Octav.

Gallantry A-la-Mode, a Satirical Poem in Three, parts representing the
Vanities of several humors of this present Age, in Octav.

Wit at a Venture, or Clio's Privy Garden, containing Songs and Poems, never
before in Print, in Octav.

The Mercury Gallant, containing many true and pleasant relations of what has
passed at Paris, from the first of January 1672. till the Kings departure
thence, in Octav.


