(...) rested in the Affairs of that Republic; so by nothing has he more
merited an universal esteem and praise from all Protestants, and acquitted
himself more worthily toward God and their Serene Highnesses, than by that
Letter wherein he was honored to declare their thoughts, and in which he has
with so much wisdom, moderation and convincing light, expressed both their
Highnesses Sentiments, and his own, as well concerning the English Laws, the
Papists may, and the Dissenters ought to be favored with the Repeal of, as
concerning those, which no wise Nonconformist desires to have rescinded, and
which to humor the Papists with the Abrogation of, were no less than to expose
the Nation to ruin, and to lay the Reformed Religion open to be totally
subverted.

Now this Excellent Letter, and which has produced all the good Effects that
honest men longed for, but knew not before how to compass, our Anonymous
Answerer is pleased with an Indignation and angry Resentment, and in hopes to
exasperate his Majesty of Great Britain against their Serene Highnesses, to
style a kind of Manifest in reference to most important Affairs, which even Mr.
Stewart, who in obedience to the injunctions of his Sovereign, had with so much
importunity solicited their Highnesses Opinion about the Repeal of the Penal
and Test Laws, he says, could not have expected. And of whom to testify his
exact and intimate knowledge, and to recompense him for the unfortunate service
he had been employed in, and to encourage his readiness to future drudgery, he
is pleased by a creation of his own, as being the Substitute of the Fountain of
Honor, to confer the Title of Dr. upon. But certainly had this Anonymous
Writer the sense and prudence of an ordinary man, he would not under the
present conjuncture of Affairs, talk of Manifests, nor put people in mind of
them at a season, when most persons of all ranks and qualities are so much
disgusted, and when they at Whitehall are so lavish in their provocations
toward some, who if they were not strangely fortified against all tincture of
Resentment, are known to be capable of doing them irreparable prejudice, and
who by such a Manifest as there is cause enough to emit, might not only disturb
their proceedings, but with the greatest facility blow up at once both all
their hopes and projections. I would fain know of this modest and discreet
Gentleman, whether if their Highnesses had ordered a Letter to be written,
declarative of their Opinion for the Abrogation of the Tests, by what name he
would have judged it worthy to be called, and whether if he had bestowed upon
it the Title of a Manifest, he would have thereby intended to fasten upon it an
imputation of presumption and reproach? All good men have reason mightily to
bewail their Highnesses condition, seeing according to this rate of proceeding
toward them, it is in the power of the Papal Ecclesiastics in England, when
they please, to prevail upon the King to reduce them to the uneasy
circumstances, either of offending against their Consciences, or of displeasing
him. For there is no more requisite toward the bringing them into this unhappy
Dilemma, but that Father Peter's, or any other of the Tribe who have an
Ascendency over his Majesty, do persuade him to desire their Highnesses
Thoughts, in reference to such particulars, wherein it is neither consistent
with their Religious Principles, nor agreeable with their Honor, to comply
with his Majesty's Judgment and Inclinations. For if in prudence they decline
the returning of an Answer, they are sure not only to be censured, as guilty of
neglect, incivility and rudeness, but they do thereby administer an advantage
to their Enemies, of diffusing reports to their prejudice through the Nation, as
if they approved all those Court-methods, which for no other reason, save upon
the mere motives of respect and wisdom, they avoided openly to disallow. And if
on the other hand, they suffer themselves to be overcome by importunities, and
thereupon give an Answer agreeable to the Dictates of their own minds, but
which is found to interfere with the prepossessions wherewith his Majesty is
imbued, then their Lot is, to have it called by the unkind and ignominious
Title of a Manifest. One would think that Letter ought to have been mentioned
by a soster name, if we do but consider its being written not only with the
utmost modesty that becomes the Relation Their Highnesses stand in to the King,
and which is any ways agreeable to their own quality, but that it is enforced
with all the Reasons, that may serve to demonstrate that their Opinion is the
result of conviction and judgment, and not the effect of humor, nor a
sentiment they are merely determined unto by their interest. But we see no Term
is too hard to be bestowed upon a Paper that has so much prejudiced the
Priests in their designs, and laid so great an obstruction in the way of those
methods, which they had proposed to themselves, for the robbing England of the
Protestant Religion.

And whereas our Author tells us, that though Mr. Stewart did not account himself
obliged to answer Monsieur Fagel's Letter yet one who extremely esteems and
honors Mr. Stewart, thinks the Public too much concerned, not to have the
weakness of the reasonings in it detected, and to have it made appear that the
inferences deduced from them are no ways convincing. I can easily believe that
Mr. Stewart did not judge himself obliged to answer the Pensionary's Letter,
and all men do account it a piece of wisdom in him to forbear endeavoring it.
For though he be much better qualified for such an undertaking than our Author,
yet he could not but be sensible that it was not to be attempted with any hope
of success. And if our Author had been endowed with any measure of discretion,
he would have applied himself to any other Employment, rather than have betaken
himself to writing, being a thing which Nature never intended him for, and
especially upon a Subject so far above the reach of his understanding, and
against a discourse of that solid and well-digested strength, that even the
Reverend Fathers, whose Letter-carrier he used to be (if we be not strangely
mistaken in the Gentleman had so much wit as not to attack it. As knowing that
notwithstanding all their Art in Sophistry, they must have come off baffled;
and that their false colors would have been easily detected, by the beams of
that light, which dart themselves forth in all the parts of that excellent
Paper. And I dare farther say, that as Mr. Stewart will never much value
himself, upon the being esteemed by one either of this Gentleman's Religious
Principles, or of his intellectual Accomplishments; so I can never think that
he can be so much degenerated from what he formerly was, as to obtain the
approbation of his mind, to return any considerable degree of honor to a
person who upon all accounts does so little merit it, unless it be that he may
possibly challenge it by virtue of an undeserved Title, and of a Character that
he is exceeding ill qualified for.

However, seeing Fools will be meddling, though they are sure to come by the
worst, I shall reduce all I have to say in Castigation of this vain and
presumptuous man, to the seven following heads. (1.) His Falsifications in
reference to several parts of Mijn Here Fagel's Letter. (2.) His Injustice to
Their Highnesses the Prince and Princess of Orange, and the hidden spleen he
every where ventureth to express against them. (3.) His slanderous Calumnies
against the States of these Provinces, and how he studies to excite their Roman
Catholic Subjects to disturb the Peace and Tranquillity of this Country. (4)
His Shameless Impudence in endeavoring to impose upon the World, as if the
Protestant Dissenters in England, were concluded by Their Highnesses to stand
hereafter involved in the same rank and condition with the Papists. (4.) His
Publishing the Villainy of the Romish Church, and proclaiming the Injustice and
Dishonor of the most Eminent Papal Monarchs, while he pretends to commend and
justify the proceeding of his Majesty of Great Britain. (6.) His egregious
Ignorance in relation to Government, Laws, Customs, and matters of Fact.
(Lastly) The signal Ingratitude of the Papists toward Their Royal Highnesses
for all that Grace, Favor and Ease, which they were willing to have allowed
unto them.

As to the first, It Is known to be a received Principle among the Casuists of
the Society, that it is at most but a venial sin, to detract from,
misrepresent, and calumniate those whom they either take to be their Enemies,
or do conceive to have done them any ways a prejudice. And though the Opinion
authorizing such a practice, be condemned by a Bull of the present Pope bearing
date Anno 1679. yet our Author is more a Vassal to the Ignatian Order, than
upon the Authority of one whom the Jesuits do so little value, to forbear
putting a Doctrine into exercise, which he has been so well instructed in by
these Reverend Fathers, and especially when he finds it so conduceable to his
design and interest. What can be remoter from Truth as well as Ingenuity, than
to charge Monsieur Fagel with confining the name of Protestants in England,
only to those of the Conformable Communion, and with excluding the Dissenters
from the glorious privilege of that appellation? For though it be true, that
through the hatred and violence of the late King and his present Majesty to the
Fanatics, and by virtue of their Commands to a Company of Mercenary, timorous
and servile Justiciaries and Officers it has some time come to pass that the
Laws which were originally enacted, and only intended against Papists, have
been executed upon Dissenters; yet all men know that to have been a perversion
of Justice, seeing in all the Statutes to the Penalties whereof they were made
obnoxious, they are still considered and acknowledged for Protestants, and made
liable to sufferings by no other Title than that of persons differing from the
Church of England, in matter of Discipline, and about Forms and Rites of
External Worship. Nor is there one word in Mijn Here Fagel's Letter, whereby
they are precluded from that style, or any ways represented as unworthy of it.
While they stand obnoxious to several Laws, in which the Members of the Church
of England have no concernment, nor are in any danger from; it was impossible
to avoid the giving them a name by which they might be distinguished from those
of the Legal and National Communion. And so tender has the Pensionary been of
charactering them by any offensive or harsh denomination, that he has not so
much as once in his whole Letter called them Fanatics, though it be an
appellation that has been vulgarly affixed to them; but he has chosen always
to denominate them by the name of Dissenters, which is not only the softest
Term they can be described by, but that which themselves have elected as the
style by which they are willing to be discriminated from their fellow
Protestants, with whom they differ in some few and little particulars. And many
of them being people, whose Principles are coincident and agreeable with theirs
of the Legal Establishment in Holland, in whose Fellowship Monsieur Fagel is
known to be; it could not have entered into the thoughts of any save one of our
Authors Intellectuals and Integrity, either to charge upon him or so much as to
imagine, that he should be so injurious to himself and to the Dutch Churches,
as to preclude those from the list of Protestants. But whether this calumnious
charge and falsification, be the fruit of an Irish Understanding, or of Papal
Sincerity, or the effect of both, I shall leave others to judge, who may
possibly know this Author, better than I pretend to do. Only this I shall add,
that he proceeds with the same wit and honesty as he has begun. For from Their
Highnesses declaring that they cannot agree to the Repeal of the Tests, and
Monsieur Fagel's thereupon saying, that these Laws inflict not any mulct or
penalty upon the Roman Catholics, but that they are only means of securing the
Reformed Religion, through containing provisions by which men are to be accounted
qualified for Members of Parliament, and to bear public Offices; our Author
does by a strange kind of falsification and calumny, fasten upon him his having
affirmed, That the Non-conformists are to be accounted dangerous Enemies of the
State, and not to be admitted into any Public Employments. He must either be
of a very unusual and perverse frame of mind, or extremely ignorant of the
nature of those Laws, and the Terms wherein they are enacted, otherways it is
impossible he should imagine how the Dissenters are capable of receiving
prejudice by them. Seeing all required by those Laws toward the qualifying
persons to sit in Parliament, and to exercise Offices in Church and State, is
only to declare that they do believe there is not any Transubstantiation in the
Sacrament of the Lord's Supper, or in the Elements of Bread and Wine, at or
after the Consecration by any persons whatsoever; and that the Invocation of
the Virgin Mary, or any other Saint; and the Sacrifice of the Mass, as they are
now used in the Church of Rome, are Superstitious and Idolatrous. And this
Declaration the Non-conformists are of all people, the most inclinable and
forward to make, and therefore very far by virtue of those Statutes from
standing incapable of any Trust, Office, and Employment, that other Subjects
are admitted unto. Nor has there been a Protestant Dissenter since the first
hour that these Laws were enacted, that ever scrupled to take the Tests, or
that was precluded from Office and Employment for refusing them. But on the
contrary, several of the most famous Dissenters, such as Sir John Hartop,
Alderman Love, and Mr. Eyles, persons who at all times have kept at the
greatest distance from Communion with the Church of England, by reason of her
Forms and Ceremonies, are known to have cheerfully made the Declaration
contained in the Test Laws, and thereupon to have sit as Members in diverse
Parliaments. And as a further demonstration of the impudence and dishonesty of
our Author in this particular, it is not unworthy of remark, that though the King
has taken upon him to dispense with the Tests, and to prohibit the requiring
them; yet the Dissenters, who have since that time, been preferred to public
Trusts, continue still to take them, and go to the respective Courts, where by
Law the Declaration is enjoined to be exacted, and there demand the being
admitted to make it. Though in the mean season they cannot be unsensible, that it
is the thing in the World whereby they most highly offend his Majesty; it being
both a proclaiming the Illegality of that Authority which he challenges of
dispensing with Laws; and a defeating, so far as lies in them, his great
design as well as artifice, for the introducing of Popery, which his Soul is so
much in travel with. And were not this Author both a person of a most depraved
Conscience, and destitute of all common sense, he would never have slandered
Monsieur Fagel, and so egregiously perverted his plain meaning, as to tell us,
that though he be a Hollander and a Nonconformist, yet he thanks God for the
Test Laws, by which his Nonconforming Brethren in England, of what degree and
quality soever they be, stand excluded from Public Employments. For every one
that will be so kind to himself, and so just to the Pensionary, as to read his
Letter, will immediately discern that there is not one word in it, upon which
to superstruct this calumny and accusation; seeing he therein affirms in
repeated and emphatical Terms, that all contained in, and designed by the Test
Laws, is the securing the Reformed Religion, through the having provided, that
none be allowed to sit in Parliament, nor admitted to Public Offices, except
they declare that they are of the Reformed, and not of the Roman Catholic
Religion. So that how Monsieur Fagel's Nonconformity Brethren in England,
should come to be affected by these Laws so as to receive any prejudice by
them, is that which none but a person of our Author's wit, integrity and
candor, could have had the faculty either to conceive or allege.

But that we may come to the second particular; there is the less reason to
wonder at this Gentleman's calumniating Mijn Here Fagel, and affixing dull,
though malicious Forgeries of his own unto him, if we do but consider with what
petulancy and injustice he treats Their Serene Highnesses, and at the gate of
their own Court assumeth the confidence to misrepresent, lessen and asperse
them. The nearness which those Princes stand in to the ascending the English
Throne, and the joyful prospect which all Protestants have of it, exciteth a
discontent and rage in our Author, which he knows not how either to suppress or
govern. For not to mention what we learn of the kindness of Roman Catholics to
an Heir, professing the Reformed Religion, from the proceedings of Sixtus
Quintus, and the Papists in France toward Henry 4. we are sufficiently
instructed what good will they bear to a Protestant Successor, by the Bull
which Clement 8. published about the End of Queen Elizabeth's Reign. For the
Supreme and Infallible Head does therein ordain, That when it should happen to
that miserable Woman to die, they should admit none to the Crown, quantumque
propinquitate sanguinis niterentur, nisi ejusmodi essent qui fidem Catholicam
non modo tolerarent, sed omni open ac studio promoverent, and more majorum
jurejurando se id praestituros susciperent; whatsoever Right and Title they
should have thereunto, by virtue of their next affinity in blood, unless they
should first swear not only to tolerate, but to advance and establish the
Romish Religion. Nor can I avoid being filled with fear and reverence to the
safety of some certain persons, when I remember how Cardinal Baronius commends
Irene for murdering the Emperor her Son, because he was against the Worship of
Images, and not only calls it Justitiae zelum, a righteous zeal but adds,
Christum docuisse, summum pietatis genus esse in hoc adversus filium esse
fidelem, That Christ has taught the perfiction of Religion in such a case to
consist in fidelity to the Church, though by destroying one that was both her Son
and her Sovereign. It Is a high piece of injustice in our Author toward Their
Highnesses, and calculated for no other end but to alienate his Majesty's
affections from them, when he tells us, that the thing aimed at in the writing
of the Pensionary's Letter, as well as that pursued in the manner of publishing
it, was to obstruct the King's righteous and pious designs, and to render them
unpracticable. For the Letter being written in obedience to the Command of
Their Highnesses, and to declare their Opinion in reference to the several
matters, about which it treats; it plainly follows that though Mijn Here Fagel
be accountable for the manner of clothing and delivering their thoughts, and
for the Order and Method in which things are digested, and possibly for the
ratiocinations by which they are supported and enforced, yet that the Prince
and Princess are the persons who are alone responsible for the End unto which
it was intended. And it appears to have been so far from their intentions,
thereby to obstruct and defeat any pious and just designs of his Majesty; that
nothing can be more visible, than that as it is admirably adapted to the giving
ease and security to all his Protestant Subjects, so it offers means for
relieving the Papists from the severe Laws to which they are liable, and for
the granting them a Warranty in a legal way for the exercise of their Religion.
Nor does it discourage any kind of favor toward them, save that which the
concession whereof, would not only be inconsistent with the peace and safety of
those of the Reformed Religion in England, but which might inflame the Nation
to such Resentments, as would in all likelihood both endanger his Majesty's
Person and Crown, and come at last to issue in the reducement of the Roman
Catholics to worse circumstances, than they have hitherto been acquainted
with. But to proceed with our Author, to whom it is so natural to act
foolishly, and with sauciness and injustice, that neither the Character he is
said to bear, nor the Quality of the Persons of whom he speaks, can either
restrain his intemperance, or correct his rudeness and indiscretion. For
Monsieur Fagel having said, that he believes there are many Roman Catholics,
who under the present state of Affairs, will not be very desirous to be in
Public Offices and Employments, nor use any attempts against those of the
Reformed Religion; and that not only because they know it to be contrary to
Law, but lest it should at some other time, prove prejudicial to their Persons
and States. Our Author is so unjust as well as imprudent, as to call this a
menacing not only of all the Non-conformists and Roman Catholics in England,
but a threatening of his Majesty, and an insulting over him: And from thence he
takes occasion to add, that he hopes God will enable his Majesty to repress and
prevent the effects of these menaces, and furnish him with means of mortifying
those who do thus threaten and insult over him. It certainly argues a strange
weakness and distemper of mind, to call so modest and soft an expression, both
a menacing of the King and of all his Catholic Subjects, when I dare say, it
proclaims the sense of all among the Papists who are endowed with any measure
of Wisdom, and is nothing else save a Declaration of the measure, by which they
do at this day regulate and conduct themselves. But the injustice of our Author
toward Their Highnesses in his Reflections upon the forementioned expression
of the Pensionary's, is his intending them by the persons that do threaten his
Majesty and insult over him. For did he take Mijn Here Fagel for the only
guilty person in reference to this Phrase which he miscalls a Menace, it would
be a strange detracting in him from the Power and Glory of his Majesty of Great
Britain, to wish him sufficient means whereby to shun the effects of a
Gentleman's threatening, whose highest Figure in the World is merely to be a
Minister in a Republic. Nor would he bring down his Master to so low a level,
as to make it the highest Object of his Hopes, concerning so great a Monarch,
that he shall be able to mortify a person, who whatsoever his Merit be, yet
his Fortune is to fill no sublimer a Post. So that it can be no other save the
Prince and Princess, whom our Author in his usual way of injustice, petulancy
and indiscretion does here character, represent and intend. And what he
thereupon means by the Kings having power in his hands, and by his hoping that
God would furnish him with means by which he may mortify them, is not a matter
of difficult penetration, even by persons of the most ordinary capacities. For
the several methods that have been projected, and are still carrying on, for
the debarring them from the Succession to the Imperial Crowns of England,
Scotland and Ireland, to which they have so Just and Hereditary a Right, are
sufficient to detect unto us what our Author intends, and serve as a Key
whereby to open the scope, and meaning of his Expressions. But whatsoever the
Papal and Jesuitick Endeavors may be, for the obstructing and preventing their
Ascending the Thrones of Great Britain, I dare say that all the effects they
will have, will be only the discovering the folly and malice of those that
attempt it, and that they can never be able to compass and accomplish it. For
as their Highnesses have both that interest in the Love and Veneration of all
Protestants, and so indisputable a Title, that it is impossible they should be
precluded either by Force, or in a way to which their Enemies may affix the
Name of Legal; so there is no great cause to apprehend or fear, their being
supplanted by the King's having Male Issue of a vigor to live, considering
both his Majesty's condition and the Queens, which is such that they can never
communicate bona stamina vitae. And for the Papists being able to Banter a
suppositious Brat upon the Nation, (though there are many among them villainous
enough to attempt it) we have not only the watchfulness of Divine Providence to
rely upon for preventing it, but there are many faithful and waking Eyes that
will be ready and industrious to discover the Cheat. And if the People once
perceive, that there has been a contrivance carried on for putting so base an
affront upon a noble and generous Kingdom, and of committing so horrid a wrong
against such Virtuous and Excellent Princes; I donot know but that their
Resentment of it may rise so high, as that all who are discovered to have been
accessory unto it, may undergo the like fate that they of old did, who were
found to have been conscious and contributory unto the thrusting the Eunuch
Smerdis into the Persian Throne. Nor do I in the least doubt but that the same
Righteous, Wise and Merciful God, who prevented the like villainy when designed
in the time of Queen Mary, and which was advanced so far, that some Priests had
the wickedness and impudence, both to give thanks in the public Churches for
her Majesty's safe delivery of a Prince, and also to describe the Beauty and
Features of the Babe, though all she had gone with amounted only to a Tympany of
Wind and Water; I say that I do not question, but that the same God will out of
his Immense Grace and Sapience, find ways and methods, of which there are many
within the compass of his Infinite Understanding, by which so hellish a piece
of villainy, if there be any such projected and promoting, may be brought into
light and disappointed. And truly when I consider the Christian and Royal
Virtues wherewith their Highnesses are imbued, and how they are furnished, with
all the Moral, Intellectual and Religious accomplishments, that are requisite
for adapting them to weild Scepters, and which render them not only so
agreeable to the necessities and desires of all good people, but so admirably
qualified to answer both the present posture of Affairs in Europe, and the
Exigencies of those that are oppressed and afflicted; I grow into a confidence,
that as the Church of God both in Britain and elsewhere, and the circumstances
in which so many Countries are involved, do bespeak and crave their Exaltation
to the Thrones of the British Dominions, so that they are both destined of God
unto them, and will in due time be safely conducted thither. Nor can I avoid
pleasing my self with those joyful and hopeful thoughts, when I reflect upon
the various steps of Divine Providence, by which they are brought into that
nearness of legally inheriting these Crowns. Certainly there is a voice that
speaks loud to this purpose, not only in Gods denying a Legitimate Issue to
the Late King, and in his taking away from time to time all the Lawful Male
Offspring of his present Majesty, but in the uniting their Highnesses in
Marriage, even to the crossing a certain Persons Inclinations, whom I forbear
to Name, as well as to the disgusting of a Neighboring Monarch, and to the
defeating the busy endeavors of the Popish Party. But I must return to our
Author, whose Injustice to their Highnesses, and his malice against their
Honor, Interest and Reputation, knows neither end nor bounds. For upon
Monsieur Fagel's having asked, Who would go about to advise him or any man
else, to endeavor to persuade their Highnesses, whom God has so far honored,
as to make them. Defenders of his Church, to approve and promote things so
dangerous and hurtful both to the Reformed Religion, and to the public safety,
as the Repealing of the Test Laws would be; our Author does hereupon, with his
wonted Friendship, Equity, and Candor to those Excellent Princes, tells us that
he has not met with so bold a Declaration as this of calling them the
Protectors of Gods Church, and that the ascribing it to them, is a detracting
from the Honor of Kings and Monarchs, who will not Abdicate from themselves to
any other so glorious a Title. And in pursuance of his rancour toward their
Highnesses, he runs out in his way of Wit and Learning into a most silly and
impertinent Discourse about the Nature of a Church, and accuses the Prince and
Princess, as if by having this Character conferred upon them, they had a design
to usurp from his Majesty of Great Britain the style of Defenders of the
Faith, and to challenge to themselves the being the Protectors of the Church of
England. Surely this Gentleman does by virtue of his Popish Zeal and Irish
Understanding, believe that no Titles are due to Princes in reference to the
Church of God, but what are derived from the Papal Chair. Whereas I dare say,
that Monsieur Fagel in bestowing this Title upon Their Highnesses, did not
dream of the Roman Pontif, but had been taught it by God Almighty, whom I take
to be the Supreme and true Fountain of Honor, who is pleased to character such
Princes as do cherish and favor his Church, by the Name of Nursing Fathers and
Nursing Mothers, which is the term that the Pensionary uses in reference to
their Highnesses. And as it is their own merit, which according to the Tenor of
the Divine Creation, has entitled them to this glorious style; so they are
neither to be ridiculed nor hectored out of that duty, of countenancing and
supporting the Reformed Religion, nor to be deterred by bold and empty words
from those compassionate, generous, and Princely Offices to sincere Orthodox
Believers, by which they have deserved it. And while others glory in the
enjoyment of the Titles of most Christian and most Catholic Kings, which their
Vassalage to the Sea of Rome, their contributing to the Exaltation of the
Triple Crown, and their being the Popes Executioners in the shedding the Blood
of Saints, has procured unto them, it is enough for their Highnesses to be by
the Suffrage of all true Protestants, and that agreeably to the Doctrine and
Authority of the Sacred Scriptures, had in esteem, and reverenced for Nutritii
and Protectors of Gods Church. Nor do they appropriate this style to
themselves, though they account it the brightest among all their Titles, but they
acknowledge it to belong equally to many others, and are afflicted at nothing
more, than that all Potentates may not justly claim a share in it. And as the
Pensionary's ascribing it unto their Highnesses was out of no design to usurp
upon the King of Englands Title of Defender of the Faith, nor to affix any
Authority unto them over that Church, so it will be no presumption to add, that
all of the Reformed Religion in that Kingdom, how much soever differing in
little and circumstantial things among themselves, are yet so far sensible of
the obligations they are under to Their Highnesses, and of the benefits they
have all the Assurance to expect from them hereafter, that without meaning ill
either to the King or to any one else, they will unanimously join in stiling
them Defenders of the Christian Reformed Faith, and Protectors of Gods Church
professing the Protestant Religion. And they will easily know with whom they
are to be angry, and against whom to direct their Resentments. Mijn Here Fagel
had said, that if the Dissenters cannot during his Majesty's Reign be eased
from the Penal Laws, unless the Tests be also abrogated, that this will be an
unhappiness unto them, but for which the Roman Catholics are only to be
blamed, who choose rather to be contented, that they and their Posterity should
remain still obnoxious to the Penal Laws, and exposed to the hatred of the
whole Nation, than be restrained from a capacity of attempting any thing
against the peace and security of the Reformed Religion. Our Author whose envy
and injustice against Their Highnesses, is not yet fully spent, does in his
imprudent and indiscreet way obtrude from hence upon the World, that the
Nonconformists as well as the Roman Catholics may hereby see where their true
Interest stands, and that they are extremely obliged to those in whose Name
this advice is given, for the Consolation afforded them in the condition under
which they are stated by Law. Which is as much as if he should harangue the
Nonconformists into coffeehouse against the Prince and Princess, by assuring
them that they are to hope for no relief against the Penal Laws by any favor
of theirs. Whereas the Dissenters are not only told that their Highnesses are
willing to consent, but that they do fully approve, that they should have an
entire Liberty for the full exercise of their Religion, without being obnoxious
to receive any prejudice, trouble, or molestation upon that account. So that
the heat which our Author would inflame the Dissenters unto against their
Highnesses, ought to turn and spend it self against the Papists, who rather
than part with the Tests which the Nonconformists are as much concerned to have
maintained as they of the National Communion can be, are resolved to keep all
the Penal Laws in force, and to leave the Dissenters under the dread and
apprehension of them. But this they may be fully persuaded of, that if they can
escape the edge of them during this Kings Reign, they will be in no danger from
them, in case the Nation come once to be so happy as to see their Highnesses
seated on the Throne. For as much as they have not only their word, which was
hitherto never violated, laid to pledge for their relief and ease, but in that
their Interest as well as their Principles will oblige them to be compassionate
and tender to all sorts of Protestants, and if they cannot be so Fortunate as
to unite them, yet to exercise equal kindness and favor toward them.

Having examined what our Author in his impertinent way venteth in unjust
Reflections against their Highnesses; and having in some measure chastned him
for them, though not to the Degree he does deserve; I come now in the third place
to call him to an account for his calumniating the States of these Provinces,
and for his endeavoring to possess the minds of their Popish Subjects with
dissatisfaction and prejudice toward them. And if he be the person whom most
men take him for, though he may have herein acted suitably to himself, yet he
has behaved disagreeably to his character, and unworthy of the Post, which his
Master has placed him in. Nor need we from henceforth to doubt, but that he
does all the ill Offices he can between his Majesty of Great Britain and this
Government, seeing he has by slanders destitute of all Foundation, most
maliciously studied to raise differences betwixt them and their own Subjects.
And if the Intelligence which he transmits to Whitehall, be as equally distant
from truth and sincerity, as the Memoirs are which he has here published, we
may easily conjecture what little credit ought to be given unto it, though at the
same time we cannot but discern the end that it must be shapen and designed
unto. Nor was there the least occasion administered by mijn Here Fagel in his
Letter, by which our Author could be provoked to attack these States, with so
much rudeness, injustice, and falsehood, as he has done in his Answer. For all
that the Pensionary had said, and which it seems threw our Author into a raging
fit, was only that their Highnesses could consent that the Papists in England,
Scotland and Ireland, should be suffered to exercise their Religion with as
much freedom, as is allowed them in these Provinces, in which they enjoy a full
liberty of Conscience. And as the time has been, and may hereafter come,
wherein the English Roman Catholics would have thought, and may again account
such a Liberty for a happiness; so I do not understand if the condition of the
Roman Catholics in these Countries, be as our Author describes it, with what
consistency either to Reason or with themselves, the Papists in England, should
have so often heretofore in their Pleas for a Toleration, have made the Liberty
vouchsafed their Brethren in these Provinces, not only a motive for their own
being capable of Indulgence, but to have represented it as the largest measure
of the freedom they desired, and which they would have been thankful for.
Seeing this Gentleman according to his accustomed manner of truth and ingenuity
takes upon him to assure us, That as there can be no greater persecution, than
what the Papists undergo in the exercise of their Religion, in Guelderland,
Freesland, Zeland, and the Province of Groningue; so that the Liberty which
they even enjoy in Holland, is so mean and inconsiderable, that it does not
deliver them from being subject to daily fines and molestations. Surely this
man is either very unacquainted with what is done upon the account of Religion
in other parts of the World, or else he must needs think, that the most brutal
severities to some, are Acts of Merit; while gentle restrictions upon others,
are mortal Crimes, otherwise he could never write at this ignorant and
extravagant rate, wherein all persons must discern his folly as well as
insincerity and neglect of truth. For we have too many deplorable evidences
daily before our Eyes, besides those which arrive with us by reports of
unquestionable credit, of a stranger kind of Persecution exercised toward
those of the Reformed Religion in France and Piedmont, than any which the Roman
Catholics in these Provinces can be alleged to be under, except it be by one
of our Author's veracity and discretion. Neither needs there any other
Refutation of the calumny with which he asperseth the Supreme and Subordinate
Magistrates of this Country in reference to the treating their Popish Subjects
with horrid Severities, nor a clearer proof that those of the Romish Communion,
do esteem themselves to be in a condition of peace, freedom and ease under this
Government, than that of their behavior during the late War carried on by the
French King against these States, which he gave out both at Rome and at several
other Courts in Europe, to have been undertaken in favor, and for the
restoring of the Roman Catholic Religion. For had they lain under that
grievous persecution, and those tragical hardships in the practice of it, which
our Author would impose the belief of upon the World; they would not have
failed to welcome that Monarch as their happy Deliverer, and would have united
in a general Insurrection against the States, for their having been Tyrannous
over them. But instead of that, most of them acquitted themselves with the same
Zeal for the support of this Government, and in defense of their Country, that
other Subjects did. Which demonstrates beyond all control, that they do not
judge themselves to be in so wretched and miserable circumstances, as this bold
and calumnious Person represents them to be. And whereas Monsieur Fagel in
justification of the necessity of preverving the Test Laws by which the Papists
are precluded from Employments and Places of Trust, and to rectify a mistake
in Mr. Stewart about his conceiving the Roman Catholics to continue capable of
bearing public Offices in this Commonwealth, had said, that by the Laws of
this Republic they are expressly shut out from all the Employments both of
Policy and Justice. Our Author does hereupon with the highest Injustice, and
with all the acrimony he can, accuse the States, not only of departing from the
express Terms of the Pacification of Gant, but of violating the Articles of the
Union at Utrecht, which was the Foundation upon which this Government was both
originally erected and does still subsist. And with his wonted degree of
knowledge and prudence he further adds, That the Provinces, and most of the
Cities, would not have entered into the foresaid Union, but upon condition that
they of the Roman Catholic Religion should at all times possess the
Government. And particularly that Amsterdam, had it stipulated unto them, under
the Guaranty of the Prince of Orange, that none of the Reformed Religion should
be allowed a Place to assemble in, either within the Walls, or without, so far
as the Jurisdiction of the City did extend. One would have little expected,
that a person living in the Communion of the Romish Church, as our Author
professes himself to do, should upbraid these States with the violation of
Articles, relating unto a Grant made unto any for their Security in the free
Exercise of their Religion, at a season when Popish Sovereigns not only account
it their glory to break all Laws, Oaths and Edicts, by which Protestants had
their Religion, together with many other Rights and Privileges, established
and confirmed unto them, but who with a salvageness and barbarity which scarce
any Age can parallel, seek to extirpate their Religion and destroy them. And
all this attempted and pursued against them, not only without their being
guilty of any crime, by which they might have deserved to lose the favor of
their Princes, and to forfeit protection in the free exercise of their
Religion, and their safety as to their Persons and Estates, which had been
sworn unto them, and secured by Authentic Laws: But when one of the chiefest
motives unto it, was their Loyalty, and the Merit that they had laid upon their
respective Sovereigns, which by a new way of gratitude was thought fit to be
thus recompensed and rewarded. And if we be not, as I have formerly said,
strangely deceived in the Person and Character of our Author, this charge upon
the States of these Provinces, is the effect of a most prodigious folly, as
well as of inveterate malice, in that his Master contrary both to the Laws of
the Realms, his often repeated Promises, and his Coronation Oath, assumes a
power of introducing those into Offices, who by the Statutes of the Land stand
precluded from them, and of thrusting them out, who alone are the Persons that
are legally capable of them. Which manner of proceeding in his Majesty, has
besides the injustice that attends it toward all that are laid aside, a signal
piece of ingratitude accompanying it to many of them, as having been the
Persons, whose Zeal for his Person brought him to the Throne, and whose courage
maintained him in it. But I shall not think it enough merely to have exposed
his imprudence and indiscretion in the forementioned accusation against the
whole Governing Body of this Country; but I shall likewise show it to be false,
slanderous, and unjust in every part and branch of it. And that I may act with
more truth and candor than our Author has done, I do acknowledge, that at the
first commencement of the War against the King of Spain, for the defense of the
Laws and Privileges of these and the neighboring Provinces, that not only
they of the Reformed Religion, but likewise the Roman Catholics, took Arms and
hazarded their Lives and Estates in that just quarrel. And I do also grant that
thereupon there was Liberty of Conscience allowed and established by several
Treaties, in the virtue of which, both parties were to be equally tolerated,
and the one not to disturb or disquiet the other. Nor was there ever any thing
done by way of Ordinance or Law, to lessen or restrain the liberty of the
Papists, nor to abridge, much less deprive them, of any Power, Jurisdiction and
Authority that they possessed, so long as they remained faithful in the common
cause, and behaved themselves with Equity, Justice and Peace toward those who
had withdrawn from the Roman Communion. But such was the ascendency of the
Priests over the Roman Catholics, and so powerful was their influence upon
them, that in a little time they not only hindered and molested the Protestants
in the exercise of their Religion, and committed many unjust and cruel
severities against them, but they proceeded to various attempts of betraying
the Rights and Civil Liberties of the whole Country, and of enslaving it both
to the Tyranny of the King of Spain, and to the bloody and cruel Inquisition.
So that from hence it became a matter of necessity rather than at first of
choice, that the Government should be disposed into Protestant hands; and that
the liberty of the Papists, should have those limits and regulations given unto
it, as might render it both consistent with the peace, freedom, and safety of
those of the Reformed Religion, and with the preservation of the Civil Rights
and Privileges of these Provinces. This is the account, which all who have
written with any knowledge and integrity of the Transactions of those Times, do
give us of the many Changes and Revolutions that fell out in reference to
Religion, till all matters both concerning it, and the Political Government of
these Countries came to be established in the Form and Way, wherein they do
still continue and subsist. And this I do undertake to make good by all
public, Authentic, and approved Histories, if our Author shall have the
confidence to insist upon the justification of his criminations, And all that I
shall at present direct men unto for the confirmation of what I have said, is
that admirable Apology of William I. Prince of Orange, whom his present
Highness, does in Wisdom, Steddiness, and true temperate Christian Zeal so
signally imitate, and which that great Prince, who was the first and happy
Founder of this Republic, published in defense of himself, and of those
actings, for which the slavish and mercenary Factors of Rome and Spain had
traduced and aspersed him. But let us advance to a particular Examination of
those matters of Fact, upon which our Author challenges these States for
violating their Faith with their Roman Catholic Subjects. And the things he is
pleased to specify, are their departing from the Terms of the Pacification of
Gant, and their breaking the Articles of the Union agreed unto at Utrecht,
1597. Nor am I unwilling to acknowledge, that soon after the Pacification
concluded at Gant, there were several indecent and undiscreet things done
contrary to the purport and tendency of it, both by those of the Romish, and by
them of the Reformed Religion. Which proceeded from the Superstitious Fury of
the former, and the imprudent Zeal of the latter. Yet it is certain, that the
ground of its coming to be rendered wholly ineffectual, arose from a design of
the King of Spain's, under the cloak and palliation of that Treaty, to subvert
the Civil Rights and Privileges of all the Provinces, to the Defense and
Preservation of which the Roman Catholics as well as Protestants were sworn
and bound by the said Pacification. For after that Philip II. had in compliance
with the necessity of his Affairs, consented unto, and ratified all the Terms,
Provisions and Conditions, which both the Papists and the Reformed had in that
Pacification, League and Confederacy, insisted upon, and agreed to adhere unto;
it was soon after discovered by Letters intercepted to Don John, who was at
that time constituted Governor over the Low Countries, that all which Philip
aimed at, was through the having rendered them secure by the Ratification of that
Treaty, to take advantages whereby to enslave them, and under the Covert of it,
to provide himself of means, by which he might be established in an unbounded
Tyranny over them. So that by reason of what was detected in those Letters, and
from Don John's proceeding to possess himself of Namur, and his endeavoring to
corrupt and debauch the German Troops, which were in the States service, and
paid by them, together with the defection of many of the Roman Catholics from
all the Terms of that Pacification; the War came again to be revived against
the King of Spain, and all that had been agreed unto at Gant, was rendered
ineffectual and overthrown. And I would fain know of our Learned and Wise
Author, how the States of the Seven Provinces are more guilty of the violation
of that Pacification, by making the Protestant Religion, to be that of the
public Establishment, within their Territories and Jurisdiction; than the King
of Spain, and the States of the Spanish Netherlands, are in their denying a
Toleration of the Protestant Religion in those Provinces; seeing I am sure it
was agreed and sworn unto in that Pacification. And as for the Union concluded
at Vtrecht, the Terms whereof our Author upbraids these States with a departure
from: It will be no difficult matter to show how his knowledge and sincerity
are in reference to this particular of one measure and piece. For though diverse
of the Provinces, which entered into that Union, did thereby enjoy a Liberty of
choosing and determining which of the two Religions should have the stamp of the
public establishment within their own Jurisdictions; yet it was then and there
ordained, that the Protestant Religion alone should be publicly professed, and
have the protection of the Laws in the Provinces of Holland and Zealand. And as
the other Provinces were left to do, as they should judge best for the peace
and safety of their respective Territories, and the support and defense of the
Union; so it is a thing wherein all that have written with any integrity, do
agree, that the alterations which were afterward made in these Provinces, or
in reference unto them, concerning Religion, were either resolved and decreed
in the Provincial Assemblies of the States of those several Provinces, or else
in the meetings of the States General, where not only the Deputies of those
several Provinces were present and consenting, but behoved to have the
approbation of their Principals, in order to the rendering those Alterations
legal and binding. Nor is it unworthy to be observed, that the chief occasion
for shutting the Roman Catholics out of the Government, and for depressing the
Romish Religion from being Dominant, arose from the Papists themselves, in that
not only contrary to their stipulations and promises, they were found in the
virtue of a malice imbibed from their Religion, to be upon all occasions
committing violences and outrages against the Reformed, but in that the Roman
Catholic Magistrates, and many others of that Communion, were discovered to
retain too great an inclination to Spain, and to be ready to abandon and betray
the Freedom and Civil Rights of their Country, instead of continuing steadfast
and faithful in the defense of them, as they had covenanted and sworn. In a
word, as neither the Articles of the Union at Vtrecht, nor any other Terms
agreed upon, before the Abdication of the King of Spain, which was not until
Anno 1581. can be called the Fundamental Laws of the Government of this
Republic, though they may be styled conditions upon which such and such
Provinces Associated for mutual defense against the Spanish Power and Tyranny;
so it is undeniable, that by reason of the many dangers they found themselves
exposed unto, and the hazards they had run of being betrayed again into the
hands of the Spaniard, through their having suffered the Magistracy to remain
any wherein Papists, and through their having allowed the Roman Catholic
Religion to be publicly preached and exercised, they thereupon reassumed and
gave a new frame unto their Union in the Year 1583. in which it was agreed and
enacted by all the Provinces, that from that time forward, the Reformed
Religion should alone be openly professed and preached, and that none but
Protestants should from that time be admitted to any Office of Policy and
Justice in the Government. And as this is the true Fundamental Law upon which
this State has since so happily subsisted and flourished; so there can be
nothing objected against the Justice of it, but what will lie against all
States of the World, who have always changed and molded their Laws, as they
have been necessitated in order to self-preservation. And so remote from all
truth, is our Author's affirming the Roman Catholics to have been upon these
Alterations brought under Persecution; that Sir William Temple, whom the World
will much sooner believe than this Gentleman, though possibly he may bear the
same character which that worthy person once did, does assure us in his
excellent Observations upon the United Provinces of the Netherlands. That no
Papist can here complain of being pressed in his Conscience, of being
restrained from his own manner of Worship in his House, or obliged to any other
abroad, and that all such, who ask no more than to serve God and save their own
Souls, have as much Freedom, Ease and Security as they can desire. Yea it is
demonstrable that the Roman Catholics enjoy advantages under this Government,
which they have not in Popish States. In that being suffered to exercise their
Religion so far as is necessary to attain all the ends of it, if it be capable
of affording them any whereon they can hereafter find themselves happy; they
are delivered from the Tyranny of Priests over their Persons and Estates, and
hindered from being in a condition to do that ill to others, which the Doctrines
of their Church would both tempt them unto and justify them in. And as to that
which our Author says of the injustice done to the City of Amsterdam, and of
the violating the Conditions toward the Roman Catholics there, upon which
under the guaranty of the Prince of Orange they came into the Union; he is
mistaken in that whole matter, and betrays only his ignorance, infidelity, or
both. For the Conditions which he mentions, were the result of an Agreement
made Anno 1578. when upon the Nassovian Army's coming before their City to
attack them, they abandoned the Party and Interest of the King of Spain, whom
they had till that time adhered unto, and came into an Alliance with the rest
of the Towns of the Province, to oppose him in defense of the Privileges of
these Countries. And as this was a year before the Union concluded at Vtrecht,
into which Amsterdam entered at the same time that Gelderland, Zutphen, Holland,
Zealand, and Utrecht did; so they joined in the Union upon the same Terms, that
the other Towns of their own Province had agreed unto. Nor could the Prince of
Orange be Guaranty in reference to the conditions specified in the Union;
forasmuch as tho the Act of Union was signed Jan. 23. 1579. yet the Prince did
not sign it till the May following. And that the Roman Catholic Magistrates,
came to be divested of the Government, contrary to the Articles made with them
when they forsook the party of the King of Spain, they have none to blame for
it but themselves, nor was there that injustice in it which our Author does
imagine. For not being satisfied to remain disobedient and refractory to an
Edict and Decree of the Archduke Matthias and the Council of State, who Anno
1578. had appointed, that wheresoever there were a hundred Families of those
professing the Reformed Religion, that they should there be allowed a Church or
Chapel for the exercise of their Worship; they not only broke all their
capitulations made with the Protestants, through oppressing them in various,
severe, unjust, method's, and in denying them a decent and convenient place in
which they might bury their dead, but they were found to be still inclining to
the Spanish Interest, and ready to espouse it upon the first convenient
opportunity. And therefore the Protestants, who were by much the majority,
partly to relieve themselves from the sufferings which were daily inflicted
upon them contrary to stipulations and Articles, and partly to prevent the
mischiefs which would have ensued to the whole Country, should that City have
been betrayed again into the power and hands of the Spaniards, assumed the
Government to themselves, and eased the other party of the Trust, which they
had so unwisely and unrighteously managed. Nor can our Author deny, but that
since they took on them the Ruling Authority, they have exercised it with all
the moderation that can be expressed. And have been so far from returning to
the Roman Catholics, the like measures which themselves had met with, that
they have in no one thing given them cause to complain, unless they should
quarrel that they are kept out of capacity of doing the mischief, their priests
would otherway's be ready to excite them unto, and which their Religion would
countenance them in.

But it is now time that I should proceed to the fourth thing, for which I
promised to call our Anonymous Answerer to an account. And were he not of a
singular Forehead, and of a peculiar complexion from all others; he could not
have had the impudence to endeavor to deceive the world into a belief, that
the Protestant Dissenters in England, stand listed by their Highnesses into the
same rank with the Papists, and that they are hereafter to expect, to be shut
up into the same state and condition. Certainly he must either have an
Antipathy woven into his nature against all truth and sincerity, or else through
having long accustomed himself to the misreporting of persons and to the giving
false representations of things, he must at last have acquired an incurable
Habit, otherwise it were impossible to prevaricate to that degree from truth,
in every thing he medleth with, and which he undertaketh to say. For Mijn Here
Fagel having declared, that the reason why their Highnesses can not agree to
the Repeal of the Test Laws, is because they are of no other tendency, than to
secure the Reformed Religion from the designs of the Roman Catholics, and that
they contain only conditions and provisions, whereby men may be qualified to be
Members of Parliament, and to bear public Offices. Our Author hereupon tells
us. That the Nonconformists as well as the Roman Catholics, do apprehend that
they receive a great deal of damage, by those Laws, and do account them
extremely prejudicial to their Persons and Families. And whereas Monsieur Fagel
had said, that he would be glad to hear one good Reason, whereby a Protestant
fearing God, and concerned for his Religion, could be prevailed upon to consent
to the Repealing of these Laws which have been enacted by the Authority of King
and Parliament, and that have no other tendency save the providing for the
safety of the Reformed Religion, and the hindreing Roman Catholics from being
in a capacity to subvert it. Our Author in way of reflection upon this, tells
us, that it is not only a Childish demand, but that it is to be hoped that the
pensionary will from hence be brought to acknowledge, how trifling and weak all
those Reasons are, by which he would preclude the Nonconformists as well as the
Roman Catholics from public Employments. So that by these and many other
passages equally false and disingenuous in our Author's pretended Answer, which
for brevity's sake I forbear to mention, it is apparent that he endeavors to
persuade the world into a belief, that the Dissenters are stated by their
Highnesses in the same rank and condition with the Papists, and are to expect
to be treated in the same manner, in case it please the Almighty God to bring
Their Highnesses to the Throne. One would wonder at this sudden and strange
change in the opinion and conduct of the Papists toward the Nonconformists;
that they who were represented by them a while ago' as unfit to live in His
Majesty's Dominions; should now come to be accounted the Kings best and most
Faithful Subjects, and worthy to be advanced to the chief Trusts and Employ's.
It Is but a few years since, that all the Laws enacted against them, were judged
to be too few and gentle, and therefore they had Laws executed upon them, to
which the Legislators had never made them obnoxious; but now the Roman
Catholics are become so tender of their ease and safety, that out of pure
kindness unto them, if any will be so foolish as to believe it, they must have
Laws abrogated, which in the worst times, and during the most illegal and
barbarous procedures against them, they were never affected with nor suffered
the least prejudice by. And whereas it was the only way for persons heretofore
to make their Court at St. James's, by declaiming against the Dissenters as
Rebels and Traitors, and by putting them into a salvage Dress, to be run upon
as beasts of prey; it is now grown the only method of becoming gracious at
Whitehall, to proclaim their Loyalty, and to cry them up for the only people in
whom his Majesty, with safety to his Person and Crown, can repose a confidence.
But under all the Shapes which the Papists do assume, they may be easily
discovered to retain the same malice to the Reformed Religion, and only to act
those various and opposite parts, in order the better to subvert it. And the
Dissenters being harassed and oppressed before, and indulged and caressed now,
was upon the same motive of hatred unto it, and in subserviency to its
extirpation. The method's are altered, but the design is one, and tho they have
changed their Tools, yet they remain constant in the pursuance of the same End.
While they of the Church of England were found compliant with the ways, which
the Factors for Rome thought serviceable thereunto, they were not only the
Favorites of the Court and of the whole Popish party, but were gratified, at
least as was pretended, with a rigorous execution of the Penal Laws upon
Dissenters. But there remaining several steps to be taken for the introduction
of Popery, and the extirpation of the Reformed Religion, which they of the
National Communion would not go along with them in, they are forced to shift
Instruments, and to betake themselves to the Nonconformists; whose assistance
the better to engage, they have not only suspended all the Penal Laws, to which
the Dissenters were liable, but have endeavored to fill them with jealousy and
apprehension of danger from the Test Acts, tho at the same time they know that
Nonconformists never either did, or could receive prejudice by them. Only they
are sensible, that if they could work up that easy people into such a belief,
they should thereby not only obtain their concurrence and abettment, for the
rescinding of those Laws, that are at present the only great remaining Fence
about our Religion, and upon the abrogation whereof nothing could hinder the
Papists from getting into a condition to extirpate it; but make them a formed
and united Body with themselves against the Prince and Princess of Orange, who
have with so much Wisdom, Courage and Integrity, declared that they are against
the having them repealed. And as the Dissenters cannot have so far renounced
all regard both to honesty and to a good name, as to be fond of being herded
with the Papists, or thank our Author for it; so they must be become void of
all sense and understanding, if they suffer themselves to be either wheedled or
frighted into an opinion of their being subject to receive any damage by the
Tests; it being so expressly contrary both to the Terms of those Laws, and to
their own experience. Nor can they be so far abandoned of God, nor prove so
treacherous to the Nation, Posterity and the whole Protestant Interest through
Europe, as to cooperate to the Repeal of them, by destroying that great Fence
about the Reformed Religion in England, and to put the Papists into capacity
both of subverting it there and every where else. And setting aside a few
mercenary fellows among them, there is no ground to fear, after we have had so
many proofs of their zeal for the Protestant Religion and English Liberties, in
the worst of times and under the greatest Temptations, that they should at this
season, when all others behave themselves with so much Integrity and Courage,
be accessory to so villainous a thing. The ill success which the Court has met
with in the several Towns and City's, since the late Regulation of the
Corporations, sufficiently shows, that the Dissenters who were put into
Magistracy, in hopes by them to have compassed the packing of a Parliament, are
no less careful of preserving the Test Laws, than they of the Church of England
Communion were, who were displaced to make way for them. And to discover the
grossness of the abuse, which our Author, without regard to Truth or Ingenuity,
endeavors to put upon them, as if they were judged by their Highnesses to be
incapable of Trusts and Employments, or any ways concluded to stand under those
restraints by the Test, which the Roman Catholics do; there is not one word in
Mijn Here Fagel's Letter, whereby they are said to be subject unto them, or by
which there is any ground administered of fancying they are put into the same
rank with the Papists, and whereby to fear that they may hereafter come to be
treated accordingly. But in stead of this, they are expressly told, that Their
Highnesses do both allow and desire the abrogation of all the Penal Laws
against Dissenters, and the having them freed from the severity of them; and
that they do not only consent but heartily approve of their having an entire
liberty granted them for the full exercise of their Religion, without any
trouble or hindrance, or being left exposed to the least molestation or
inconvenience upon that account. And to testify how far the Nonconformists are
from being in the least menaced by those Laws, it is again Declared, that the
only reason why their Highnesses refuse to consent to the having them repealed,
is, because that they have no other tendency, save to Secure the Reformed
Religion from the Designs of the Papists, by containing provisions in the
virtue of which, those only may be kept out of Office who can not testify that
they are of the Reformed, and not of the Roman Catholic Religion. Which as it
is the highest evidence imaginable, of their own stedfastness and integrity in
the Reformed Religion, and of the compassion and love which they equally bear
to all who profess it, and how careful they will at all times be to have it
maintained and supported; so it is the putting such a merit upon all
Protestants, that it should engage their prayers for their happy extation to
the Throne, and make them ambitious as well as willing and ready to hazard
their lives and Fortunes, for the securing the Succession unto them, if any
should be so wicked as to go about to preclude them.

But I must pay a further attendance upon our Author, and accompany him to the
fifth particular which I promised to consider; namely that according to his own
foolish and incoherent way of writing, while he pretends to commend and justify
the proceeding of His Majesty of Great Britain, he publishes the villainy of
the Papal Church, and proclaims the dishonor and injustice of diverse Eminent
Monarchs and Princes of the Romish Communion. His Panegyricks upon the King of
England, are so many just Satyr's upon the Church of Rome, the Monarch of
France, and the Duke of Savoy, etc. For if it be becoming a Christian, to be of
a contrary judgment to those who are for persecuting such as differ from the
public and established Religion, and if it be a sentiment worthy of a Royal
mind, that none ought to be oppressed for their Consciences in Divine Matters;
what characters of irreligion, ignominy, wickedness, are due unto them, who
judge it to be meritorious to destroy sincere Christians, for no other
pretended Crime, save that they cannot believe as the Pope and the Church of
Rome do. Surely our Author must either be extremely ignorant of the Doctrine of
his own Church, and of the bloody and barbarous practices pursuant thereunto,
both at this day, and for many ages past; or else he must be the most unsincere
miscreant that ever writ, or at best be guilty of the inconsistency and folly
as to continue in the Communion of a Church, whose Articles of Faith he
condemns as Antichristian, and whose practices according to the Terms made
necessary for Salvation, he abhors both as unworthy of Royal Minds, and
contrary to Christian Piety. But tho nothing can render a false man honest, or
a foolish Man wise, yet seeing something may be done toward the curing a
person's ignorance if he be teachable, or at least to show his obstinacy, and
that the fault is in his will, not in his Understanding, if he will not learn
and be convinced; I shall therefore both acquaint him a little with the
Doctrine of that Church, and briefly put him in remembrance, how these of the
Romish Fellowship have therefore persecuted Christians, and still continue so
to do, only for differing from the public and established Religion. As to the
first, it is sufficiently known that according to the judgment of the Church of
Rome we are Heretics, and that Heresy being Crimen laesae Majestatis Divinae,
we are therefore the worst of Traitors, and liable to the Penalties of the
greatest High Treason. And thereupon we are not only declared to be infamous
and sentenced to be deprived of all Honor and Dignity, and to be incapable of
all Offices, and have our Estates confiscated and seized; but we are condemned
to be burnt, and if that cannot conveniently be effected, it is both made
lawful and meritorious to extirpate us by War or Massacre, as shall be best and
most safe for the Church of Rome. In order whereunto, not only all Laws made
for our Security are declared to be null, and that no promises made unto us,
ought to be kept; but all Princes, that neglect to destroy and extirpate us,
are proclaimed to be deposed. And suitable hereunto has their carriage been for
many ages to such as differ from them in Articles of Faith, and will not join
in their Superstitions and Idolatries. In proof whereof I neither need to
insist upon the infinite Murders, committed by the Inquisition, the most
Devilish Engine of Cruelty that ever the World was acquainted with, nor to
reflect so far backward as the Parisian and Irish Massacres, or the infinite
Slaughters perpetrated heretofore in France, Germany, and the Low Countries,
etc. seeing we have such fresh and doleful evidences of the mercy and
gentleness of the Papal Church, in the ungrateful, inhumane, perjurious, and
salvage persecutions executed so lately in France and Piedmont. If it be the
effect of Royal and Paternal affection in the King of England to his Subjects,
that all he endeavors, is to treat them as becomes a common Father, without
making any distinction between one and another, as our Author is pleased to
call it in his Testimony concerning him; what cruel Parents must many Princes
of the Roman Communion be, who act with that difference toward their people,
that while they cherish and embrace some, they tear out the Bowels, and suck
the blood of others? And if no Society destitute of such tender and Christian
affections, can merit the name of a Church, we hence learn where to fasten the
character of being the Mother of Harlots. In that we not only know whose
Doctrine it is, that whom She cannot convert, She ought to destroy; but that we
have observed her, to have been in all Ages drunk with the Blood of Saints. All
the commendations our Author bestows upon the King of England; are not only
either so many accusations of His Majesty's insincerity in the Papal Faith, or
infallible indications that both the King (pardon the expression) and his
Minister, are Hypocritical Dissemblers; but they are stabbing and twinging
Satyr's against Mother Church, and the Holy Father, and against his Brittanick
Majesty's dear Brother and Ally the French King. Nor can we be guilty either of
Crime or Indecency, in the worst we can say of the Church of Rome, and the Most
Christian King; seeing we have in equivalent Terms a President for it, both
from so good a Catholic, and so wise a Minister of a great Monarch, as our
honorable Author is.

And tho I begin to grow weary of conversing with so impertinent a man, yet I
am bound to wait upon him a little longer, and while the Reader can reap no
advantage by any thing he says, to see whether it be not possible to lay hold
of an occasion from his Ignorance and Folly, to communicate things that may be
more solid and instructive. The sixth thing therefore whereof I accused him,
and for which I promised to call him to an account, is his egregious ignorance
in relation to Government, Laws, Customs, and matters of Fact, Mijn Here Fagel
tells us, that the Test Laws being enacted by King and Parliament for the
Security of the Reformed Religion, and the Roman Catholics receiving no
prejudice by them, but being merely restrained from getting into a condition to
subvert it, therefore Their Highnesses could not consent to their Repeal. And
he further adds, that there is no Kingdom, Commonwealth, or any constituted
Body and Society, in which there are not Laws made for the safety thereof,
which not only provide against all attempts that may disturb their peace, but
which prescribe such conditions as they judge necessary, for the discerning who
are qualified to bear Employments. To which he again subjoins, that there is a
great difference between the conduct of these of the Reformed Religion toward
Roman Catholics, which is moderate, and only to prevent their getting into a
capacity to do hurt; and that of those of the Roman Catholic Religion toward
the Reformed, who not being satisfied to exclude them from places of Trust, do
both suppress the whole Exercise of their Religion and severely persecute all
that profess it. And he finally adds, that both Reason and the Experience of
the present, as well as past Ages do show, that it is impossible for Roman
Catholics, and those of the Reformed Religion, when joined together in places
of Trust, and public Employment, to maintain a good Correspondence, live in
mutual peace, and to discharge their Offices quietly and to the public Good.
Now from these several passages, which carry their own evidence along with
them, our Author takes occasion both to vent his foolish and ridiculous
Politics, and to proclaim his ignorance in History and of the most obvious
matters of Fact. However we shall have the patience to hearken to what he has
been pleased to say, and shall examine it piece by piece, as we go along. And
the first thing he does is to acquaint us with a mighty Mystery of State, and
which none but so great a Minister could have been able to have revealed;
namely, that tho the King and Parliament upon the first Revolution with respect
to Religion, and the introducing and setting up the Reformed Religion, thought
fit to make those Laws which they judged necessary for its preservation; yet
that it does not follow that his present Majesty and a Parliament would be of
the same mind, but that they might enact Laws of a differing Nature from the
former, and re-establish Religion into the same State, in which it was before
the Reformed Doctrine and Worship was set up. We are much obliged to our Author
for this discovery, though I must add, that this it is to trust a Fool with
secrets, for he will be sure to be blabbing. For tho he subjoin, that he will
not say that matters would be pushed so far; yet he has already told us
enough, to make us understand both what his own hopes are, and what is designed
by the Papal party, if they could compass a Parliament of a Complexion and
Temper to their mind. But there are two fatal things, which lie in their way.
One is, that neither progressing nor closeting, bribing nor threatening, can
prove effectual to give them the slenderest ground of confidence of their
obtaining a Parliament of that mould and constitution. And the second is, that
all the Members must take the Tests, before they can be a Legal Parliament; and
then there is little probability, that they who can make the Declaration
required in these Laws, will be inclinable to Repeal them; especially at a
season, when their own safety as well as that of the Protestant Religion,
renders it so necessary to have them maintained. Whatsoever any Body of men, by
what name soever they be called, or within what walls soever they assemble,
shall attempt to do, without first having taken the Tests; is ipso facto null
and void in Law, and will serve to no Legal purpose, but to make themselves
obnoxious to the severest punishments, which the Justice of a provoked and
betrayed Nation can be able to inflict upon them. So that we do not doubt what
the King would do, for the re-establishing Popery and banishing the Protestant
Religion, could he get a Parliament to his mind; but our hope is that he will
not, and the better to prevent it, we will endeavor to keep our Test Laws. But
to go on with our Author, who with his accustomed ignorance, but personating
here the wisdom of a Solon or a Lycurgus, takes upon him to instruct us, that
as nothing can be called the fundamental Law of a Kingdom or a Republic, but
what was enacted at the commencement of that State or Society, before any
alterations could fall out in it with reference to Religion; so nothing
deserves the name of such a Law save that which is to the advantage and benefit
of all the Subjects. It were not amiss here to enquire, by what Authority our
Author fastens on Mijn Here Fagel this Term of Fundamental Law in reference to
the Tests; seeing he never used it in his Letter much less applied it to such a
purpose. But falsifying is so natural to this Gentleman, that he could not
avoid it, even when he might have been sensible, that he would not escape the
being challenged for it. There is a Country in the world, that is said to bear
no poisonous animal, nor had it need, seeing if any number of the Natives be of
the mould and frame that some are, there are brutal and venomous Creatures
enough in it, tho there be neither Toad nor Serpent there. But may not the Test
Laws answer the end they were designed unto, of being a Fence about Religion,
tho they be none of the Fundamental Laws of the Government. It is not the name
that alone gives value to a Law; but the Sanction of the Legislative Authority,
and the usefulness of it to the public good. A Statute, that was occasioned by
a necessity arisng in reference to the public Safety, ought as much to be
stood by and upheld while that necessity continues, as if it were an original
Law and Coaeval with the Constitution. And if it was the indispensable
dependence of the Welfare and Safety of the Community upon such and such
Provisions at first, that gave them the Name of Fundamental Laws; I am sure,
that under our present Circumstances, we may call the Test Laws absolutely
needful, if we assume not the vanity to style them Fundamental. Besides I would
fain know of our Author, that if all Laws lie exposed to an easy Abrogation,
that are not coaeval with the Kingdom; what will then become of the Magna
Charta for Liberty of Conscience, which his Majesty not only promises, but
undertakes to make irrepealable? And withal may not some Laws be as necessary
to the being and preservation of a State under the notion of Protestant; as
others are to its being and subsistence under the consideration of an embodied
and formed Society? Every Society is bound to use all necessary means to
preserve it self, and while it makes no provisions in order thereunto, that
derive inconvenience upon others, unless it be only to keep them from being
able to do hurt; it would be a wickedness as well as a folly to neglect them.
In a word, as the making no Laws necessary for the Safety of a people under any
knowledge of God they may be grown up into, but what were coaeval with their
first formation into a Kingdom or Republic, were the weakening and undermining
the Security of the Christian Religion in all parts of the world where it has
obtained to be embraced and settled; so by the same reason that it is lawful to
make provisions for the preservation of Christianity in a State professing the
Gospel of Jesus Christ; it is also lawful to make the like provisions for the
Security of the Reformed Religion in these Kingdoms and Commonwealths, which
have judged it to be their duty to God, and their Souls, to receive and
establish it. And for our Author's saying, that no Law deserves to be called
Fundamental, save that which is to the benefit and advantage of all the
Subjects; it is wholly impertinent to the case for which it is alleged, and
does no way's attack or weaken what the Pensionary had said. For as the Laws
contended for to be maintained, were never styled Fundamental; so many
thousands may have benefit by a Law; whom nevertheless all persons of sense and
wisdom will account unfit to be advanced to public Trusts. As no man will
judge it unreasonable to require that all who are held capable of public
employments, should have some degree of wit and understanding; so I think it is
very reasonable that they should be qualified with so much honesty, as to be
well affected to the Government as it is by Law established. And to speak
properly it is not the Law that makes the Papists incapable of Offices and
Employments, it only declares they shall not be admitted, because they were
incapable before, and had made themselves unfit to be trusted, partly through
their dependence upon a foreign power, that is at enmity with the State, and
seeks to subvert it, and partly by reason of that principle which they are
possessed with, of its being their duty to destroy us whenever they can. And
as it is a great favor vouchsafed by the Government, to suffer such to live
under it, as stand so ill affected to it, and want only means to overthrow it;
so if the Roman Catholics will not be content with the first without the
latter, it will be a great temptation upon the Kingdom to deprive them of the
Privilege they have, because they would not be content with it, unless they
might obtain that which the Nation could not grant, without being Felo de se,
and without abandoning the means both of our safety here, and Happiness
hereafter. And whereas our Author takes the confidence to tell us, That there
are many States and Cities in Germany, where without the giving occasion to any
disturbance, the Government is shared between Papists and Protestants, and
where both those of the Roman Catholic and Reformed Religion, do equally
partake in public Trusts and Employments: He must pardon me if I not only say,
he is mistaken, but that it is a downright Falsehood, and that herein he
betrays his wonted ignorance, or at least gives us a new discovery of the
insincerity that is natural to him. Nor would he have vented this in so general
Terms, but that he did foresee if he should have condescended to particulars,
how easy it would have been for persons of very ordinary acquaintance either
with History or the World, to have both contradicted and refuted him. And if
there were some one or other small City, where by reason of the Fewness of
those of one Religion to exercise the Government, and to take care of the
Welfare of the Society, those of the other Religion are sometimes received into
Employments, in order to prevent the inconveniences which the want of a
competent number of Magistrates would be attended with, and where the Jealousy
and Fear of being swallowed up by some envious and potent Neighbor, may lay
them under a necessity of agreeing better together than otherwise they would or
than the principles of some of them incline them unto; must we thence conclude
that it ought to be so in a great Kingdom, where there is so vast a number of
Protestants admirably qualified with Wisdom, Interest, and Estates, to
discharge all the Offices of the Government, and to manage the universal care
of the Society, without running the hazard of the many mischiefs, that would
accompany the taking the Papists into partnership with them? Nor could Mijn
Here Fagel in representing what is safe or unsafe to so great and noble a
Nation, take notice of what is practiced upon necessity in some mean Town or
Corporation, (supposing that it were there as our Author alleges) without
transgressing against all the Rules both of prudence and decency. But as the
Pensionary had no where in his Letter affirmed, that there were not any States
or Cities, in which the Protestants and Papists bear Office in Government
together; but had only said, that Reason and Experience do show us, how
impossible it will be for them when joined together in places of Trust and
public Employments, to maintain a good Correspondence, and to live peaceably
with one another; so this is found to be so just a truth, and so pertinently
observed, that in all the places where it has been practiced (tho not in
Germany, as our Author ignorantly suggests) they have not only lived in
continual heats and dissentions, but have often come to open Hostility against
each other. Nor has it merely fallen out thus in private, and particular
States within themselves, but the like evils have often followed and ensued
where more States have associated into Union for the common preservation of the
Generality; and where the Government has been in some in the hands of
Protestants, and in others executed by Roman Catholics. Of this we have
diverse Examples in the Cantons of Switzerland, where through the Magistrates
being in some Cantons of the Reformed, and in others of the Roman Catholic
Religion, they have not only been often hindered from joining and acting
vigorously, as they ought to have done, for the interest of all, and the
benefit of the common Confederation and Union; but they have sometimes come to
open ruptures, and have been embarked in War against one another. And
forasmuch as our Author makes bold to say, That there was never any Christian
Kingdom, where the Religion that the Prince professes, and which had in former
ages been Dominant, was so far laid aside and banished, that his Subjects
professing the same with himself, were shut out and precluded from Trusts and
Employments. I will take the freedom to tell him, that it is so gross and
palpable a Falsehood, that none but a person of his ignorance and impudence,
would have had the face to have asserted it. For there are Christian Kingdoms
that have done more than this amounts unto, and who to prevent the danger of
having Papists preferred to Trusts and Employments, in case a Prince of their
Religion should come to the Throne, have been so wise as to declare Roman
Catholics incapable either of obtaining or keeping the Sovereignty. And it was
in the virtue of such a Law, and by reason of the dread of it, that Christina
Queen of Sweden, upon the having taken up a resolution to turn Papist, chose to
demit her Crown before she declared her self, as knowing that immediately after
such a Declaration she would have been deposed from the Throne, and possibly
not have had so liberal an allowance assigned her afterward, as by that
conduct she did obtain. Nor is it unknown to any, except it be to such as our
Author is for natural and acquired accomplishments, that there were not only
Laws in Scotland for precluding a Popish Prince from coming to the Government,
but that the same thing was employed in the English Oaths of Allegiance and
Supremacy, as being Oaths of such a frame and nature that it had been most
incongruous to impose them upon Subjects to a King of the Roman Catholic
Religion. And tho these two Nations did not improve the advantage which they
had by means of their legal provisions, to hinder the present King from
inheriting the Crowns of the respective Realms; yet those Laws serve to inform
us, how far some Christian Kingdoms thought it lawful to go, and to what
height to Act, not only against Popish Subjects, but against Catholic Princes
themselves. Yea the time was, that the very Papists were so far from condemning
the having men of their Religion debarred from Trusts and Employments in
Protestant Kingdoms under a Popish Prince, that they made the Test Laws by
which they are shut out from Offices and Declared incapable of them, the great
Argument against the necessity of having the Bill passed for excluding the Duke
of York from the Crown, and improved them as the main Engine for allaying the
fears of the Nation, under the apprehensions they had of his being a Roman
Catholic, and coming to the Throne. But by their different Language now from
what it was then, all Englishmen understand how far they are to be believed in
other cases: and whether the many promises which they do make at this time, in
order to a further design, and the putting a new Trick upon the Nation, ought
to be depended on by them whom they have already deceived. And whereas upon
Mijn Here Fagel's having observed that the conduct of Roman Catholics is much
more severe toward Protestants, than that of those of the Reformed Religion
toward Papists, our Author is pleased to reply, that in order to judge as we
should of that different procedure, we are to consider whether it be not less
just, to banish a Religion that had been so long dominant as the Roman
Catholic had been; than to withstand the introduction of a new Religion that
would depress and supplant the old. All I shall say in reference to this, is
that as it does not weaken, but in effect acknowledge what the Pensionary had
said; so by justifying what the Papists did, to prevent the bringing in of the
Protestant Religion, which he styles new; he forewarns us what we are to expect
they will be ready to do, for the reintroducing the Papal Religion, to which he
gives the character of old. Nor is it at all pertinent to the present case,
which of the Religions is the oldest, or which is the newest; but all contended
for is that the method's of the one, have been, and still are, more severe and
sanguinary, than the methods of those of the other. And as we believe our
Religion to be as ancient, as Jesus Christ and his Apostles; so no prescription
of time for Popery's having been in possession, can deprive that which has the
Divine Authority to warrant it, from a right of re-entrance.

There remains only one thing to be spoken unto, of all that I undertook to
discipline and correct our Author for, and that is the signal ingratitude of
the Papists, and particularly of this Gentleman, to their Highnesses, for all
that Liberty, Favor, and ease which Their Highnesses were willing to have had
allowed unto them. And that we may the more fully have an Idea of their
unthankfulness, we are to consider both the extent of that Liberty which Their
Highnesses were contented to have had bestowed upon them, and the obligations
they would have come under for the rendering it hereafter inviolable. And all
this not only at a season, when many of the Papists carry it so undutifully
toward their Highnesses, but at a time when they of the Reformed Religion are
so unhumanely persecuted by several Popish Princes in other parts of the world.
It had not been an unreasonable desire that before the Papists had been so
importunate to have all Penal Laws against them in Protestant Nations rescinded
and taken away; that they should have declared themselves, and improved their
interest, for the Abrogation of all such Laws as are in force against those of
the Reformed Religion in Popish Countries. And if their Highnesses had insisted
upon such a stipulation, before They would have given their consent for the
Repeal of the Penal Laws against Roman Catholics in England, it had been no
more than what was agreeable to the Rules of Wisdom and Justice. But their
Highnesses not thinking it fit to suffer their own mercy to be restrained by
reason of the want of Christian bowels in others, took the first opportunity
put into their hands, of testifying their readiness to consent to the Repeal of
all those Laws against Papists in England, Scotland and Ireland, by which they
are made liable to fines or other punishments. And that those which they can
not agree to the rescinding of, are only such by which the Reformed Religion is
covered from the designs of the Roman Catholics against it, and by which they
are restrained from getting into a condition to overturn it. One would think
that this should have been received as a most special favor, and have obliged
them to very hearty acknowledgments. Especially when the Prince and Princess
were willing to confirm both this and a Liberty for the private Exercise of
their Religion with their Guaranty. But in stead of any symptoms of gratitude,
there is nothing to be heard of from many of them, or to be met with in our
Answerer, but what proclaims their dissatisfaction, anger, and revenge. For
besides all the ill returns, we have already taken notice of in this wrathful
and unthankful man; he tells us, that all which Their Highnesses declare
themselves ready to consent unto amounts only to the abolishing some cruel
Laws, by which Romish Ecclesiastics stood condemned to death, for no other
reason save their being Priests; and in the virtue of which, other persons were
banished and deprived of their Estates, merely for being Roman Catholics; all
which was a higher degree of barbarity than was ever practiced among the most
salvage Nations. Now not to trouble my self about what kind of entertainment,
Romish Priests and Lay Papists have met with among those Nations, which our
Author styles Barbarous, tho it will be found infinitely more severe, than any
thing that was ever inflicted upon them in England, Scotland or Ireland, by
reason of their Religion, or upon the score of any Ecclesiastical Character: I
would only know of this modest and veracious Gentleman, what he thinks of the
barbarous and innumerable Cruelties, that were perpetrated in all ages and
places heretofore, and which are at this day committed upon peaceable and
sincere Christians, for no other crime but that they could not, and to this day
cannot believe as the Church of Rome does, nor continue in Communion with so
idolatrous and villainous a Society. Whatsoever measure of severity has been
any where exercised toward Papists, it was but according to the President
themselves had set, in their dealing with them whom they style Heretics, and
in which the Copy comes vastly below the Original. But then that which wholly
alters the case, is, that whereas the Papists persecute and destroy Christians,
merely upon the account of Religion; there were never any severe, much less
Sanguinary Laws enacted against them, save by reason of their Crimes against
the State, and for being Enemies and Traitors to the Government. Popery was
never persecuted in England as it is a false and erroneous Belief; but as it
binds men to the owning of a foreign, usurped, and unlawful Jurisdiction. It Is
neither for their believing Transubstantiation, nor for their Worshipping
Images, that Papists are adjudged to penalties or death; but because they
adhere to a foreign Enemy, and are treacherous to their Country. Could they
have been but good Subjects; their being bad Christians would never have
prejudiced them. And indeed while they continue to hold that the Pope can
depose Protestant Sovereigns, and absolve Subjects from their Allegiance to
them, and that it is lawful to cut the Throats of all whom they style
Heretics, and that all Laws made for our security are null and void, as being
enacted by an incompetent and unlawful Authority, it would seem according to
the exact measures of wisdom and reason, that all lenity and favor toward
them, were not only a supererogating in Mercy, but an indiscretion in Policy.
But then to let such into the Government, were plainly to betray the State, and
wilfully to abandon both it and our selves to be destroyed and ruined. Nor is
there so much danger in advancing Robbers and Newgate Fellons to Employments,
as there would be in preferring Papists, especially if Jesuiced and Bigoted,
into Civil Offices in a Reformed Kingdom. And therefore seeing they will not
thankfully accept and quietly acquiesce in what is offered, and that rather
from an exurberancy of Generosity and Mercy, than from Maxims of prudence, and
obligations arising from duty; it is best to leave them, to steer their own
course, and to pursue those Methods, which will infallibly issue in their
disadvantage, to say no worse. All ways of Gentleness and Moderation toward
them, do only encourage their making the bolder claims, and the proceeding
further in their usurpations. The giving them an inch, provokes them to take an
ell, and they grow enraged because we will not tamely suffer it. If they act as
they do, while the Chain hangs still about their necks? what are we to expect
if it should be wholly taken off, and they left loose to exert the malignity
which their Religion inspires them with? For not being contented to invade and
usurp all sorts of Employments and places of Trust in defiance of the Test
Laws; they have assumed that confidence, as to make those very Laws which were
intentionally enacted and designed to keep Papists out of Office and Power, the
ground and occasion of incapacitating and shutting out Protestants. And whereas
none are by Law to be admitted into Employments without making the Declarations
contained in the Tests; none are now to be continued, save they who shall both
refuse to take them, and withal promise to give their votes for the Election of
such persons into Parliament, as shall be willing to Abrogate and Repeal them.
Which is not only such a piece of Chicannery in it self, but such an Assault
upon the Legislative Authority, that it is hard to speak of it, without more
than usual emotion of mind, and the having ones indignation strangely excited
and enflamed. However all I shall allow my self at present to say, shall be
only to advise all sort of persons to take care what they do, there being no
Dispensing power lodged in the King, in reference to Penal, and much less in
relation to the Test Laws. Of this we have a clear and uncontrollable proof in
the proceedings of the Parliament 1673. when the House of Commons voted the
Declaration of the late King for Liberty of Conscience, to be both a violation
of the Laws of the Land, and an altering of the Legislative power. Which is the
more remarkable, in that it was not only done by the most obsequious Parliament
that ever any King of England had, and of which many of the Members were his
hired and bribed Pensioners, but that they did thus adjudge, both after the
King had acquainted them by a solemn Speech at the opening of the Session, that
he was Resolved to adhere to his Declaration, and had endeavored to Hector
them into a departure from their Vote, by telling them in an Answer which he
made to one of their Addresses, that they had questioned a power in the Crown,
which had never been disputed in the Reign of any of his Predecessors, and
which belonged unto him as a prerogative inseparable from the Sovereignty. Yet
notwithstanding both all this, and his applying himself in a Speech to the
House of Lords to have engaged them to stand by him against the Commons, he was
necessitated upon the Commons insisting, that there was never any such
Dispensing power vested in the Crown, nor claimed or exercised by any of his
Predecessors; and that the assuming it was a changing of the Constitution, and
an altering of the Legislative Authority; and upon the Lords declining to stand
by him, and their advising him to give liberty by way of Bill to be passed into
a Law; I say he was necessitated to take his Declaration off from the File,
tear the Seal from it, and to assure both Houses in a Speech he made to them,
March 8. that what he had done in taking upon him to Suspend the Penal Laws,
should not for the future be drawn either into consequence or Example. In
brief, if the Papists will not so far consult their own interest, and comply
with our safety, as to be contented with an ease from Penalties, and an
Indulgence to be ratified into a Law for the private exercise of their
Religion; it is the indispensable duty of all Protestants, of what party or
persuasion soever they be, to unite together in withstanding their endeavors
and attempts for obtaining more. We have a laudable example in the carriage of
all that pretended to Christianity, when they were brought into a condition
somewhat parallel with ours in one of the first Centuries. For tho the Orthodox
had been persecuted by the Arrians under Constantius, and some of the Arrians
harshly enough treated at least, as they thought for a while under Constantine;
yet upon Julian's coming to the Throne, both parties were so far from embracing
his offers in order to revenge their wrongs upon one another, that they
resolved at that season if not wholly to silence their Disputes, yet to forbear
all those harsh Terms, that had enflamed their heats and animosities. To which
I shall add but this one thing more, and would beg of the Dissenters, that they
may seriously consider it, namely that as the Donatists were the only party of
Christians that made Addresses to Julian, and received favors from him; so
they thereby became infamous, and were often afterward reproached with it.

Thus Sir, I have studied to do what you required of me, and if it be my
misfortune not to have acquitted my self answerably to your expectations; yet
the doing it as well, as the being bound up to an Author, that administers so
little occasion for valuable thoughts, would allow, gives me the satisfaction
of having approved my self,

SIR, Your Obedient Servant.


