

Non magna loquimur sed bivimus.
Nihil opinionis Gratia. omnia
Conscentiae faciam
A Dissuasive FROM POPERY.

By JEREMY Lord Bishop of Down. The third Edition, revised and corrected by the
Author.

LONDON: Printed by I. G. for Rich. Royston, Bookseller to the King's most
Excellent Majesty. MDCLXIV.

THE PREFACE TO THE READER.
WHen a Roman Gentleman had, to please himself, written a book in Greek, and
presented it to Cato; he desired him to pardon the faults of his Expressions,
since he wrote in Greek, which was a Tongue in which he was not perfect Master.
Cato told him he had better then to have let it alone and written in Latin, by
how much it is better not to commit a fault, than to make apologies. For if the
thing be good, it needs not to be excused; if it be not good, a crude apology
will do nothing but confess the fault, but never makes amends. I therefore make
this Address to all who will concern themselves in reading this book, not to
ask their pardon for my fault in doing of it; I know of none; for if I had
known them I would have mended them before the Publication; and yet though I
know not any, I do not question but much fault will be found by too many; I
wish I have given them no cause for their so doing. But I do not only mean it
in the particular Periods, (where every man that is not a Son of the Church of
England or Ireland, will at least do as Apollonius did to the Apparition that
affrighted his company on the mountain Caucasus, he will revile and persecute
me with evil words) but I mean it in the whole Design, and men will reasonably
or capritiously ask, Why any more Controversies? Why this over again? Why
against the Papists, against whom so very many are already exasperated, that
they cry out fiercely of Persecution? And why can they not be suffered to enjoy
their share of peace, which has returned in the hands of His Sacred Majesty at
his blessed Restoration? For as much of this as concerns my self I make no
excuse, but give my reasons, and hope to justify this procedure with that
modesty which David used to his angry brother, saying, What have I now done? is
there not a cause? The cause is this:

The Reverend Fathers my Lords the Bishops of Ireland in their circumspection
and watchfulness over their Flocks having espied grievous Wolves to have
entered in, some with Sheeps-clothing, and some without, some secret enemies,
and some open, at first endeavored to give check to those enemies which had
put fire into the bed-straw; and though God has very much prosper'd their
labors, yet they have work enough to do, and will have, till God shall call
them home to the land of peace and unity. But it was soon remembered, that when
King James of blessed memory had discerned the spirits of the English
Non-conformists, and found them peevish and factious, unreasonable and
imperious, not only unable to govern, but as inconsistent with the Government,
as greedy to snatch at it for themselves; resolved to take off their disguise,
and put a difference between Conscience and Faction, and to bring them to the
measures and rules of Laws; and to this the Council and all wise men were
consenting, because by the Kings great wisdom, and the conduct of the whole
Conference and Inquiry, men saw there was reason on the Kings side, and
necessity on all sides. But the Gunpowder Treason breaking out, a new Zele was
enkindled against the Papists, and it shined so greatly, that the
Non-conformists escaped by the light of it, and quickly grew warm by the heat
of that flame, to which they added no small increase by their Declamations and
other acts of insinuation: insomuch that they being neglected, multiplied
until they got power enough to do all those mischiefs which we have seen and
felt. This being remembered and spoken of, it was soon observed that the Tables
only were now turned, and that now the public zele and watchfulness against
those men and those persuasions, which so lately have afflicted us, might give
to the Emissaries of the Church of Rome leisure and opportunity to grow into
numbers and strength to debauch many Souls, and to unhinge the safety and peace
of the Kingdom. In Ireland we saw too much of it done, and found the mischief
growing too fast, and the most intolerable inconveniences, but too justly
apprehended, as near and imminent. We had reason at least to cry Fire when it
flamed through our very Roofs, and to interpose with all care and diligence
when Religion and the eternal Interest of Souls was at stake, as knowing we
should be greatly unfit to appear and account to the great Bishop and Shepherd
of Souls if we had suffered the enemies to sow tares in our fields, we standing
and looking on. It was therefore considered how we might best serve God, and
rescue our charges from their danger, and it was concluded presently to run to
arms, I mean to the weapons of our warfare, to the armor of the Spirit, to the
works of our calling, and to tell the people of their peril, to warn them of
the enemy, and to lead them in the ways of truth and peace and holiness: that
if they would be admonished, they might be safe, if they would not, they should
be without excuse, because they could not say but the Prophets have been
amongst them.

But then it was next enquired who should minister in this affair, and put in
order all those things which they had to give in charge: It was easy to choose
many, but hard to choose one; there were many fit to succeed in the vacant
Apostleship, and though Barsabas the Just was by all the Church named as a fit
and worthy man, yet the lot fell upon Matthias; and that was my case, it fell
to me to be their Amanuensis, when persons most worthy were more readily
excused; and in this my Lords the Bishops had reason, 1. Cor. 6.4.
that (according to S. Paul's rule) If there be judgments or controversies
amongst us, they should be employed who are least esteemed in the Church; and
upon this account I had nothing left me but Obedience; though I confess that I
found regret in the nature of the employment, for I love not to be (as S. Paul
calls it) one of the (...), Disputers of this world. For I suppose skill in
Controversies (as they are now used) to be the worst part of Learning, and time
is the worst spent in them, and men the least benefited by them; that is, when
the Questions are curious and impertinent, intricate and inexplicable, not to
make men better, but to make a Sect. But when the Propositions disputed are of
the foundation of Faith, or lead to good life, or naturally do good to single
persons or public societies, then they are part of the depositum of
Christianity, of the Analogy of faith; and for this we are by the Apostle
commanded to contend earnestly, and therefore Controversies may become
necessary; but because they are not often so, but oftentimes useless and always
troublesome; and as an ill diet makes an ill habit of body, so does the frequent
use of controversies baffle the understanding, and makes it crafty to deceive
others, it self remaining instructed in nothing but useless notions and words
of contingent signification and distinctions without difference, which minister
to pride and contention and teach men to be pertinacious, troublesome and
uncharitable, therefore I love them not.

But because by the Apostolical Rule I am tied to do all things without
murmurings, Phil. 2.14.
as well as without disputings, I considered it over again, and found my self
relieved by the subject matter, and the grand consequent of the present
Questions. For in the present affair, the case is not so as in the others; here
the Questions are such that the Church of Rome declares them to reach as far as
eternity, and damn all that are not of their opinions; and the Protestants have
much more reason to fear concerning the Papists, such who are not excused by
ignorance, that their condition is very sad and deplorable, and that it is
charity to snatch them as a brand from the fire; and indeed the Church of Rome
maintains Propositions, which, if the Ancient Doctors of the Church may be
believed, are apt to separate from God. I instance in their superaddition of
Articles and Propositions, derived only from a pretended tradition, and not
contained in Scripture. Now the doing of this is a great sin, and a great
danger. Adoro Scripturae plenitudinem; Si non est scriptum timeat vae illud
adjicientibus and detrahentibus destinatum, said Tertullian: I adore the
fullness of Scripture, and if it be not written, Contra Hermogen.
let Hermogenus fear the woe that is destined to them that detract from or add
to it.

De vera fide and Moral. reg. 72. c. 1. and reg. 80. c. 22.
S. Basil says, Without doubt it is a most manifest argument of infidelity, and
a most certain sign of pride, to introduce any thing that is not written (in
the Scriptures;) our blessed Savior having said, My sheep hear my voice, and
the voice of strangers they will not hear; and to detract from Scriptures, or
add any thing to the Faith that is not there, is most vehemently forbidden by
the Apostle, saying, If it be but a man's testament, nemo superordinat, no man
adds to it. And says also, This was the Will of the Testator. Epist. Pasch. 2.
And Theophilus Alexandrinus says plainly, It is the part of a Devilish spirit
to think any thing to be Divine, that is not in the authority of the holy
Scriptures: De incarn^ Christi^
and therefore S. Athanasius affirms, that the Catholics will neither speak
nor endure to hear any thing in Religion that is a stranger to Scripture; it
being immodestiae vaecordia, an evil heart of immodesty, to speak those things
which are not written. Now let any man judge whether it be not our duty, and a
necessary work of charity, and the proper office of our Ministry, to persuade
our charges from the immodesty of an evil heart, from having a Devilish
spirit, from doing that which is vehemently forbidden by the Apostle, from
infidelity and pride, and lastly from that eternal Woe which is denounced
against them that add other words and doctrines than what is contained in the
Scriptures, and say, Dominus dixit, The Lord has said it, and he has not said
it. If we had put these severe censures upon the Popish doctrine of Tradition,
we should have been thought uncharitable; but because the holy Fathers do so,
we ought to be charitable, and snatch our Charges from the ambient flame.

Lib. 2. cap. de Origin. error. Lib. 7. contra Cel^um.
And thus it is in the question of Images; Dubium non est, quin Religio nulla
sit, ubicunque fimulacrum est, said Lactantius; Without all peradventure where
ever an Image is, (meaning for worship) there is no Religion: and that we ought
rather to die than pollute our Faith with such impieties, said Origin. It is
against the Law of Nature, it being expressly forbidden by the second
Commandment, as Irenaeus affirms, Tertullian, Cyprian, and S. Augustine; and
therefore is it not great reason we should contend for that Faith which forbids
all worship of Images, and oppose the superstition of such Guides who do teach
their people to give them veneration, to prevaricate the Moral Law, end the
very Law of Nature, and do that which whosoever does has no Religion? We know
Idolatry is a damnable sin, and we also know that the Roman Church with all the
artifices she could use, never can justify her self, or acquit the common
practices from Idolatry; and yet if it were but suspicious that it is Idolatry,
it were enough to awaken us; for God is a jealous God, and will not endure any
such causes of suspicion and motives of jealousy. I instance but once more.

Can. comperlmus de consecr. did. 2. in 1. Cor. 11.
The primitive Church did excommunicate them that did not receive the holy
Sacrament in both kinds, and S. Ambrose says, that he who receives the Mystery
other ways than Christ appointed, (that is, but in one kind, when he has
appointed it in two) is unworthy of the Lord, and he cannot have Devotion. Now
this thing we ough^ not to suffer, that our people by so do^ing should remain
unworthy of the Lord, and for ever be indevou^, ^^ cozened with a false show of
devotion, or fall by following evil Guides into the sentence of
Excommunication. These matters are not trifling, and when we see these errors
frequently taught and owned as the only true Religion, and yet are such evils,
which the Fathers say are the way of damnation, we have reason to hope that all
wise and good men, lovers of souls, will confess that we are within the circles
of our duty, when we teach our people to decline the crooked ways, and to walk
in the ways of Scripture and Christianity.

But we have observed amongst the generality of the Irish, such a declension of
Christianity, so great credulity to believe every superstitious story, such
confidence in vanity, such groundless pertinacy, such vicious lives, so little
sense of true Religion and the fear of God, so much care to obey the Priests,
and so little to obey God; such intolerable ignorance, such fond Oaths and
manners of swearing, thinking themselves more obliged by swearing on the
Mass Book, than the four Gospels, and S. Patricks Mass Book more than any new
one; swearing by their Fathers soul, by their Godsips hand, by other things
which are the product of those many Tales are told them; their not knowing upon
what account they refuse to come to Church, but only that now they are old and
never did, or their Countrymen do not, or their Fathers or Grandfathers never
did, or that their Ancestors were Priests, and they will not alter from their
Religion; and after all, can give no account of their Religion what it is:
only they believe as their Priest bids them, and go to Mass which they
understand not, and reckon their Beads to tell the number and the tale of their
prayers, and abstain from Eggs and flesh in Lent, and visit S. Patricks Well,
and leave Pins and Ribbons, Yarn or Thread in their holy Wells, and pray to God,
S. Mary and S. Patrick, S. Columbanus and S. Bridget, and desire to be buried
with S. Francis's Cord about them, and to fast on Saturdays in honor of our
Lady. These and so many other things of like nature we see daily, that we being
conscious of the infinite distance which these things have from the spirit of
Christianity, know that no charity can be greater than to persuade the people
to come to our Churches, where they shall be taught all the ways of godly
wisdom, of peace and safety to their souls: whereas now there are many of them
that know not how to say their prayers, but mutter like Pies and Parrots words
which they are taught, but they do not pretend to understand. But I shall give
one particular instance of their miserable superstition and blindness.

I was lately within a few months very much troubled with Petitions and
earnest Requests for the restoring a Bell, which a Person of Quality had in his
hands in the time of, and ever since, the late Rebellion. I could not guess at
the reasons of their so great and violent importunity, but told the
Petitioners, If they could prove that Bell to be theirs, the Gentleman was
willing to pay the full value of it; though he had no obligation to do so (that
I know of) but charity: but this was so far from satisfying them, that still
the importunity increased, which made me diligently to inquire into the secret
of it. The first cause I found was, that a dying person in the Parish desired
to have it rung before him to Church, and pretended he could not die in peace
if it were denied him; and that the keeping of that Bell did anciently belong
to that family from father to son: but because this seemed nothing but a fond
and an unreasonable superstition, I enquired further, and at last found that
they believed this Bell came from Heaven, and that it used to be carried from
place to place, and to end Controversies by Oath, which the worst men durst not
violate if they swore upon that Bell, and the best men amongst them durst not
but believe him; that if this Bell was rung before the Corpse to the grave, it
would help him out of Purgatory; and that therefore when any one died, the
friends of the deceased did, whilst the Bell was in their possession, hire it
for the behoof of their dead, and that by this means that Family was in part
maintained. I was troubled to see under what spirit of delusion those poor
souls do lie, how infinitely their credulity is abused, how certainly they
believe in trifles, and perfectly rely on vanity, and how little they regard
the truths of God, and how not at all they drink of the waters of Salvation.
For the numerous companies of Priests and Friars amongst them take care they
shall know nothing of Religion, but what they design for them, they use all
means to keep them to the use of the Irish Tongue, lest if they learn English
they might be supplied with persons fitter to instruct them; the people are
taught to make that also their excuse for not coming to our Churches, to hear
our advices, or converse with us in religious intercourses, because they
understand us not, and they will not understand us, neither will they learn
that they may understand and live. And this and many other evils are made
greater and more irremediable by the affrightment which their Priests put upon
them by the issues of Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, by which (they now
exercising it too publicly) they give them Laws, not only for Religion, but
even for Temporal things, and turn their Proselytes from the Mass, if they
become Farmers of the Tithes from the Minister or Proprietary without their
leave. I speak that which I know to be true by their own confession and
unconstrained and uninvited Narratives; so that as it is certain that the Roman
Religion, as it stands in distinction and separation from us, is a body of
strange Propositions, having but little relish of true primitive and pure
Christianity, (as will be made manifest, if the importunity of our Adversaries
extort it) so it is here amongst us a Fa^tion and a State-party and design to
recover their old Laws and barbarous manner of living, a device to enable them
to dwell alone, and to be Populus unius labii, a people of one language and
unmingled with others. And if this be Religion, it is such a one as ought to be
reproved by all the severities of Reason and Religion, lest the people perish,
and their souls be cheaply given away to them that make merchandise of souls,
who were the purchase and price of Christ's blood.

Having given this sad account, why it was necessary that my Lords the Bishops
should take care to do what they have done in this affair, and why I did
consent to be engaged in this Controversy, otherwise than I love to be, and
since it is not a love of trouble and contention, but charity to the souls of
the poor deluded Irish, there is nothing remaining but that we humbly desire of
God to accept and to bless this well-meant Labor of Love, and that by some
admirable ways of his Providence, he will be pleased to convey to them the
notices of their danger, and their sin, and to^de-obstruct the passages of
necessary truth to them, for we know the arts of their Guides, and that it will
be very hard that the notice of these things shall ever be suffered to arrive
to the common people, but that whi^^ hinders will hinder until it be taken
away: however we believe and hope in God for remedy.

For although Edom would not let his brother Israel pass into his Country, and
the Philistims would stop the Patriarchs Wells, and the wicked Shepherds of
Midian would drive their neighbors flocks from the watering troughs, and the
Emissaries of Rome use all arts to keep the people from the use of Scriptures,
the Wells of salvation, and from entertaining the notices of such things which
from the Scriptu^es we teach; yet as God found out a remedy for those of old,
so he will also for the poor misled people of Ireland; and will take away the
evil minds, or the opportunities of the Adversaries hindering the people from
Instruction, and make way that the Truths we have here taught may approach to
their ears, and sink into their hearts, and make them wise unto salvation. Amen.

The Contents.
The Introduction. page 1
CHAP. I.
The Doctrine of the Roman Church in the Controverted Articles is neither
Catholic, Apostolic, nor Primitive. 5
CHAP. II.
The Church of Rome, as it is at this day disordered, teaches Doctrines and
uses Practices, which are in themselves, or in their true and immediate
Consequences, direct Impieties, and give warranty to a wicked life. 127
CHAP. III.
The Church of Rome teaches Doctrines^ which in many things are destructive of
Christian Society in general, and o^ Monarchy in special: Both which the
Religion of the Church of England and Ireland does by her Doctrines greatly and
Christianly support. 260
A DISSUASIVE FROM POPERY To the People of IRELAND. The Introduction.
THe Questions of difference between Our Churches and the Church of Rome have
been so often disputed, and the evidences both sides so often produced, that
those who are strangers to the present constitution of affairs, it may seem
very unnecessary to say them over again: and yet it will seem almost
im^impossible to produce any new matter; or if we could, it will not be
probable, that what can be newly alleged can prevail more than all that which
already has been so often urged in these Questions. But we are not deterred
from doing our duty by any such considerations: as knowing, that the same
medicaments are with success applied to a returning or an abiding Ulcer; and
the Preachers of Gods word must for ever be ready to put the People in mind of
such things, which they already have heard, and by the same Scriptures and the
same reasons endeavor to destroy their sin, o^ prevent their danger, and by
the same word of God to extirpate those errors, which have had opportunity in
the time of our late disorders to spring up and grow stronger, not when the
Keepers of the field slept, but when they were wounded, and their hands cut
of^^ and their mouths stopped lest they should continue, or proceed to do the
work of God thoroughly.

A little warm Sun, and some indulgent showers of a softer rain, have made many
weeds of erroneous Doctrine to take root greatly, and to spread themselves
widely: and the Bigots of the Roman Church by their late importune boldness and
indiscreet frowardness in making Proselytes have but too manifestly declared to
all the World, that if they were rerum potiti^ Masters of our affairs, they
would suffer nothing to grow but their own Colocynths and Gourds. And although
the Natural remedy for this were to take away that impunity, upon the account
of which alone they do increase, yet because we shall never be Authors of such
Counsels, but confidently rely upon God, the Holy Scriptures, right reason, and
the most venerable and prime Antiquity, which are the proper defensatives of
truth for its support and maintenance; yet we must not conceal from the People,
committed to our charges, the great evils to which they are tempted by the
Roman Emissaries, that while the King and the Parliament take care to secure
all the public interests by instruments of their own, we also may by the word
of our proper Ministry endeavor to stop the progression of such errors, which
we know to be destructive of Christian Religion, and consequently dangerous to
the interest of souls.

In this procedure, although we shall say some things which have not been
always placed before their eyes, and others we shall represent with a
fittingness to their present necessities, and all with Charity too, and zeal
for their souls; yet if we were to say nothing but what has been often said
already; we are still doing the work of God, and repeating his voice, and by
the same remedies curing the same diseases, and we only wait for the blessing
of God prospering that importunity which is our duty: according to the avice of
Solomon, Eccles. 11.6.
In the Morning sow thy seed, and in the Evening withhold not thy hand, for
thou know not whether shall prosper, either this, or that, or whether they
both shall be alike good.

CHAP. I. The Doctrine of the Roman Church in the Controverted Articles is
neither Catholic, Apostolic, nor Primitive.
Sect. I.
IT was the challenge of St. Augustine to the Donatists, De unit. Eccles. cap.
6.
who (as the Church of Rome does at this day) enclosed the Catholic Church
within their own circuits: [ Ye say that Christ is Heir of no Lands, but where
Donatus is Coheir. Read this to us out of the Law and the Prophets, out of the
Psalms, out of the Gospel it self, or out of the Letters of the Apostles. Read
it thence and we believe it.] Plainly directing us to the Fountains of our
Faith, the Old and New Testament, the words of Christ, and the words of the
Apostles. For nothing else can be the Foundation of our Faith, whatsoever came
in after these, for is est, it belongs not unto Christ. Ecclesia ex s^cris and
canonicis Scripturis ostendenda est, quaeque ex illis ostendi non potest,
Ecclesiae non est, S. Aug. de uni. Eccles. c. 4. etc. 3. ^bi quaeramus
Ecclesiam, ibi decernamus causam nostram.


To these we also add, not as Authors or Finishers, but as helpers of our
Faith, and Heirs of the Doctrine Apostolical, the Sen^iments and Catholic
Doctrine of the Church of God, in the Ages next after the Apostles. Not that we
think them or our selves bound to every private opinion, even of a Primitive
Bishop and Martyr; but that we all acknowledge that the whole Church of God
kept the Faith entire, and transmitted faithfully to the after-Ages the whole
Faith, (...), the form of Doctrine, and sound words, which was at first
delivered to the Saints, and was defective in nothing that belonged unto
salvation; and we believe that those Ages sent millions of Saints to the bosom
of Christ, and sealed the true faith with their lives and with their deaths,
and by both, gave testimony unto Jesus, and had from him the testimony of his
Spirit.

And this method of procedure we now choose, not only because to them that know
well how to use it, to the Sober and the Moderate, the Peaceable and the Wise,
it is the best, the most certain, visible and tangible, most humble and
satisfactory, but also because the Church of Rome does with greatest noises
pretend her Conformity to Antiquity. Indeed the present Roman Doctrines, which
are in difference, were invisible and unheard of in the first and best
antiquity, and with how ill success their quotations are out of the Fathers of
the first three Ages, every inquiring Man may easily discern. But the noises
therefore which they make are from the Writings of the succeeding Ages; where
secular interest did more prevail, and the writings of the Fathers were vast
and voluminous, full of controversy, and ambiguous senses, fitted to their own
times and questions, full of proper opinions, and such variety of sayings, that
both sides eternally and inconfutably shall bring sayings for themselves
respectively. Now although things being thus, it will be impossible for them to
conclude from the sayings of a number of Fathers, that their doctrine, which
they would prove thence, was the Catholic Doctrine of the Church; because any
number that is less than all, does not prove a Catholic consent; yet the clear
sayings of one or two of these Fathers truly alleged by us to the contrary,
will certainly prove that what many of them (suppose it) do affirm, and which
but two or three as good Catholics as the other do deny, was not then matter
of faith or a Doctrine of the Church; for if it had, these had been Heretics
accounted, and not have remained in the Communion of the Church. But although
for the reasonableness of the thing we have thought fit to take notice of it;
yet we shall have no need to make use of it; since not only in the prime and
purest Antiquity we are indubitably more than Conquerors; but even in the
succeeding Ages, we have the advantage both numero, pondere and men sura, in
number, weight and measure.

We do easily acknowledge that to dispute these questions from the sayings of
the Fathers is not the readiest way to make an end of them; but therefore we do
wholly rely upon Scriptures as the foundation and final resort of all our
persuasions, and from thence can never be confuted; but we also admit the
Fathers as admirable helps for the understanding of the Scriptures, and as good
testimony of the Doctrine delivered from their forefathers down to them of what
the Church esteemed the way of Salvation: and therefore if we find any Doctrine
now taught, which was not placed in their way of Salvation, we reject it as
being no part of the Christian faith, and which ought not to be imposed upon
consciences. They were wise unto salvation, and fully instructed to every good
work; and therefore the faith which they professed and derived from Scripture,
we profess also; and in the same faith, we hope to be saved even as they. But
for the new Doctors; we understand them not, we know them not: Our faith is the
same from the beginning, and cannot become new.

But because we shall make it to appear that they do greatly innovate in all
their points of controversy with us, and show nothing but shadows instead of
substances, and little images o^ things instead of solid arguments; we shall
take from them their armor in which they trusted, and choose this sword of
Goliath to combat their errors; for non est alter talis; It is no^ easy to
find a better than the word of God expounded by the prime and best Antiquity.

The first thing therefore we are to advertise is, that the Emissaries of the
Roman Church endeavor to persuade the good People of our Dioceses from a
Religion that is truly Primitive and Apostolic, and divert them to
Propositions of their own, new and unheard of in the first ages o^ the
Christian Church.

For the Religion of our Church is therefore certainly Primitive and
Apostolic, because it teaches us to believe the whole Scriptures of the Old
and New Testament, and nothing else as matter of faith; and therefore unless
there can be new Scriptures, we can have no new matters of belief, no new
articles of faith. Whatsoever we cannot prove from thence, we disclaim it, as
not deriving from the Fountains of our Savior. We also do believe the Apostles
Creed, the Nicene, with the additions of Constantinople, and that which is
commonly called, the Symbol of Saint Athanasius: and the four first General
Councils are so entirely admitted by us, that they together with the plain
words of Scripture are made the rule and measure of judging Heresies amongst
us: and in pursuance of these, it is commanded by our Church that the Clergy
shall never teach any thing as matter of Faith religiously to be observed, but
that which is agreeable to the Old and New Testament, and collected out of the
same Doctrine by the Ancient Fathers and Catholic Bishops of the Church Lib.
Cano. discip, Eccle. Angl. and injunct. Regin. Elis. A. D. 1571. Can. de
concionatoribus.
. This was undoubtedly the Faith of the Primitive Church, they admitted all
into their Communion that were of this faith; they condemned no Man that did
not condemn these; they gave letters communicatory by no other cognizance, and
all were Brethren who spoke this voice. [ Hanc legen^ sequentes, Christianorum
Catholicorum^ nomen jubemus amplecti, reliquos ver^ dementes, vesanosque
judicantes haeretici dogmatis infamiam sustinere] said the Emperors, Dat. 3.
Ca^en. Mart. Thessalonicae.
Gratian, Valentinia^ and Theodosius, in their Proclamation to the People of C.
P. All that believed this Doctrine were Christian^ and Catholics, viz. all
they who believe in the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, one Divinity of equal
Majesty in the Holy Trinity; which indee^ was the sum of what was decree^ in
explication of the Apostles Creed in the four first General Councils.

And what faith can be the foundation of a more solid peace, the surer
ligaments of Catholic Communion, or the firmer basis of a holy life and of the
hopes of Heaven hereafter, than the measures which the Holy Primitive Church
did hold, and we after them? That which we rely upon is the same that the
Primitive Church did acknowledge to be the adaequate foundation of their hopes
in the matters of belief: The way which they thought sufficient to go to Heaven
in, is the way which we walk: what they did not teach, we do not publish and
impose; into this faith entirely and into no other, as they did theirs; so we
baptize our Catechumens: The Discriminations of Heresy from Catholic Doctrine
which they used, we use also, and we use no other: and in short, we believe all
that Doctrine which the Church of Rome believes, except those things which they
have superinduced upon ^he Old Religion, and in which we shall prove that they
have innovated. So that by their confession, all the Doctrine, which we teach
the people, as matter of Faith, must be confessed to be Ancient, Primitive and
Apostolic, or else theirs is not so: for ours is the same, and ^^ both have
received this faith from the fountains of Scripture and Universa^ Tradition;
not they from us, or we from them, but both of us from Christ and his Apostles.
And therefore there can be no question whethe^ the Faith of the Church of
Englan^ be Apostolic or Primitive; it is so confessedly: But the Question is
concerning many other particulars which were unknown to the Holy Doctor of the
first ages, which were no part ^^ their faith, which were never put into their
Creeds, which were not determined in any of the four first Gener^^ Councils,
revered in all Christendom and entertained every where with gre^^ Religion and
veneration, even next (...) the four Gospels and the Apostolic^ writings.

Of this sort, because the Church of Rome has introduced many, an^ has
adopted them into their lan^ Creed, and imposes them upon the People, not only
without, but again the Scriptures and the Catholic Doctrine of the Church of
God; laying heavy burdens on Men's consciences, and making the narrow way to
Heaven yet narrower by their own inventions; arrogating to themselves a
dominion over our faith, and prescribing a method of Salvation which Christ and
his Apostles never taught; corrupting the faith of the church of God, and
teaching for Doctrines the Commandments of Men; and lastly, having derogated
from the Prerogative of Christ, who alone is the Author and Finisher of our
faith, and has perfected it in the revelations consigned in the Holy
Scriptures; therefore it ^s, that we esteem our selves obliged to warn the
People of their danger, and to depart from it, and call upon them ^o stand upon
the ways, and ask after the old paths, and walk in them; lest they partake of
that curse which is ^hreatned by God to them, who remove ^he Ancient Landmarks
which our Fathers in Christ have set for us.

Now that the Church of Rome cannot not pretend that all which she imposes is
Primitive and Apostolic, appears in this; That in the Church of Rome, there is
pretense made to a power, not only of declaring new articles of faith, but of
making new Symbols or Creeds, and imposing them as of necessity to Salvation.
Which thing is evident in the Bull of Pope Leo the Tenth against Martin Luther,
in which, amongst other things, he is condemned for saying, [ It is certain
that it is not in the power of the Church or Pope to constitute Articles of
Faith.] We need not ad^ that this power is attributed to the Bishops of Rome by
Turrecremata Quod sit metrum^ and regula, acsciet^a credendorum. Summae de
Ecclesia, l. 2 c 203.
Augustinus Triumphus de Ancona Novum Symi^ium condere solum ad Papam specta^,
quia est caput fidei Christianae, cujus authoritate omnia quae ad^ them spectant
firmantur and roborantur. q. 59 a. 1. and art. 2. sicut petest no^^ symbolum
condere, i^^ po^est novos articulos supra alios multiplicare.
Petrus de Ancorano Papa potest facere novos articulos fidei, id est, quod modo
credi oport^at, cum prius non oport^ret. In cap. cum Christus. de ^^aeret. n 2.
, and the Famo^^ Abbot of Panormo Papa potest induceren^ vum arti^u um fidei.
In idem.
, that the Pop^ cannot only make new Creeds, bu^ new Articles of Faith; that he
can make that of necessity to be believed which before never was necessary;
that he is the measure and rule, and the very notice of all credibilities; That
the Canon Law is the Divine law; and whatever law the Pope promulges, God,
whose Vicar he is, is understood to be the promulger. That the souls of Men are
in the hands of the Pope; and that in his arbitration Religion does consist:
which are the very words of Hostiensis Super 2. Decret. de jur^jur. c. nimis.
n. 1.
, and Ferdinandus ab Inciso Apud Petrum Ciezam t. 2. ins^it. per^^nae ca^ 69.
, who were Casuists and Doctors of Law, of great authority amongst them and
renown. The thing it self, is not of dubious disputation amongst them, but
actually practiced in the greatest instances, as is to be seen in the Bull of
Pius the fourth at the end of the Council of Trent; by which all Ecelesiasticks
are not on^y bound to swear to all the Articles of the Council of Trent for the
present and for the future, but they are put into a new Symbol or Creed, and
they are corrobroated by the same decretory clauses that are used in the Creed
of Athanasius: that this is the true Catholic Faith^ and that without this no
Man can be saved.

Now since it cannot be imagined that this power, to which they pretend, should
never have been reduced to act; and that it is not credible they should publish
so inviduous and ill-sounding Doctrine to no purpose, and to serve no end; it
may without furthe^ evidence be believed by all discerning persons, that they
have need of this Doctrine, or it would not have been taugh^^ and that
consequently without mo^^adoe, it may be concluded that some (...) their
Articles are parts of this new faith^ and that they can therefore in no sen^^
be Apostolical, unless their being Ro^man makes them so.

To this may be added another con^sideration, not much less material, th^^
besides what Eckius told the Elector (...) Bavaria that the Doctrines of Luth^^
might be overthrown by the Father^ though not by Scripture; they ha^^ also many
gripes of conscience conce^^ning the Fathers themselves, that the are not right
on their side; and of the they have given but too much demonstration by their
Expurgatory indices. The Serpent by being so curious a defender of his head,
shows where his danger is, and by what he can most readily be destroyed. But
besides their innumerable corruptings of the Fathers writings, their thrusting
in that which was spurious, and like Pharaoh, killing the legitimate Sons of
Israel Iohanne^ Clemens aliquo^ folia Theodoreti laceravit and abjecit in
focum, in quibus contra transubstantionem praeclare disseruit. Et cum ^on ita
pridem Origenem ^xcuderent, totum illud caput sextum Johannes and quod
commentabatur ^rigen^s ^mis^runt, and mutilum ^did^runt libru^ propt^r candem
ca^sa^.
; though in this, they have done very much of their work, and made the
Testimonies of the Fathers to be a record infinitely worse, than of themselves
uncorrupted, they would have been (of which diverse Learned Persons have made
public complaint and demonstration) they have at last fallen to a new trade,
which has caused more dis-reputation to them, than they have gained advantage,
and they have virtually confessed, that ^n many things, the Fathers are against
them.

For first, the King of Spain gave a ^ommission to the Inquisitors to purge ^ll
Catholic Authors; but with this clause, iique ipsi privatim, nullisque
consciis apud se indicem expurgatorium habebunt, quem eundum neque aliis
communicabunt, neque ejus exemplum ulli dabunt: that they should keep the
expurgatory Index privately, neither imparting that index, nor giving a copy of
it to any. But it happened, by the Divine providence, so ordering it, that
about thirteen years after, a copy of it was gotten and published by Johannes
Pappus and Franciscus Iunius, an^ since it came abroad against their wills,
they find it necessary now to own it, and they have printed it themselves^ Now
by these expurgatory Table what they have done is known to a^^ Learned Men. In
St. Chrysostom^ Works printed at Basil, these words [ The Church is not built
upon the Man but upon the faith] are commanded (...) be blotted out: and these
[ There is (...) merit, but what is given us by Christ, and yet these words are
in his Sermon upon Pentecost, and the former wor^ are in his first homily upon
that of S^^ John, Ye are my friends, etc.] T^^ like they have done to him in
many other places, and to St. Ambrose, and to St. Austin, and to them all
Sixtus S^nensis epis^. dedicat. ad. P^^^m Q^^n. ^auda^ Pon^^sic^m id haec
verba, Expurgari and ^maculari carasti omnium Catholicorum Scriptorum, ac
prae^i^ue ve^erum patr^m scrip^a.
, insomuch that Ludovicus Saurius the Corrector of the Press at Lions showed
and complained of it to Iunius, that he was forced to cancellate or blot out
many sayings of St. Ambrose in that edition of his works, which was printed at
Lions 1559. So that what they say on occasion of Bertrams book [ In the old
Catholic Writers we suffer very many errors, and extenuate and excuse them,
and finding out some commentary, we feign some convenient sense when they are
opposed in disputations] they do indeed practice, but esteem it not sufficient;
for the words which make against them they wholly leave out of their editions.
Nay they correct the very Tables or Indices made by the Printers or Correctors;
insomuch that out of one of Frobens indices they have commanded these words to
be blotted [ The use ^f images forbidden] The Eucharist no ^acrifice, but the
memory of a sacrifice] Works, although they do not justify, yet are necessary
to Salvation] Marriage i^ granted to all that will not contain] Venial sins
damn] The dead Saints, afte^ this life cannot helf us] nay out of the Index of
St. Austins Works by Claudius Chevallonius at Paris 1531. there is a very
strange deleatur [ Dele, Index expurgator. Madrili. 1612. in Indice libror.
expurgatorum page ^9.
Solu^ Deus ador andus] that God alone is to b^ worshipped, is commanded to be
blotted out, as being a dangerous Doctrine^ These instances may serve instead
o^ multitudes, which might be brought o^ their corrupting the witnesses and
razing the records of antiquity, that the errors and Novelties of the Church o^
Rome might not be so easily reprov'd^ Now if the Fathers were not against them,
what need these arts? Wh^ should they use them thus? Their o^^ expurgatory
indices are infinite testimo^^ against them, both that they do so, a^^ that
they need it.

But besides these things, we ha^^ thought it fit to represent in on^ aspect,
some of their chief Doctrines (...) difference from the Church of En^^land, and
make it evident that they (...) indeed new, and brought into the Church, first
by way of opinion, and afterward by power, and at last, by their own authority
decreed into Laws and Articles.

Sect. II.
FIrst, we allege that that this very power of making new Articles is a
Novelty, and expressly against the Doctrine of the Primitive Church; and we
prove it, first, by the words of the Apostle, Gal. ^.^.
saying, If we, or an Angel from Heaven shall preach unto you any other Gospel
(viz. in whole or in part, for there is the same reason of them both) than that
which we have preached, let him be Anathema: and secondly, by ^he sentence of
the Fathers in the third General Council, that at Ephesus. Part. 2. act. 6. c.
7.
^ That it should not be lawful for any Man ^o publish or compose another Faith
or Creed than that which was defined by the Nicene Council: and that whosoever
shall ^are to compose or offer any such to any ^ersons willing to be converted
from ^aganism, Judaism, or Heresy, if they were Bishops or Clerks, they should
be deposed, if Laymen, they should be accursed.] And yet in the Church of Rome
Faith and Christianity increase like the Moon; Bromyard complained of it long
since, and the mischief increases daily. They have now a new Article of Faith,
ready for the stamp, which may very shortly become necessary to salvation; we
mean, that of the immaculate conception of the Blessed Virgin Mary. Whether the
Pope be above a Council or no; we are not sure, whether it be an article of
faith amongst them or not: It is very near one if it be not. Bellarmine would
fain have us believe that the Council of Constance approving the Bull of P.
Martin the fifth, De potest. Eccles. Consi^. 12.
declared for the Popes Supremacy. But John Gerson, who was at the Council
says that the Council did abate those heights to which flattery had advance'^
the Pope; and that before that Council they spoke such great things of the
Pope, which afterward moderate Me^^durst not speak; but yet some other spoke
them so confidently before it, that he that should then have spoken to the
contrary would hardly have escaped the note of Heresy: and that these Men
continued the same pretensions even after the Council. But the Council of Basil
decreed for the Council against the Pope; and the Council of Lateran under Leo
the tenth, decreed for the Pope against the Council. So that it is cross and
pile; and whether for a penny, when it can be done; it is now a known case it
shall become an article of faith. But for the present it is a probationary
article, and according to Bellarmine's expression is fere de fide, De Consil.
author. l. 2. c. 17. Sect. 1.
it is almost an article of Faith; they want a little age, and then they may go
alone. But the Council of Trent has produced a strange new article; Sess. 21.
c. 4.
but it is sine controver si a credendum, it must be believed, and must not be
controverted: that although the Ancient Fathers did give the Communion to
infants, yet they did not believe it necessary to salvation. Now this being a
matter of fact whether they did or did not believe it, every man that reads
their writings can be able to inform himself and besides that it is strange
that this should be determined by a Council, and determined against evident
truth (it being notorious, that diverse of the Fathers did say it is necessary
to salvation;) the decree it self is beyond all bounds of modesty, and a
strange pretension of Empire over the Christian belief. But we proceed to other
instances.

Sect. III.
THe Roman Doctrine of indulgences was the first occasion of the great change
and Reformation of the Western Churches, begun by the Preachings of Martin
Luther and others; and besides that it grew to that intolerable abuse, that it
became a shame to it self and a reproach to Christendom, it was also so very an
Innovation, that their great Antoninus confesses that concerning them we have
nothing expressly, Part. 1. Sum. tit. 10. p. 3.
either in the Scriptures, or in the sayings of the Ancient Doctors: and the
same is affirmed by Sylvester Prieria^. Bishop Fisher of Rochester says, In
art. 1^. Luther.
that in the beginning of the Church there was no use of indulgences; and that
they began after the people were awhile affrighted with the torments of
Purgatory; and many of the Schoolmen confess that the use of indulgences began
in the time of Pope Alexander the third, toward the end of the XII Century:
but Agrippa imputes the beginning of them to Boniface the VIII. who lived in
the Reign of King Edward the first of England; 1300 years after Christ. But
that in his time the first Jubilee was kept we are assured by Crantzius. This
Pope Intravit ut vulpes, regnavit ut leo, mori^batur ut canis, de eo saepiu^
d^ctum.
lived and died with very great infamy, and therefore was not likely form
himself to transfer much honor and reputation to the new institution. But that
about this time indulgences began, is more than probable; much before, it is
certain they were not For in the whole Canon Law written by Gratian, and in the
sentences of Peter Lombard there is nothing spoken of indulgences: Now because
they lived in the time of P. Alexander III. if he had introduced them, and much
rather if they had been as ancient as S. Gregory (as some vainly and weakly
pretend, from no greater authority than their own Legends) it is probable that
these great Men writing Bodies of Divinity and Law, would have made mention of
so considerable a point, and so great a part of the Roman Religion, as things
are now ordered. If they had been Doctrines of the Church then, as they are
now, it is certain they must have come under their cognizance and discourses.

Now lest the Roman Emissaries should deceive any of the good Sons of the
Church, we think it fit to acquaint them, Tertul. 1^ ad Martyr. c. 1. S.
Cyprian. lib. 3.

Ep. 15. apud Pamelium 11.

Council. Nicen. 1. can. 12. Conc. Ancyr c. 5. Council. Laodicen. c. 2. S. Basil.
in Ep. canonicis habentur in Nomocanone Phot^i, can. 73.


that in the Primitive Church, when the Bishops imposed severe penances, and
that they were almost quite performed, and a great cause of pity intervened, or
danger of death, or an excellent repentance, or that the Martyrs interceded,
the Bishop did sometimes indulge the penitent, and relax some of the remaining
parts of his penance; and according to the example of S. Paul, in the case of
the incestuous Corinthian, gave them ease, lest they should be swallowed up
with too much sorrow. But the Roman Doctrine of Indulgences is wholly another
thing; nothing of it but the abused name remains. For in the Church of Rome
they now pretend that there is an infinite of degrees of Christ's merits and
satisfaction beyond what is necessary for the salvation of his servants: and
(for fear Christ should not have enough) the Saints have a surplusage of
merits, Communis opinio D.D. tam Theol^gorum, quam Canonicorum, quod sunt ex
abundantia meritorum quae ultra mensuram demeritorum suorum sancti
sustinnerunt, and Christi, Sum. Angel. v. Indulg 9.
or at lest of satisfactions more than they can spend, or themselves do need:
and out of these the Church has made her a treasure, a kind of poor-mans box;
and out of this, a power to take as much as they list to apply to the poor
souls in Purgatory; who because they did not satisfy for their venial sins, or
perform all their penances which were imposed, or which might have been imposed
and which were due to be paid to God for the temporal pains reserved upon them,
after he had forgiven them the guilt of their deadly sins, are forced sadly to
roar in pains not inferior to the pains of hell, excepting only that they are
not eternal. Lib. 1. de indulgent. cap. 2. and.3.
That this is the true state of their Article of Indulgences, we appeal to
Bellarmine.

Now concerning their new foundation of Indulgences, the first stone of it was
laid by P. Clement VI. in his extravagant Unigenitus, de poenitentiis and
remissionibus, A. D. 1350. This constitution was published Fifty years after
the first Jubilee, and was a new devise to bring in customers to Rome at the
second Jubilee, which was kept in Rome in this Popes time. What ends of profit
and interest it served, we are not much concerned to enquire; but this we know,
that it had not yet passed into a Catholic Doctrine, for it was disputed
against by Franciscus de Mayronis In. 4. l. sen. did. 19. q 2.
and Durandus Ibid. did. 20. q 3.
not long before this extravagant; and that it was not rightly formed to their
purposes till the stirs in Germany, raised upon the occasion of indulgences,
made Leo the tenth set his Clerks on work to study the point and make something
of it.

But as to the thing it self: it is so wholly new, so merely devised and forged
by themselves, so newly created out of nothing, from great mistakes of
Scripture, and dreams of shadows from antiquity; that we are to admonish our
charges, that they cannot reasonably expect many sayings of the Primitive
Doctors against them, any more than against the new fancies of the Quakers,
which were born but yesterday. That which is not cannot be numbered, and that
which was not could not be confuted. But the perfect silence of antiquity in
this whole matter, is an abundant demonstration that this new nothing was made
in the later laboratories of Rome. For as Durandus said, Ubi supra.
the Holy Fathers, Ambrose, Hilary, Hierom, Augustine speak nothing of
Indulgences. And whereas it is said that S. Gregory DC. years after Christ,
gave indulgences at Rome in the stations; Magister Angularis who lived about
200. years since, says, he never read of any such any where; and it is certain
there is no such thing in the writings of S. Gregory, nor in any histo^y of
that age or any other that is authentic: and we could never see any history
pretended for it by the Roman writers, but a Legend of Ledgerus brought to us
the other day by Surius: which is so ridiculous and weak, that even their own
parties dare not avow it as true story; and therefore they are fain to make use
of Thomas Aquinas upon the Sentences, and Altisiodorensis for story and record.
And it were strange that if this power of giving indulgences to take off the
punishment, reserved by God after the sin is pardoned, were given by Christ to
his Church, that no one of the ancient Doctors should tell any thing of it:
insomuch that there is no one writer of authority and credit, not the more
ancient Doctors we have named, nor those who were much later, Rupertus
Tuitiensis, Anselm or S. Bernard ever took notice of it; but it was a Doctrine
wholly unknown to the Church for about MCC years after Christ: and Card.
Cajetane told P. Adrian VI. that to him that reads the Decretals it plainly
appears, that an indulgence is nothing else but an absolution from that penance
which the Confessor has imposed; and therefore can be nothing of that which is
now adays pretended.

True it is, that the Canonical penances were about the time of Burchard
lessened and altered by commutations; and the ancient Discipline of the Church
in imposing penances was made so loose, that the Indulgence was more than the
Imposition, and began not to be an act of mercy but remisness, an absolution
without amends: It became a trumpet, and a leavy for the Holy War; in Pope
Urban the Seconds time; for he gave a plenary Indulgence and remission of all
sins to them that should go and fight against the Saracens: and yet no man
could tell how much they were the better for these Indulgences: for concerning
the value of indulgences, the complaint is both old and doubtful, said Pope
Adrian; and he cites a famous gloss, In lib. 4. sent.
which tells of four Opinions all Catholic, and yet vastly differing in this
particular: Verb. Indulgentia.
but the Summa Angelica reckons seven Opinions concerning what that penalty is
which is taken off by Indulgences: No man could then tell; and the point was
but in the infancy, and since that, they have made it what they please: but it
is at last turned into a Doctrine, and they have devised new propositions, as
well as they can, to make sense of it; and yet it is a very strange thing; a
solution, not an absolution (it is the distinction of Bellarmine) that is, the
sinner is let to go free without punishment in this world, or in the world to
come; and in the end, it grew to be that which Christendom could not suffer: a
heap of Doctrines without Grounds of Scripture, or Catholic Tradition; and not
only so, but they have introduced a way or remittin^ sins, that Christ and his
Apostle^ taught not; a way destructive of the repentance and remission of sins
which was preached in the Name of Jesus: it brought into the Church, false and
fantastic hopes, a hope that will make men ashamed; a hope that does not
glorify the merits and perfect satisfaction of Christ; a doctrine expressly
dishonorable to the full and free pardon given us by God through Jesus Christ;
a practice that supposes a new bunch of Keys given to the Church, besides that
which the Apostles received to open and shut the Kingdom of Heaven; a Doctrine
that introduces pride among the Saints, and advances the opinion of their works
beyond the measures of Christ, who taught us, Vt quid non praevides tibi in die
judicii, quando nemo poterit per alium excusari, vel defendi; sed unusquisque
sufficiens onus erit sibi i^si: Th. a (...) ^. 1. d^ ^mit. c. 24.
That when we have done all that is commanded, we are unpro^itable servants,
and therefore certainly cannot supererogate, or do more than what is infinitely
recompensed by the Kingdom of Glory, to which all our doings and all our
sufferings are not worth^ to be compared, especially, since the greatest Saint
cannot but say with David, Enter not into judgment with thy servant; for in thy
sight no flesh living can be justified; It is a practice that has turned
penances into a Fair, and the Court of Conscience into a Lombard, and the
labors of Love into the labors of pilgrimages, superstitious and useless
wanderings from place to place; and Religion into vanity, and our hope in God to
a confidence in man, and our fears of hell to be a mere scarcrow to rich and
confident sinners: and at last, it was frugally employed by a great Pope to
raise a portion for a Lady, the Wife of Franceschetto Cibo bastard Son of P.
Innocent VIII. and the merchandise it self became the stakes of Gamesters, at
Dice and Cards, and men did vile actions that they might win indulgences; by
gaming making their way to heaven easier.

Now although the Holy Fathers of the Church could not be supposed in direct
terms to speak against this new Doctrine of Indulgences, because in their days
it was not: yet they have said many things which do perfectly destroy this new
Doctrine and these unchristian practices. For besides that they teach a
repentance wholly reducing us to a good life; a faith that entirely relies upon
Christ's merits and satisfactions; a hope wholly depending upon the plain
promises of the Gospel, a service perfectly consisting in the works of a good
conscience, a labor of love, a religion of justice and piety, and moral
virtues: they do also expressly teach that pilgrimages to holy places and such
like inventions, which are now the earnings and price of indulgences, are not
requir^d of us, and are not the way of salvation, as is to be seen in an
Oration made by S. Gregory Nyssene wholly against pilgrimages to Jerusalem; in
S. Chrysostom Homil. 1. in ep. ad Philem.
, S. Augustine Sermon. de Martyrib.
, and S. Bernard S^rm. 1. de Advent.
: The sense of these Fathers is this, in the words of S. Augustine: God said
not, Go to the East, and seek righteousness; sail to the West that you may
receive indulgence. But indulge thy brother, and it shall be indulged to thee:
you have need to inquire for no other indulgence to thy sins; if thou will
retire into the closet of thy heart, there thou shall find it. That is, All our
hopes of Indulgence is from GOD through JESUS CHRIST, and is wholly to be
obtained by faith in Christ, and perseverance in good works, and entire
mortification of all our sins.

To conclude this particular: Though the gains which the Church of Rome makes
of Indulgences, be a heap almost as great as the abuses themselves, yet the
greatest Patrons of this new Doctrine could never give any certainty, or
reasonable comfort to the Conscience of any person that could inquire into it.
They never durst determine, whether they were Absolutions, or Compensations;
whether they only take off the penances actually imposed by the Confessor, or
potentially, and all that which might have been imposed; whether all that may
be paid in the Court of men; or all that can or will be required by the Laws
and severity of God^ Neither can they speak rationally to the Great Question,
Whether the Treasure of the Church consists of the Satisfactions of Christ
only, or of the Saints? For if of Saints, it will by all men be acknowledged to
be a defeisible estate, and being finite and limited, will be spent sooner than
the needs of the Church can be served; and if therefore it be necessary to add
the merits and satisfaction of Christ, since they are an Ocean of infinity, and
can supply more than all our needs, to what purpose is it to add the little
minutes and droppings of the Saints? They cannot tell whether they may be
given, if the Receiver do nothing, or give nothing for them: And though this
last particular could better be resolved by the Court of Rome, than by the
Church of Rome, yet all the Doctrines which built up the new Fabric of
Indulgences, were so dangerous to determine, so improbable, so unreasonable, or
at best so uncertain and invidious, that according to the advice of the Bishop
of Modena, the Council of Trent left all the Doctrines, and all the cases of
Conscience quite alone, and slubber'd the whole matter both in the question of
Indulgences and Purgatory in general and recommendatory terms; affirming, that
the power of giving Indulgence is in the Church, and that the use is wholesome:
And that all hard and subtle questions ( viz.) concerning Purgatory, (which
although (if it be at all) it is a fire, yet is the fuel of Indulgences, and
maintains them wholly;) all that is suspected to be false, and all that is
uncertain; and whatsoever is curious and superstitious, scandalous, or for
filthy lucre, be laid aside. And in the mean time, they tell us not what is,
and what is not Superstitious; nor what is scandalous, nor what they mean by
the general term of Indulgence; and they establish no Doctrine, neither
curious, nor incurious, nor durst they decree the very foundation of this whole
matter, The Churches Treasure: Neither durst they meddle with it, but left it
as they found it, and continued in the abuses, and proceed in the practice, and
set their Doctors, as well as they can, to desend all the new, and curious and
scandalous questions, and to uphold the gainful trade. But however it be with
them, the Doctrine it self is proved to be a direct Innovation in the matter of
Christian Religion, and that was it which we have undertaken to demonstrate.

Sect. IV.
THe Doctrine of Purgatory is the Mother of Indulgences, and the fear of that
has introduced these: For the world happened to be abused like the Countryman
in the Fable, who being told he was likely to fall into a delirium in his feet,
was advised for remedy to take the juice of Cotton: He feared a disease that
was not, and looked for a cure as ridiculous. But if the Parent of Indulgences
be not from Christ and his Apostles; if upon this ground the Primitive Church
never built, the Superstructures of Rome must fall; they can be no stronger
than their Supporter. Now then in order to the proving the Doctrine of
Purgatory to be an Innovation,

1. We consider, That the Doctrines upon which it is pretended reasonable, are
all dubious, and disputable at the very best. Such are, 1. Their distinction of
sins Mortal and Venial in their own nature. 2. That the taking away the guilt
of sins, does not suppose the taking away the obligation to punishment; that
is, That when a man's sin is pardoned, he may be punished without the guilt of
that sin, as justly as with it; as if the guilt could be any thing else but an
obligation to punishment for having sinned: which is a Proposition, of which no
wise man can make sense; but it is ce^tain, that it is expressly against the
Word of God, who promises upon our repentance, so to take away our sins, that
he will remember them no more: Eze. 1^. 22.
And so did Christ to all those to whom he gave pardon; for he did not take our
faults and guilt on him any other way, but by curing our evil hearts, and
taking away the punishment Neque ab iis quos sanas lent languor abscedit, sed
illico quem restituis ex integro ^mvalescit, qu^a consummatum est quod sacis,
and perfectum quod largiris, S. Cyprian de caena Domini: vel potius Ar^o^dus.
P. Ge^asius de vincul. anath^m. neg^t p^n^m deberi culpaesi culp^ co^rigatur.
. And this was so perfectly believed by the Primitive Church, that they always
made the penances and satisfaction to be undergone before they gave absolution;
and after absolution they never imposed or obliged to punishment, unless it
were to sick persons, of whose recovery they despaired not: of them indeed, in
case they had not finished their Canonical punishments, they expected they
should perform what was enjoined them formerly. But because all sin is a blot
to a man's soul, and a foul stain to his reputation; we demaud, in what does
this stain consist? In the guilt, or in the punishment? If it be said that it
consists in the punishment; then what does the guilt signify, when the
removing of it, does neither remove the stain nor the punishment, which both
remain and abide together? But if the stain and the guilt be all one, or always
together, then when the guilt is taken away, there can no stain remain; and if
so, what need D^let gratia finalis p^ccatum veniale in ipsa d^ssolutione
corporis and animae. Hoc ab antiquis d^ctum ^st. Albert. Mag. in compend.
Theolog. verit. ^. 3. 6. 13.
is there any more of Purgatory? For since this is pretended to be necessary,
only lest any stained or unclean thing should enter into Heaven; if the guilt
and the pain be removed, what uncleanness can there be left behind? Indeed
Simon Magus (as Epiphanius reports, Haeres. 20.) did teach, That after the
death of the body there remained (...), a purgation of souls: But whether the
Church of Rome will own him for an Authentic Doctor, themselves can best tell.
3. It relies upon this also, That God requires of us a full exchange of
penances and satisfactions, which must regularly be paid here or hereafter,
even by them who are pardoned here: which if it were true, we were all undone.
4. That the Death of Christ, his Merits and Satisfaction do not procure for us
a full remission before we dye, nor (as it may happen) of a long time after.
All which being Propositions new and uncertain, invented by the School Divines,
and brought ex post facto, to dress this opinion, and make it to seem
reasonable; and being the products of ignorance concerning remission of sins by
Grace, of the righteousness of Faith, and the infinite value of Christ's Death,
must needs lay a great prejudice of novelty upon the Doctrine it self, which
but by these, cannot be supported. But to put it past suspicion and conjectures:


Roffensis and Polydore Virgil affirm, Art. 18. con, Luther. Invent. rerum. l.
8. c. 1.
That who so searches the Writings of the Greek Fathers, shall find that none,
or very rarely any one of them, ever makes mention of Purgatory; and that the
Latin Fathers did not all believe it, but by degrees came to entertain
opinions of it: But for the Catholic Church, it was but lately known to her.

But before we say any more in this Question, we are to premonish, That there
are Two great causes of their mistaken pretensions in this Article from
Antiquity.

The first is, That the Ancient Churches in their Offices, and the Fathers in
their Writings, did teach and practice respectively, prayer for the dead. Now
because the Church of Rome does so too, and more than so, relates her prayers
to the Doctrine of Purgatory, and for the souls there detained, her Doctors
vainly suppose, that when ever the Holy Fathers speak of prayer for the dead,
that they conclude for Purgatory; which vain conjecture is as false as it is
unreasonable: For it is true, the Fathers did pray for the dead, but how? That
God would show them mercy, and hasten the resurrection, and give a blessed
sentence in the great day. But then it is also to be remembered, that they made
prayers, and offered for those, who by the^ confession of all sides, never were
in Purgatory; even for the Patriarchs and Prophets, for the Apostles and
Evangelists, for Martyrs and Confessors, and especially for the blessed Virgin
Mary: So we find it in Haeres. 75.
Epiphanius, Cateches, mystag. 5.
St. Cyril, and in the Canon of the Greeks, and so it is acknowledged by their
own De riti^us, lib. 2. c. 35.
Durantus; and in their Mass Book anciently they prayed for the soul of St.
Leo: Of which because by their latter doctrines they grew ashamed, they have
changed the prayer for him, into a prayer to God by the intercession of St.
Leo, in behalf of themselves; Innocent. P. de Celeb. Missar. cap. c^m Martha.
so by their new doctrine, making him an Intercessor for us, who by their old
doctrine was supposed to need our prayers to intercede for him; of which Pope
Innocent being asked a reason, makes a most pitiful excuse.

Upon what accounts the Fathers did pray for the Saints departed, and indeed
generally for all, it is not now seasonable to discourse; but to say this
only, that such general prayers for the dead as those above reckoned the
Church of England never did condemn by any express Article, Apologia
confessionis Augustanae express approbat clansulam illam (...), Deus de^ ei
pacatam q^i^^em, ad v^am resurre^tionem.
but left it in the middle, and by her practice declares her faith of the
Resurrection of the dead, and her interest in the communion of Saints, and that
the Saints departed are a portion of the Catholic Church, parts and members of
the Body of Christ; but expressly condemns the Doctrine of Purgatory, and
consequently all prayers for the dead relating to it: And how vainly the Church
of Rome from prayer for the dead, infers the belief of Purgatory, every man may
satisfy himself, by seeing the Writings of the Fathers, where they cannot meet
with one Collect or Clause for praying for the delivery of souls out of that
imaginary place. Which thing is so certain, that in the very Roman Offices, we
mean, the Vigils said for the dead, which are Psalms and Lessons taken from the
Scripture, speaking of the miseries of this World, Repentance, and
Reconciliation with God, the bliss after this life of them that die in Christ,
and the Resurrection of the Dead; and in the Anthemes, Versicles and Responses,
there are prayers made recommending to God the Soul of the newly defunct,
praying, he may be freed from Hell, and eternal death, that in the day of
Judgment he be not judged and condemned according to his sins, but that he may
appear among the Elect in the glory of the Resurrection; but not one word of
Purgatory, or its pains.

The other cause of their mistake is, That the Fathers often speak of a fire of
Purgation after this life; but such a one that is not to be kindled until the
day of Judgment, and it is such a fire that destroys the Doctrine of the
intermedial Purgatory. We suppose that Origin was the first that spoke plainly
of it; and so S. Ambrose follows him in the opinion (for it was no more;) so
does S. Basil, S. Hilary, S. Hierom, and Lactantius, as their words plainly
prove, as they are cited by Sixtus Senensis, affirming, that all men, Christ
only excepted, shall be burned with the fire of the worlds conflagration at the
day of Judgment; Biblieth ^. l, 5. Anno^. clxxi Vide etiam Bellar. l. 2 de
Purgat sect. c. 1. Ambr^sius.
even the Blessed Virgin her self is to pass through this fire. There was also
another Doctrine very generally received by the Fathers, which greatly destroys
the Roman Purgatory: Sixtus Senensis says, and he says very true, that Justin
Martyr, Tertullian, Victorinus Martyr, Prudentius, S. Chrysostom, Arethas,
Euthimius and Lib. 6. Bi^l. Sa^ct. annot. 345, Bernandum e^c^ssandum arbi^ror
ob ingentem numerum illustrium Ecc^esiae Patrum, q^i ante ipsum huic d^gmati
authori^^n^m suo testim^nio visi sunt praebuisse; prae^er citatos; enum^ra^, S.
Jacobum Apostolum, Irenaeum, Clementem Romanum, Augustinum, Theodoretum,
Oecumenium, Theophylactum, and Johannem 22. ponif. Romans quam sententia^^ non
m^do d^cuit, and declaravit, sed a^ om^i^us ^eneri mandavit, ut ^it Adrianus P.
in 4. lib. sent. in fine quaest. i^ sa^ram confirmationis.
S. Bernard, did all affirm, that before the day of Judgment the souls of men
are kept in secret receptacles, reserved unto the sentence of the great day,
and that before then, no man receives according to his works done in this life.
We do not interpose in this opinion to say that it is true or false, probable
or improbable; for these Fathers intended it not as a matter of faith, or
necessary belief, so far as we find, But we observe from hence, that if their
opinion be true, then the Doctrine of Purgatory is false. If it be not true,
yet the Roman Doctrine of Purgatory, which is inconsistent with this so
generally received opinion of the Fathers, is at least new, no Catholic
Doctrine, not believed in the Primitive Church, and therefore the Roman Writers
are much troubled to excuse the Fathers in this Article, and to reconcile them
to some seeming concor^ with their new Doctrine.

But besides these things, it is certain, that the Doctrine of Purgatory,
before the day of Judgment, in S. Augustins time, was not the Doctrine of the
Church; it was not the Catholic Doctrine; for himself did doubt of it: [
Whether it be so or not, Enchyrid c. 69. lib. 21. ^^civit. Dei c. 26.
it may be inquired, and possibly it may be found so, and possibly it may
never:] so S. Augustine. In his time therefore it was no Doctrine of the
Church, and it continued much longer in uncertainty; for in the time of Otho
Frisingensis, Lib. 8. Chron. cap. 26.
who lived in the year 1146. it was gotten no further than to a Quidam
asserunt: [some do affirm, that there is a place of Purgatory after death.] And
although it is not to be denied, but that many of the ancient Doctors, had
strange opinions concerning Purgations, and Fires, and Intermedial states, and
common receptacles, and liberations of Souls and Spirits after this life; yet
we can truly affirm it, and can never be convinced to err in this affirmation,
that there is not any one of the Ancients within five hundred years, whose
opinion in this, Article throughout, the Church of Rome at this day follows.

But the people of the Roman Communion have been principally led into a belief
of Purgatory by their fear, and by their credulity; they have been softened and
en^ic'd into this belief by perpetual tales and legends, by which they love to
be abused. To this purporse, their Priests and Friars have made great use of
the apparition of S. Hierom after death to Eusebius, commanding him to lay his
sack upon the corpse of three dead men, that they arising from death, might
confess Purgatory, which formerly they had denied. The story is written in an
Epistle impu^ed to S. Cyril; but the ill-luck of it was that S. Hierom
outlived S. Cyril, an^ wrote his life, and so confuted tha^ story; but all is
one for that, they believe it never the less: But the^^ are enough to help it
out; and if the^ be not firmly true Haec descri^simus, ut tamen in i^ nuila
veluti Canonica constituatur authoritas. l. de 8. quaest. Dulcitii. c. ^ Did.
3. exem. 3. Exempl. 60.
, yet if they b^ firmly believed, all is well enough. (...) the Speculum
exemplorum it is said, That a certain Priest in an ecstasy saw the soul of
Constantinus Turritanus in the eves of his house tormented with frosts and cold
rains, and afterward climbing up to heaven upon a shining pillar. And a
certain Monk saw some souls roasted upon spits like Pigs, and some Devils
basting them with scalding lard; but a while after they were carried to a cool
place, and so proved Purgatory. Histor. Lom^.
But Bishop Theobald standing upon a piece of ice to cool his feet, was nearer
Purgatory than he was aware, and was convinced of it, when he heard a poor soul
telling him, that under that ice he was tormented: and that he should be
delivered, if for thirty days continual, he would say for him thirty Masses:
and some such thing was seen by Conrade and Udalric in a Pool of water: Legend.
185.
For the place of Purgatory was not yet resolved on, till S. Patrick had the
key of it delivered to him; which when one Nicholas borrowed of him, he saw as
strange and true things there, as ever Virgil dreamed of in his Purgatory, or
Cicero in his dream of Scipio, or Plato in his Gorgias, or Phaedo, who indeed
are the surest Authors to prove Purgatory. But because to preach false stories
was forbidden by the Council of Trent, there are yet remaining more certain
arguments, even revelations made by Angels, and the testimony of S. Odilio
himself, who heard the Devil complain (and he had great reason surely) that the
souls of dead men were daily snatched out of his hands, by the Alms and Prayers
of the living; and the sister of S. Damianus being too much pleased with
hearing of a Piper, told her brother, that she was to be tormented for fifteen
days in Purgatory.

We do not think that the wise men in the Church of Rome believe these
Narratives; for if they did, they were not wise: But this we know, that by such
stories, the people were brought into a belief of it; and having served their
turn of them, the Master Builders used them as false arches and centries,
taking them away when the parts of the building were made firm and stable by
Authority. But even the better sort of them do believe, or else they do worse,
for they urge and cite the Dialogues of S. Gregory, the Oration of S. John
Damascen de Defunctis, the Sermons of Saint Augustine upon the Feast of the
Commemoration of All Souls (which nevertheless was instituted after S.
Augustins death) and diverse other citations, which the Greeks in their Apology
call (...)^ The Holds and the Castles, the corruptions and insinuations of
Heretical persons. But in this they are the less to be blamed, because better
arguments than they have, no men are tied to make use of.

But against this way of proceeding we think fit to admonish the people of our
charges, that, Deuteronomy. 18. 11, etc. Isa. 8.19.
besides that the Scriptures expressly forbid us to enquire of the dead for
truth; the Holy Doctors of the Church, particularly, Vide Mald^nat. in 16. cap
S. Luca.
Tertul. S. Athanasius, S. Chrysostom. Isido. and Theophylact, deny that the
souls of the dead ever do appear; and bring many reasons to prove, that it is
unfitting they should; saying, if they did, it would be the cause of many
errors, and the Devils under that pretense, might easily abuse the world with
notices and revelations of their own: And because Christ would have us content
with Moses and the Prophets, and especially to hear that Prophet, whom the Lord
our God has raised up amongst us, our Blessed Jesus, who never taught any such
Doctrine to his Church.

But because we are now representing the Nov^lty of this Doctrine, and proving,
that anciently it was not the Doctrine of the Church, nor at all esteemed a
matter of faith, whether there was or was not any such place or state, we add
this, That the Greek Church did always dissent from the Latins in this
particular, since they had forged this new Doctrine in the laboratories of
Rome; and in the Council of Basil, published an Apology directly disapproving
the Roman Doctrine of Purgatory. How afterward they were pressed in the
Council of Florence by Pope Eugenius, and by their necessity; how unwillingly
they consented, how ambiguously they answered, how they protested against
having that half consent put into the Instrument of Union; how they were yet
constrained to it by their Chiefs, being obnoxious to the Pope; how a while
after they dissolved that Union, and to this day refuse to own this Doctrine,
are things so notoriously known, that they need no further declaration.

We add this only, to make the conviction more manifest: Ad Demetrian. sect. 16.
We have thought fit to annex some few, but very clear testimonies of
Antiquity, expressly destroying the new Doctrine of Purgatory. S. Cyprian says,
Quando istinc excessum fuerit, nullus jam locus poenitentiae est, nullus
satisfaction is effectus: [ When we are gone from hence, there is no place left
for repentance, and no effect of satisfaction. Eccles. hier. c. 7.
] S. Dionysius calls the extremity of death, (...) The end of all our agonies,
and affirms, That the Holy men of God rest in joy, and in never failing hopes,
and are come to the end of their holy combats. S. Justin Martyr affirms, That
when the soul is departed from the body (...), Quast. and respons. ad orthod.
qu. 75. Iustino imputat.
presently there is a separation made of the just and unjust: The unjust are by
Angels born into places which they have deserved; but the souls of the just
into Paradise, where they have the conversation of Angels and Archangels. S.
Ambrose De bono mortis, cap. 4.
says, that Death is a haven of rest, and makes not our condition worse, but
according as it finds every man, sort reserves him to the judgment that is to
come. The same is affirmed by In Psalm. 2.
S. Hilary, Homil, 22.
S. Macarius, and diverse others; they speak but of two states after death, of
the just and the unjust: These are placed in horrible Regions reserved to the
judgment of the great day; the other have their souls carried by Quires of
Angels into places of rest. S. Gregory Nazianzen Orat. 5. In Piagam grandinis
and orat. 42 in Pascha. De E^cles. dogmat. c. ^79.
expressly affirms, that after this life there is no purgation: For after
Christ's ascension into Heaven, the souls of all Saints are with Christ, says
Gennadius, and going from the body, they go to Christ, expecting the
resurrection of their body, with it to pass into the perfection of perpetual
bliss; and this he delivers as the Doctrine of the Catholic Church: In Eccle.
c. 11.
[ In what place soever a man is taken at his death, of light or darkness, of
wickedness or virtue, (...)^ in the same order, and in the same degree; either
in light with the just, and with Christ the great King; or in darkness with the
uujust, and with the Prince of Darkness,] said Olimpiodorus. And lastly, we
recite the words of S. Leo, one of the Popes of Rome, Epist. 59.
speaking of the Penitents who had not performed all their penances [ But if
any one of them for whom we pray unto the Lord, being interrupted by any
obstacles, falls from the gift of the present Indulgence ( viz. of
Ecclesiastical Absolution) and before he arrive at the appointed remedies (that
is, before he has performed his penances or satisfactions) ends his temporal
life, that which remaining in the body he has not received, when he is
divested of his body, he cannot obtain.] He knew not of the new devices of
paying in Purgatory, what they paid not here; and of being cleansed there, who
were not clean here: And how these words, or of any the precedent, are
reconcilable with the Doctrines of Purgatory, has not yet entered into our
imagination.

To conclude this particular, We complain greatly, that this Doctrine which in
all the parts of it is uncertain, and in the late additions to it in Rome is
certainly false, is yet with all the faults of it passed into an Article of
Faith by the Council of Trent. But besides what has been said, it will be more
than sufficient to oppose against it these clearest words of Scripture, Rev. 14
13.
Blessed are the dead which die in the Lord, from henceforth, even so says the
Spirit, that they may rest from their labors. If all the dead that die in
Christ be at rest, and are in no more affliction or labors, then the Doctrine
of the horrible pains of Purgatory is as false as it is uncomfortable: To these
words we add the saying of Christ, and we rely upon it [ He that hears my
word, and believes on him that sent me, John 5.2^.
has eternal life, and comes not into judgment, but passes from death unto
life.] If so, then not into the judgment of Purgatory: If the servant of Christ
passes from death to life, then not from death to the terminable pains of a
part of Hell. They that have eternal life, suffer no intermedial punishment,
judgment or condemnation after death; for death and life are the whole
progression, according to the Doctrine of Christ, and Him we choose to follow.

Sect. V.
THe Doctrine of Transubstantiation is so far from being Primitive and
Apostolic, that we know the very time it began to be owned publicly for an
opinion, and the very Council in which it was said to be passed into a public
Doctrine, and by what arts it was promoted, and by what persons it was
introduced.

For all the world knows that by their own parties, by In 4. lib. sent. d. 11.
q. 3
Scotus, Ibid. q. 6.
Ocham, Lect. 40. in can. missa.
Biel, Fisher Bishop of ^ap. 1. contr. captiv. Babyl.
Rochester, and diverse others, whom De Euchar. l. 3. cap. 23. sect. secundo
dicit.
Bellarmine calls most learned and most acute men, it was declared, that the
Doctrine of Transubstantiation is not expressed in the Canon of the Bible; that
in the Scriptures there is no place so express (as without the Churches
Declaration) to compel us to admit of Transubstantiation, and therefore at
least, it is to be suspected of novelty. But further, we know it was but a
disputable question in the ninth and tenth ages after Christ; that it was not
pretended to be an Article of faith till the Lateran Council in the time of
Pope Innocent, the third, MCC years and more after Christ; that since that
pretended Venere tum quidem multa in consislationem, nec decerni tam^n quicquam
aperte po^^it. Platina in vit^ Innocen. III.
determination, diverse of the chiefest teachers of their own side have been no
more satisfied of the ground of it, than they were before, but still have
publicly affirmed, that the Article is not expressed in Scripture,
particularly, Iohanes de Bassolis, Cardinal Apud Suar. Tom. 3. disp. 46. sect.
3.
Cajetan, and Melchior Loc. com. l. 3. c. 3. fund. 2.
Canus, besides those above reckoned: And therefore, if it was not expressed in
Scripture, it will be too clear, that they made their Articles of their own
heads, for they could not declare it to be there, if it was not; and if it was
there but obscurely, then it ought to be taught accordingly; and at most, it
could be but a probable doctrine, and not certain as an Article of Faith. But
that we may put it past argument and probability, it is certain, that as the
Doctrine was not taught in Scripture expressly: so it was not at all taught as a
Catholic Doctrine, or an Article of the Faith by the Primitive ages of the
Church.

Now for this, we need no proof but the confession and acknowledgment of the
greatest Doctors of the Church of Rome. Scotus says, that before the Lateran
Council, Transubstantiation was not an Article of faith, L. 3. d^ Euch. cap.
23. sect. unum (...) S^m. l. ^. c. 20.
as Bellarmine confesses; and Henriquez affirms, that Scotus says, it was not
ancient, insomuch that Bellarmine accuses him of ignorance, saying, he talked
at that rate, because he had not read the Roman Council under Pope Gregory the
VII. nor that consent of Fathers which (to so little purpose) he had heaped
together. Discurs. modest. p. 13.
Rem transubstantiation is Patres ne attigisse quidem, said some of the English
Jesuits in Prison: The Fathers have not so much as touched or meddled with the
matter of Transubstantiation; and in Peter Lombard's time it was so far from
being an Article of Faith, or a Catholic Doctrine, that they did not know
whether it were true or no: And after he had collected the sentences of the
Fathers in that Article, he confessed, He could not tell whether there was any
substantial change or no. Lib. 4. sent. did. ^1. lit. a.
His words are these, [ If it be inquired what kind of conversion it is,
whether it be formal or substantial, or of another kind? I am not able to
define it: Only I know that it is not formal, because the same accidents
remain, the same color and taste. To some it seems to be substantial, saying,
that so the substance is changed into the substance, that it is done
essentially. To which the former authorities seem to consent. But to this
sentence others oppose these things, If the substance of bread and wine be
substantially converted into the body and blood of Christ, then every day some
substance is made the body or blood of Christ, which before was not the body;
and to day something is Christ's body, which yesterday was not; and every day
Christ's body is increased, and is made of such matter of which it was not made
in the conception:] These are his words, which we have remarked, not only for
the arguments sake (though it be unanswerable) but to give a plain
demonstration that in his time this Doctrine was new, not the Doctrine of the
Church: And this was written but about fifty A. D. MCLX.
years before it was said to be decreed in the Lateran A. D. MCCXV.
Council, and therefore it made have, in so short time to pass from a
disputable opinion, to an Article of faith. But even after the Council, A. D.
MCCLXX. secund. ^uchol. sed secundum Volaterranum MCCCxxxv. In lib. 4 sent.
did. 11. qu. 1. sect. pro^^er ^ertium.
Durandus, as good a Catholic, and as famous a Doctor as any was in the Church
of Rome, publicly maintained, that even after consecration, the very matter of
bread remained; and although he says, that by reason of the Authority of the
Church, it is not to be held, yet it is not only possible it should be so, but
it implies no contradiction that it should be Christ's body, and yet the matter
of bread remain; and if this might be admitted, it would salve many
difficulties, which arise from saying that the substance of bread does not
remain. But here his reason was overcome by authority, and he durst not affirm
that of which alone he was able to give (as he thought) a reasonable account.
But by this it appears, that the opinion was but then in the forge, and by all
their understanding they could never accord it, but still the questions were
uncertain, according to that old Distich, Corpore de Christilis est, de
sanguine lis est,
Deque modo lis est, non habitura modum.
And the opinion was not determined in the Lateran, as it is now held at Rome;
bu^ it is also plain, that it is a stranger to antiquity. De haeres. lib. 8.
Verbo Indulgentia.
De Transubstantiatione panis in corpus Christi rara est in antiquis
scriptoribus mentio, said Alphonsus a Castro. There is seldom mention made in
the ancient writers of transubstantiating the bread into Christ's body. We know
the modesty and interest of the man; he would not have said it had been
seldom, if he could have found it in any reasonable degree warranted; he might
have said and justified it, There was no mention at all of this Article in the
primitive Church: and that it was a mere stranger to Antiquity, will not be
denyd by any sober person, who considers, That it was with so much uneasiness
entertained, even in the corruptest and most degenerous times, and argued and
unsettled almost 1300 years after Christ.

And that it was so, Cap. E^o Berengarius de Consecrat^ did. 2.
will but too evidently appear by that stating and resolution of this question
which we find in the Canon law. For Berengarius was by P. Nicolaus, commanded
to recant his error in these words, and to affirm, Verum corpus and sanguinem
Domini nostri Jesus Christi sensualiter, non solum in sacramento, sed in
veritate manibus sacerdotum tractari, frangi, and fidelium dentibus atteri.
That the true body and blood of our Lord Jesus Christ sensually, not only in
sacrament, but in truth is handled by the priests hands, and broken and grinded
by the teeth of the faithful. Now although this was publicly read at Rome
before an hundred and fourteen Bishops, and by the Pope sent up and down the
Churches of Italy, France and Germany, yet at this day it is renounced by the
Church of Rome, and unless it be well expounded (says the Gloss) will lead into
a heresy, greater than what Berengarias was commanded to renounce; and no
interpretation can make it tolerable, but such an one, as is in another place
of the Canon law, statuimus, i. e. abrogamus; nothing but a plain denying it in
the sense of Pope Nicolas. But however this may be, it is plain they understood
it not, as i^ is now decreed. But as it happened to the Pelagians in the
beginning of their heresy, they spoke rudely, ignorantly, and easily to be
reproved; but being ashamed and disputed into a more sober understanding of
their hypothesis, spoke more warily, but yet differently from what they said at
first: so it was and is in this question; at first they understood it not; it
was too unreasonable in any tolerable sense, to make any thing of it; but
experience and necessity has brought it to what it is.

But that this Doctrine was not the doctrine of the first and best ages of the
Church, these following testimonies do make evident. The words of Tertullian
are these. A^ver. Marc^on^ l 4. c. 40.
The bread being taken and distributed to his Disciples, Christ made it his
body, saying, This is my body, that is, the figure of my body.

The same is affirmed by Justin Martyr. Contr. ^ryph. Jud.
The bread of the Eucharist was a figure which Christ the Lord commanded to do
in remembrance of his passion. Origin In dial^g. cont. Marcion. collect^s ^^
Maximo, tempo e (...) and Seve^^ Im^. In Man. 1^.
calls the bread and the chalice, the images of the body and blood of Christ:
and again, That bread which is sanctified by the word of God, so far as belongs
to the matter (or substance) of it goes into the belly, and is cast away in the
secession or separation; which to affirm of the natural or glorified body of
Christ, were greatly blasphemous: and therefore the body of Christ which the
Communicants receive, is not the body in a natural sense, but in a spiritual,
which is not capable of any such accident, as the elements are.

Demonst. Evang lib. 1 c^p. 1.
Eusebius says, that Christ gave to his Disciples the Symbols of Divine
Economy, commanding the image and type of his own body to be made: and cap.
ult.
and that the Apostle received a command according to the constitution of the
New Testament, to make a memory of this sacrifice upon the Table by the symbols
of his body and healthful blood.

Homil. 27.
S. Macarius says, that in the Church is offered bread and wine, the antitype
of his flesh and of his blood, and they that partake of the bread that appears,
do spiritually eat the flesh of Christ. By which words the sense of the above
cited Fathers is explicated. For when they affirm, that in this Sacrament is
offered the figure, the image, the antitype of Christ's body and blood, although
they speak perfectly against Transubstantiation, yet they do not deny the real
and spiritual presence of Christ's body and blood; which we all believe as
certainly, as that it is not transubstantiated or present in a natural and
carnal manner.

The same thing is also fully explicated by the good S. Ephrem, De sacris
Antioch. legibus apud Photium, l. 1. c. 229.
The body of Christ received by the faithful, departs not from his sensible
substance, and is undivided from a spiritual grace. For even baptism being
wholly made spiritual, and being that which is the same, and proper, of the
sensible substance, I mean, of water, saves, and that which is born, does not
perish.

S. Gregory Nazianzen spoke so expressly in this Question, Orat. 2. in Pasch.
as if he had undertaken on purpose to confute the Article of Trent. Now we
shall be partakers of the Paschal supper, but still in figure, though more
clear than in the old Law. For the Legal Passover (I will not be afraid to
speak it) was a more obscure figure of a figure.

Ep. ad Caes. cont. here is. Apollinarii. cit. per Damascen. and per collect.
senten. Pp. cont. Sererianos, edit. per Tur^ianum

Homil. 23. in 1 Cor.


S. Chrysostom affirms dogmatically, that before the bread is sanctified, we
name it bread, but the Divine grace sanctifying it by the means of the Priest,
it is freed from the name of bread, but it is esteemed worthy to be called the
Lords body, although the nature of bread remains in it. And again: As thou
eatest the body of the Lord: so they (the faithful in the old Testament) did
eat Manna; as thou drinkest blood, so they the water of the rock. For though
the things which are made be sensible, yet they are given spiritually, not
according to the consequence of Nature, but according to the grace of a gift,
and with the body they also nourish the soul, leading unto faith.

To these very many more might be added; but instead of them, the words of S.
Austin may suffice, as being an evident conviction what was the doctrine of the
primitive Church in this question. This great Doctor brings in Christ thus
speaking as to his Disciples, In Psalm. 98.
[ You are not to eat this body which you see, or to drink that blood which my
crucifiers shall pour forth. I have commended to you a sacrament, which being
spiritually understood shall quicken you:] And again; Cont. Adimantium cap. 12.
Christ brought them to a banquet, in which he commended to his Disciples the
figure of his body and bloud] For he did not doubt to say, This is my body,
when he gave the sign of his body] and, Lib. 10. cont. Faust. Manich.
That which by all men is called a sacrifice, is the sign of the true
sacrifice, in which the flesh of Christ after his assumption is celebrated by
the sacrament of remembrances.]

But in this particular the Canon Law it self, De consecrat. did. 2. cap. Qui
manducant, and cap. Prima quidem, and cap. Non hoc corpus, and cap. Vt quid
paras.

Sentent. l. 4. did. 11.

Dialog. 1. c. 8


and the Master of the Sentences are the best witnesses; in both which
collections there are diverse testimonies brought, especially from S. Ambrose
and S. Austin, which whosoever can reconcile with the doctrine of
Transubstantiation, may easily put the Hyaena and a Dog, a Pigeon and a Kite
into couples, and make fire and water enter into natural and eternal
friendships.

Theodoret and P. Gelasius speak more emphatically, even to the nature of
things, and the very philosophy of this Question. [ Christ honored the symbols
and the signs (says Theodoret) which are seen with the title of his body and
blood, not changing the nature, but to nature adding grace. Dial. 2. c. 24.
For neither do the mystical signs recede from their nature; for they abide in
their proper substance, figure and form, and may be seen and touched, etc. And
for a testimony that shall be esteemed infallible, we allege the words of Pope
Gelasius, D^ duabus naeturis con r^ Eutych. and Nestor.

Videatur Pich^rellus in dissert. de Missa and expositione v^rborum
institutionis coenae Domini.


[ Truly the sacraments of the body and blood of Christ, which we receive, are
a Divine thing; for that by them we are made partakers of the Divine nature;
and yet it ceases not to be the substance or nature of bread and wine. And
truly an image and similitude of the body and blood of Christ are celebrated in
the action of the mysteries.

Now from these premises we are not desirous to infer any odious consequences
in reproof of the Roman Church, but we think it our duty to give our own people
caution and admonition; 1. That they be not abused by the rhetorical words and
high expressions alleged out of the Fathers, calling the Sacrament, The body or
the flesh of Christ. For we all believe it is so, and rejoice in it. But the
question is, after what manner it is so; whether after the manner of the flesh,
or after the manner of spiritual grace, and sacramental consequence? We with
the H. Scriptures and the primitive Fathers, affirm the later. The Church of
Rome against the words of Scripture, and the explication of Christ John 6.63.
, and the doctrine of the primitive Church, affirm the former. 2. That they be
careful not to admit such Doctrines under a pretense of being Ancient; since,
although the Roman error has been too long admitted, and is ancient in
respect of our days, yet it is an innovation in Christianity, and brought in by
ignorance, power and superstition, very many ages after Christ. 3. We exhort
them, that they remember the words of Christ, when he explicates the doctrine
of giving us his flesh for meat, and his blood for drink, Vbi supra.
that he tells us, The flesh profits nothing, but the words which he speaks
are spirit, and they are life.

4. That if those ancient and primitive Doctors above cited, say true, and that
the symbols still remain the same in their natural substance and properties,
even after they are blessed, and when they are received, and that Christ's body
and blood are only present to faith and to the spirit, that then whoever
tempts them to give Divine honor to these symbols or elements (as the Church
of Rome does) tempts them to give to a creature the due and incommunicable
propriety of God; and that then, this evil passes further than an error in the
understanding; for it carries them to a dangerous practice, which cannot
reasonably be excused from the crime of Idolatry. To conclude,

This matter of it self is an error so prodigiously great and dangerous, that
we need nor tell of the horrid and blasphemous questions which are sometimes
handled by them concerning this Divine Mystery. As, if a Priest going by a
Bakers shop, and saying with intention, Hoc est corpus meum, whether all the
Bakers bread be turned into the body of Christ? Whether a Church mouse does eat
her Maker? Whether a man by eating the consecrated symbols does break his fast?
For if it be not bread and wine, he does not: and if it be Christ's body and
blood naturally and properly, it is not bread and wine. Whether it may be said,
the Priest is in some sense the Creator of God himself? Whether his power be
greater than the power of Angels and Archangels? For that it is so, is expressly
affirmed by Cassenaeus. Gloria mundi 4. number. 6.
Whether (as a Bohemian Priest said) that a Priest before he say his first
Mass, be the Son of God, but afterward he is the Father of God and the Creator
of his body? But against this blasphemy a book was written by John Huss, about
the time of the Council of Constance. But these things are too bad, and
therefore we love not to rake in so filthy channels, but give only a general
warning to all our Charges, to take heed of such persons, who from the proper
consequences of their Articles, grow too bold and extravagant; and, of such
doctrines, from whence these and many other evil Propositions (...), frequently
do issue. As the tree is, such must be the fruit. But we hope it may be
sufficient 1.
to say, That what the Church of Rome teaches of Transubstantiation, is
absolutely impossible, and implies contradictions very many, to the belief of
which no faith can oblige us, and no reason can endure. For Christ's body being
in heaven, glorious, spiritual and impassible, cannot be broken. And since by
the Roman doctrine nothing is broken, but that which cannot be broken, that is,
the color, the taste, and other accidents of the elements; yet if they could
be broken, since the accidents of bread and wine are not the substance of
Christ's body and blood, it is certain that on the Altar, Christ's body naturally
and properly cannot be broken 2.
And since they say that every consecrated Wafer is Christ's whole body, and yet
this Wafer is not that Wafer, therefore either this or that is not Christ's
body, or else Christ has two bodies, for there are two Wafers. 3.
But when Christ instituted the Sacrament, and said, This is my body which is
broken: because at that time Christ's body was not broken naturally and
properly, the very words of Institution do force us to understand the Sacrament
in a sense not natural, but spiritual, that is, truly sacramental. 4.
And all this is besides the plain demonstrations of sense, which tells us it
is bread and it is wine naturally as much after as before consecration. 5.
And after all, the natural sense is such as our blessed Savior reproved in
the men of Capernaum, and called them to a spiritual understanding; the natural
sense being not only unreasonable and impossible; but also to no purpose of
the spirit, or any ways perfective of the soul; as has been clearly
demonstrated by many learned men against the fond hypothesis of the Church of
Rome in this Article.

Sect. VI.
OUr next instance of the novelty of the Roman Religion in their Articles of
division from us, is that of the half Communion. For they deprive the people of
the chalice, and dismember the institution of Christ, and praevaricate his
express law in this particular, and recede from the practice of the Apostles;
and though they confess it was the practice of the primitive Church, yet they
lay it aside, and curse all them that say they do amiss in it; that is, they
curse them who follow Christ, and his Apostles, and his Church, while
themselves deny to follow them.

Now for this we need no other testimony but their own words in the Council of
Constance. Council. Cons^ant. s^ss. 13.
[ Whereas in certain parts of the world some temerariously presume to affirm,
that the Christian people ought to receive the Sacrament of the Eucharist under
both kinds of bread and wine, and do every where communicate the Laity not
only in bread but in wine also; -- Hence it is, that the Council decrees and
defines against this error, that although Christ instituted after supper, and
administered this venerable Sacrament under both kinds of bread and wine, yet
this notwithstanding -- And although in the primitive Church this Sacrament was
received of the faithful under both kinds] Here is the acknowledgment, both of
Christ's institution in both kinds, and Christ's ministering it in both kinds, and
the practice of the primitive Church to give it in both kinds; yet the
conclusion from these premises is [ We command under the pain of
Excommunication, that no Priest communicate the people under both kinds of
bread and wine.] The opposition is plain: Christ's Testament ordains it: The
Church of Rome forbids it: It was the primitive custom to obey Christ in this:
a later custom is by the Church of Rome introduced to the contrary. To say that
the first practice and institution is necessary to be followed, is called
Heretical: to refuse the later subintroduc'd custom incurrs the sentence of
Excommunication: and this they have passed not only into a law, but into an
Article of Faith; and if this be not teaching for doctrines the commandments of
men, and worshipping God in vain with men's traditions; then there is, and there
was, and there can be no such thing in the world.

So that now the question is not, whether this doctrine and practice be an
INNOVATION, but whether it be not better it should be so? Whether it be not
better to drink new wine than old? Whether it be not better to obey man than
Christ, who is God blessed for ever? Whether a late custom be not to be
preferred before the ancient? a custom dissonant from the institution of
Christ, before that which is wholly consonant to what Christ did and taught?
This is such a bold affirmative of the Church of Rome, that nothing can suffice
to rescue us from an amazement in the consideration of it: especially since,
although the Institution it self, being the only warranty and authority for
what we do, is of it self our rule and precept; (according to that of the
Lawyer, Accursius praefat. super Instit. Justin.
Institutiones sunt praeceptiones quibus instituuntur and docentur homines) yet
besides this, Christ added preceptive words, Drink ye all of this: Mat. 26. 27
he spoke it to all that received, who then also represented all them, who for
ever after were to remember Christ's death.

But concerning the doctrine of Antiquity in this point, although the Council
of Constance confess the Question, yet since that time they have taken on them
a new confidence, and affirm, that the half Communion was always more or less
the practice of the most Ancient times. We therefore think it fit to produce
testimonies concurrent with the saying of the Council of Constance, such as are
irrefragable, and of persons beyond exception. Cassander affirms, Consult.
sect. 22.
That in the Latin Church for above a thousand years, the body of Christ, and
the blood of Christ were separately giuen^ the body apart, and the blood apart,
after the consecration of the mysteries. So Aquin as also affirms, Commen. in 6
Ioh. lect. 7.
[ According to the ancient custom of the Church, all men as they communicated
in the body, so they communicated in the blood; which also to this day is kept
in some Churches.] And therefore Paschasius Ratbertus resolves it dogmatically,
De corp. and sang. Domini, cap. 19.
That neither the flesh without the blood, nor the blood without the flesh is
rightly communicated; because the Apostles all of them did drink of the
chalice. And Salmeron being forced by the evidence of the thing, Tract. 35.
ingenuously and openly confesses, That it was a general custom to communicate
the Laity under both kinds.

It was so, and it was more: There was anciently a Law for it, Apud Gratian. de
consecr. did. 2. cap. Comperimus.
Aut integra Sacramenta percipiant, aut ab integris arceantur, said Pope
Gelasius. Either all nor none, let them receive in both kinds, or in neither;
and he gives this reason, Quia divisio unius and ejusdem mysterii sine grandi
sacrilegio non potest pervenire. The mystery is but one and the same, and
therefore it cannot be divided without great sacrilege. The reason concludes as
much of the Receiver as the Consecrator, and speaks of all indefinitely.

Thus it is acknowledged to have been in the Latin Church, Vide Ochagav de
Sacr. tract. 2. de Euchar. q. 18. De consecrat. did. 2. cap. Si non sunt^ and
cap. Quia passus, and cap. Prima quidem, and cap. Tunc ei^, and cap.
Accesserun^.
and thus we see it ought to have been: And for the Greek Church there is no
question; for even to this day they communicate the people in the chalice. But
this case is so plain, and there are such clear testimonies out of the Fathers
recorded in their own Canon Law, that nothing can obscure it; but to use too
many words about it. We therefore do exhort our people to take care that they
suffer not themselves to be robbed of their portion of Christ, as he is pleased
sacramentally and graciously to communicate himself unto us.

Sect. VII.
AS the Church of Rome does great injury to Christendom, in taking from the
people what Christ gave them in the matter of the Sacrament; so she also
deprives them of very much of the benefit which they might receive by their
holy prayers, if they were suffered to pray in public in a Language they
understand. But that is denied to the common people, to their very great
prejudice and injury.

Concerning which, although it is as possible to reconcile Adultery with the
seventh Commandment, as Service in a Language not understood to the fourteenth
Chapter of the first Epistle to the Corinthians; and that therefore if we can
suppose that the Apostolical age did follow the Apostolical rule, it must be
conclude, that the practice of the Church of Rome is contrary to the practice
of the Primitive Church: Yet besides this, we have thought fit to declare the
plain sense and practice of the succeeding Ages in a few testimonies, but so
pregnant, as not to be avoided.

Lib. 8. contra Celsum.
Origin affirms, that the Grecians in their prayers use Greek, and the Romans
the Roman language, and so every one according to his Tongue, prays unto God,
and praises him as he is able. S. Chrysostom urging the precept of the Apostle
for prayers in a Language understood by the hearer, affirms that which is but
reasonable, saying, If a man speaks in the Persian Tongue, and understands not
what himself says, to himself he is a Barbarian, and therefore so he is to him
that understands no more than he does. And what profit can he receive, who
hears a sound, and discerns it not? It were as good he were absent as present:
For if he be the better to be there, because he sees what is done, and guesses
at something in general, Affectus consequitur intellectum: ubi autem nullus
earum rerum quae petuntur vel dicuntur habetur intellectus^ aut g^^eraliter
tantum, ibi exiguus assurgit affectus. Azor. Inst. moral. to. 1. lib. 9. c. 34.
q. ^.
and consents to him that ministers: It is true, this may be, but this
therefore is so, because he understands something; but he is only so far
benefited as he understands, and therefore all that which is not understood,
does him no more benefit that is present, than to him that is absent, and
consents to the prayers in general, and to what is done for all faithful
people. But [ If indeed ye meet for the edification of the Church, those things
ought to be spoken which the hearers understand,] said S. Ambrose: And so it
was in the primitive Church; blessings and all other things in the Church were
done in the Vulgar tongue, says In 1 Cor. 14
Lyra; Nay, not only the public Prayers, but the whole Bible was anciently by
many Translations, made fit for the peoples use. S. Hierom Epist ad Su^hron.
affirms, that himself translated the Bible into the Dalmatian Tongue; and
Sozom. l. 6. ^ist. cap. 37.
Ulphilas a Bishop among the Goths, translated it into the Gothic Tongue; and
that it was translated into all Languages, we are told by Hom. 1. in 8 ^^^an.
S. Chrysostom, De Doctr. Christ. cap 5.
S. Austin, and Sermon. 5. de Graecar. ^ffect. curat.
Theodoret.

But although what twenty Fathers say, can make a thing no more certain than if
S. Paul had alone said it, yet both S. Paul and the Fathers are frequent to
tell us, That a Service or Prayers in an unknown Tongue do not edify: So Li^.
Q^ ex var. Script. lo^^q. 278.
S. Basil, In 1 Cor. him. 35.
S. Chrysostom, Super 1 Cor. 14.
S. Ambrose, and S^per Psalm. 1^. con. 2.
S. Austin, In 1 Cor. 14.
and this is consented to by Aquinas, Ibid.
Lyra, and Liturg. cap. 28.
Cassander: And besides that, these Doctors affirm, that in the primitive
Church the Priest and People joined in their Prayers, and understood each
other, and prayed in their Mother Tongue: We find a story (how true it is, let
them look to it, but it is) told by Histor. Bohem. ^
AEneas Sylvius, who was afterward Pope Pius the II. that when Cyrillus Bishop
of the Moravians and Methodius had converted the Slavonians, Cyril being at
Rome, desired leave to use the language of that Nation in their Divine Offices.
Concerning which when they were disputing, a voice was heard, as if from
Heaven, Let every spirit praise the Lord, and every tongue confess unto him:
Upon which it was granted according to the Bishops desire. But now they are not
so kind at Rome; and although the Fathers at Tre^t confessed in their Decree,
that the Mass contains in it great matter of erudition and edification of the
people, yet they did not think it fit, that it should be said in the vulgar
Tongue: So that it is very good food, but it must be locked up; it is an
excellent candle, but it must be put under a bushel: And now the Question is,
Whether it be fit that the people pray so as to be edified by it; or is it
better that they be at the prayers when they shall not be edified? Whether it
be not as good to have a dumb Priest to do Mass, as one that has a tongue to
say it? For he that has no tongue, and he that has none to be understood, is
alike insignificant to me. De Doctr. Christ. lib. 4. cap. 10.
Quid prodest locutionum integritas quam non sequitur intellectus audientis?
cum loquendi nulla fit causa, si quod loquimur non intelligunt propter quos ut
intelligant loquimur, said S. Austin: What does it avail that man speaks all,
if the hearers understand none? and there is no cause why ^ man should speak at
all, if they, for whose understanding you do speak, understand it not. God
understands the Priests thoughts when he speaks not, as well as when he speaks;
he hears the prayer of the heart, and sees the word of the mind, and a dumb
Priest can do all the ceremonies, and make the signs; and he that speaks aloud
to them that understand him not, does no more. Now since there is no use of
vocal prayer in public, but that all together may signify their desires, and
stir up one another, and join in the expression of them to God; by this device,
a man who understands not what is said, can only pray with his lips; for the
heart cannot pray but by desiring, and it cannot desire what it understands
not. So that in this case, prayer cannot be an act of the soul: There is
neither affection nor understanding, notice or desire: The heart says nothing,
and asks for nothing, and therefore receives nothing. Solomon calls that the
sacrifice of fools, when men consider not; and they who understand not what is
said, cannot take it into consideration. But there needs no more to be said in
so plain a case. We end this with the words of the Civil and Canon Law.
Justinian the Emperor made a Law in these words, [ We will and command, that
all Bishops and Priests celebrate the sacred Oblation, and the Prayers
thereunto added in holy Baptism, not in a low voice, but with a loud and clear
voice, which may be heard by the faithful people; that is, be understood, for
so it follows, Novel. 123.
that thereby the minds of the hearers may be raised up with greater devotion
to set forth the praises of the Lord God; for so the Apostle teaches in the
first to the Corinthians. It is true, that this Law was rased out of the Latin
versions of Justinian. The fraud and design was too palpable, but it prevailed
nothing; for it is acknowledged by Cassander and Bellarmine, De Missa l. 2. ^.
13. sect. ad Novella^.
and is in the Greek Copies of Holoander.

The Canon Law is also most express from an Authority of no less than a Pope
and a General Council, as themselves esteem; Innocent III. in the great Council
of Lateran, above MCC years after Christ, in these words, [ Because in most
parts within the same City and Diocese, Cap. 9.
the people of diverse Tongues are mixed together, having under one and the same
faith diverse ceremonies and rites, we straightly charge and command, That the
Bishops of such Cities and Dioceses provide men fit, who may celebrate Divine
Service according to the diversity of ceremonies and languages, and administer
the Sacraments of the Church, instructing them both by word and by example.]

Now if the words of the Apostle, and the practice of the primitive Church, the
Sayings of the Fathers, and the Confessions of wise men amongst themselves; if
the consent of Nations, and the piety of our forefathers; if right reason, and
the necessity of the thing; if the needs of the ignorant, and the very
inseparable conditions of holy prayers; if the Laws of Princes, and the Laws of
the Church, which do require all our prayers to be said by them that understand
what they say; if all these cannot prevail with the Church of Rome to do so
much good to the peoples souls, as to consent they should understand what in
particular they are to ask of God, certainly there is a great pertinacy of
opinion, and but a little charity to those precious souls, for whom Christ dyed
and for whom they must give account.

Indeed the old Toscan Rites, and the Sooth-sayings of the Salian Priests, Vix
Sacerdotibus suis intellecta, Quintil. l. 1.
sed quae mutari vetat Religio: were scarce understood by their Priests
themselves, but their Religion forbad to change them. Thus anciently did the
Osseni Heretics of whom Epiphanius tells, and the Heracleonitae of whom S.
Austin gives account; Verb. Osseni. Cap. 6. ad Quod vult De^m.
they taught to pray with obscure words; and some others in Clemens
Alexandrinus, supposed, that words spoken in a barbarous or unknown tongue,
(...), are more powerful. The Jews also in their Synagogues at this day, read
Hebrew, which the people but rarely understand; and the Turks in their Mosques
read Arabic, of which the people know nothing. But Christians never did so,
till they of Rome resolved to refuse to do benefit to the souls of the people
in this instance, or to bring them from intolerable ignorance.

Sect. VIII.
THe Church of Rome has to very bad purposes introduced and imposed upon
Christendom the worship and veneration of Images, kissing them, pulling off
their hats, kneeling, falling down and praying before them, which they call,
giving them due honor and veneration. What external honor and veneration that
is, which they call due, is expressed by the instances now reckoned, which the
Council of Trent in their Decree enumerate and establish. What the inward honor
and worship is, which they intend to them, is intimated in the same Decree. By
the Images they worship Christ and his Saints; and therefore by these Images
they pass that honor to Christ and his Saints which is their due: that is, as
their Doctors explain it, Latria or Divine worship to God and Christ.
Hyperdulia or more than service to the Blessed Virgin Mary; and service or
doulia to other canonized persons. So that upon the whole, the case is this:
What ever worship they give to God, and Christ and his Saints, they give it
first to the image, and from the image they pass it unto Christ and Christ's
servants. And therefore we need not to enquire what actions they suppose to be
fit or due. For whatsoever is due to God, to Christ or his Saints, that worship
they give to their respective Images: all the same in external semblance and
ministry; as appears in all their great Churches, and public actions, and
processions, and Temples and Festivals, and endowments, and censings, and
pilgrimages, and prayers, and vows made to them.

Now besides that these things are so like Idolatry, that they can no way be
reasonably excused (of which we shall in the next Chapter give some account)
besides that they are too like the religion of the Heathens, Chap. 2. Sect. 12.
and so plainly and frequently forbidden in the Old Testament, and are so
infinitely unlike the simple and wise, the natural and holy, the pure and the
spiritual religion of the Gospel; besides that they are so infinite a scandal
to the Jews and Turks, and reproach Christianity it self amongst all strangers
that live in their communion, and observe their rites: besides that they cannot
pretend to be lawful, but with the laborious artifices of many Metaphysical
notions and distinctions, which the people who most need them, do least
understand; and that therefore the people worship them without these
distinctio^s, and directly put confidence in them; and that it is impossible
that ignorant persons, who in all Christian countries make up the biggest
number, should do otherwise, when otherwise they cannot understand it; and
besides that, the thing it self with or without distinctions, is a
superstitious and forbidden, an unlawful and unnatural worship of God, who will
not be worshipped by an Image: we say that besides all this, This whole
Doctrine and practice is an innovation in the Christian Church, not practiced,
not endured in the primitive ages; but expressly condemned by them, and this is
our present undertaking to evince.

The first notice we find of Images brought into Christian Religion, was by
Simon Magus: indeed that was very Ancient, but very heretical and abominable:
but that he brought some in to be worshipped, we find in Lib. 1. ^aret. fabul.
Theodoret, and De haeres.
S. Austin, Lib. 1. cap. 23. vide etiam Epiphan. 10. 2. lib. 1. haeres. 27. and
S. August. de haeres.
S. Irenaeus tells, That the Gnostics or Carpocrations did make images, and
said, that the form of Christ as he was in the flesh, was made by Pilate; and
these Images they worshipped, as did the Gentiles: These things they did, but
against these things the Christians did zealously and piously declare: We have
no Image in the world, said S. Clemens of Lib. 6. strom. and in paran^^i ^.
Alexandria: It is apparently forbidden to us to exercise that deceitful art:
For it is written, Thou shall not make any similitude of any thing in Heaven
above, etc. And Origin wrote a just Treatise against Celsus; in which he not
only affirms, Lib. 7. and 3. cont. Cells.
That Christians did not make or use Images in Religion, but that they ought
not, and were by God forbidden to do so. To the same purpose also Lactantius
discourses to the Emperor, and confutes the pretenses and little answers of the
Heathen in that manner, that he leaves no pretense for Christians under another
cover, to introduce the like abomination.

We are not ignorant, that those who were converted from Gentilism, and those
who loved to imitate the customs of the Roman Princes and people, did soon
introduce the Historical use of Images, and according to the manner of the
world, did think it honorable to depict or make Images of those whom they had
in great esteem; and that this being done by an esteem, relying on Religion,
did by the weakness of men, and the importunity of the Tempter, quickly pass
into inconvenience and superstition; yet even in the time of Julian the
Emperor, S. Cyril denies, that the Christians did give veneration and worship
to the Image, even of the Cross it self, which was one of the earliest
temptations; Epist. ad Ioh. Hi^ros.
and S. Epiphanius (it is a known story) tells, that when in the village of
Bethel he saw a cloth picture, as it were of Christ, or some Saint in the
Church, against the Authority of Scripture; He cut it in pieces, and advised
that some poor man should be buried in it; affirming, that such Pictures are
against Religion, and unworthy of the Church of Christ. The Epistle was
translated into Latin by S. Hierome; by which we may guess at his opinion in
the question.

Can. 36. Placuit pictur as in Ecclesia esse non debere, ne quod colitur aut
adoratur in pari^^ibus depingatur.

De mori^.

Eccles. ^. 1. c. 34. Idem de fide and Symb^^o. c. 7. and contr. Adimant. cap.
13.


The Council of Eliberis is very ancient, and of great fame; in which i^ is
expressly forbidden, that what is worshipped, should be depicted on the walls;
and that therefore Pictures ought not to be in Churches. S. Austin complaining,
that he knew o^ many in the Church who were Worshippers of Pictures, calls them
Superstitious; and adds, that the Church condemns such customs, and strives to
correct them: and S. Gregory writing to Serenus Bishop of Massilia, says he
would not have had him to break the Pictures and Images, which were there set
for an historical use; but commends him for prohibiting any one to worship
them, and enjoins him still to forbid it. But Superstition by degrees creeping
in, the Worship of Images was decreed in the seventh Synod, or the second
Nicene. But the decrees of this Synod being by Pope Adrian sent to Charles the
Great, A^no Dom. DCCLXIV.
he convocated a Synod of German and French Bishops at Francfurt, who discussed
the Acts passed at Nice, and condemned them: And the Acts of this Synod,
although they were diligently suppressed by the Popes arts, yet Eginardus,
Hincmarus, Aventinus, Blondus, Adon, Aymonius ^and Regino, famons Historians,
tell us, That the Bishops of Francfurt condemned the Synod of Nice, and
commanded it should not be called a General Council; and published a Book under
the name of the Emperor, confuting that unchristian Assembly; and not long
since, this Book^ and the Acts of Francfurt^ were published by Bishop Tillius;
by which, not only the infinite fraud of the Roman Doctors is discovered, but
the worship of Images is declared against and condemned.

A while after this, Ludovicus the son of Charlemain, sent Claudius a famous
Preacher to Taurinum in Italy, where he preached against the worshipping of
Images, and wrote an excellent book to that purpose. Against this book Jonas
Bishop of Orleans, after the death of Ludovicus and Claudius, did write: In
which he yet durst not assert the worship of them, but confuted it out of
Origin; whose words he thus cites, [ Images are neither to be esteemed by
inward affection, nor worshipped with outward show;] and out of Lactantius
these, [ Nothing is to be worshipped that is seen with mortal eyes: Let us
adore, let us worship nothing, but the name alone of our only Parent, who is
to be sought for in the Regions above, not here below:] And to the same
purpose, he also alleges excellent words out of Fulgentius and S. Hierom; and
though he would have Images retained, and therefore was angry at Claudius who
caused them to be taken down, yet he himself expressly affirms, that they ought
not to be worshipped; and withal adds, that though they kept the Images in
their Churches for history and ornament, yet that in France the worshipping of
them was had in great detestation. And though it is not to be denied, but that
in the sequel of Jonas his book, he does something prevaricate in this
question; yet it is evident, that in France this Doctrine was not accounted
Catholic for almost nine hundred years after Christ; Lib 2^ in vitae Isaac^
Angeli, A.D. 1160.
and in Germany it was condemned for almost MCC years, as we find in Nicetas.

We are not unskilled in the devices of the Roman Writers, and with how much
artifice they would excuse this whole matter, and palliate the crime imputed to
them, and elude the Scriptures expressly condemning this Superstition: But we
know also, that the arts of Sophistry are not the ways of Salvation. And
therefore we exhort our people to follow the plain words of Scripture, and the
express Law of God in the second Commandment; and add also the exhortation of
S. John, 1 John 5.21
Little children, keep your selves from Idols. To conclude, it is impossible
but that it must be confessed, that the worship of Images was a thing unknown
to the primitive Church; in the purest times of which, they would not allow the
making of them; as (amongst diverse others) appears in the Writings of Clemens
Strom. l. 6. and in Pro^rep.
Alexandrinus, Lib. 2. c. 22. advers. Marcion. and de Ido^olatr. c. 3.
Tertullian, and Lib. 4. cont. Celsum.
Origin.

Sect. IX.
AS an Appendage to this, we greatly reprove the custom of the Church of Rome,
in picturing God the Father, and the most holy and undivided Trinity; which,
besides that i^ ministers infinite scandal to all sober minded men, and gives
the new Arrians in Polonia and Antitrinitarians, great and ridiculous
entertainment exposiag that sacred Mystery to derision and scandalous contempt:
It is also (which at present we have undertaken particularly to remark) against
the doctrine and practice of the primitive Catholic Church.

S. Clemens of Alexandria says, Stromat. l. 1.
that in the Discipline of Moses, God was not to be represented in the shape of
a Man, or of any other thing: and that Christians understood themselves to be
bound by the same Law, we find it expressly taught by Origin Lib. 7. contra
Celsum.
, Tertullian De coron a ^il^is.
, Eusebius Lib. 1. c. 5. praep. Evang.
, Athanasius Orat. contra gentes.
, S. Hierom In c. 40. Isa.
, S. Austin De fide and symbol. c. 7.
, Theodoret In Deuteronomy. q. 1.
, Damascen Lib^ 4. d^ Orthod. fide c. 17.
, and the Synod of Constantinople, as it is reported in the 6. Action of the
second Nicene Council. And certainly if there were not a strange spirit of
contradiction or superstition or deflexion from the Christian Rule, greatly
prevailing in the Chapter of Rome, it were impossible that this practice should be
so countenanced by them, and defended so, to no purpose, with so much scandal,
and against the natural reason of mankind, and the very Law of Nature it self:
For the Heathens were sufficiently by the light of Nature, taught to abominate
all Pictures or Images of God. Sil. Italic.
Sed nulla effigies, simulacraque nulla Deorum:
Majestate locum, and sacro implevere timore.
They in their earliest ages had no Pictures, no Images of their Gods: Their
Temples were filled with majesty, and a sacred fear; and the reason is given by
Macrobius, Lib. 1. in somn. Scip. cap. 2.
Antiquity made no Image (viz. of God) because the supreme God, and the mind
that is born of him, (that is, his Son, the eternal Word) as it is beyond the
Soul, so it is above Nature, and therefore it is not lawful that Figments
should come thither.

Lib. 18. c. 53.
Nicephorus Callistus relating the heresy of the Armenians and Iacobites says,
they made Images of the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, quod perquam absurdum est.
Nothing is more absurd, than to make Pictures or Images of the Persons of the
holy and adorable Trinity. And yet they do this in the Church of Rome. For in
the windows of their Churches, even in Conntrey-villages, where the danger
cannot be denied to be great, and the scandal insupportable; nay, in their
books of Devotion, in their very Mass-books and Breviaries, in their Portuises
and Manuals they picture the holy Trinity with three noses and four eyes, and
three faces in a knot, to the great dishonor of God and scandal of
Christianity it self. We add no more, (for the case is too evidently bad) but
reprove the error with the words of their own Polydore Virgil: Lib. 2. de
Invent. c. 23.
Since the world began never was any thing more foolish than to picture God,
who is present everywhere.

Sect. X.
THe last Instance of Innovations introduc^d in Doctrine and Practice by the
Church of Rome, that we shall represent, is that of the Popes Universal
Bishopric. That is, not only that he is Bishop of Bishops, superior to all
and every one; but that his Bishopric is a Pleni^ude of Power; and as for
other Bishops, of his fullness they all receive, a part of the Ministry and
solicitude; and not only so, but that he only is a Bishop by immediate
Divine Dispensation, and others receive from him whatsoever they have. For to
this height many of them are come at last. Which Doctrine, although as it is in
sins, where the carnal are most full of reproach, but the spiritual are of
greatest malignity; so it happens in this Article. For though it be not so
scandalous as their Idolatry, so ridiculous as their Superstitions, so
unreasonable as their Doctrine of Transubstantiation, so easily reproved as
their Half Communion, and Service in an unknown Tongue; yet it is of as
dangerous and evil effect, and as false, and as certainly an Innovation, as any
thing in their whole Conjugation of Errours^

When Christ founded his Church, he left it in the hands of his Apostles,
without any prerogative given to one, or eminency above the rest, save only of
priority and orderly precedence, which of it self was natural, necessary and
incident. The Apostles governed all; their Authority was the sanction, and
their Decrees and Writings were the Laws of the Church. They exercised a common
jurisdiction, and divided it according to the needs and emergencies, and
circumstances of the Church. In the Council of Jerusalem, S. Peter gave not the
decisive sentence, but S. James, who was the Bishop of that See. Christ sent
all his Apostles as his Father sent him; and therefore he gave to every one of
them the whole power which he left behind; and to the Bishops congregated at
Miletum, Acts 20. 2^.
S. Paul gave them caution to take care of the whole flock of God, and affirms
to them all that the Holy Ghost had made them Bishops: and in the whole New
Testament, there is no act or sign of superiority, or that one Apostle
exercised power over another: but to them whom Christ sent, he in common
entrusted the Church of God: according to that excellent saying of S. Cyprian,
Epist. de unit. Ecclesia ad Novatian. and habetur cause. 24. qu. 1.
[ The other Apostles are the same that S. Peter was, endowed with an equal
fellowship of honor and power: and they are all shephards, and the flock is
one] and therefore it ought to be ^ed by all the Apostles with unanimous
consent.

This unity and identity of power without question and interruption did
continue and descend to Bishops in the primitive Church, in which it was a
known doctrine that the Bishops were successors of the Apostles: and what was
not in the beginning, could not be in the descent, unless it were innovated and
introduced by a new authority. Christ gave ordinary power to none but the
Apostles, and the power being to continue for ever in the Church, it was to be
succeeded to, and by the same authority, even of Christ, it descended to them
who were their successors, that is, to the Bishops, as all antiquity Irenae.
lib. 4. c. 43, 44. S. Cyprian: lib. 1. ep. 6. and lib. 2. ep. 10. and lib. 4.
ep. 9. S. Ambrose. de dignit. sacerd. c. 1. S. Aug. de baptism. contra Donat.
l. 7. c. 43. and ibid. Claru^ a Muscula. Idem de verb. Dom. Ser. 24. Con. Romans
sub Sylvest. Constable. Apost. l. 8. c. ult. Anacl. P. ep. 2. Clemens P. ep. 1. S.
Hieron. ep. 13. and ep. 54. Euthym. in Ps. 44. S. Gregor. in Evang. Hom. 26. ad
Heliod^^. ep. 1. S. Chrysostom. ser. Damascen. de imaginibus: Orat. 2. S. Greg.
Naz. Orat 21. de laud Basilii.
does consent and teach: Not S. Peter alone, but every Apostle, and therefore
every one who succeeds them in their ordinary power, may and must remember the
words of S. Paul; We are Ambassadors or Legates for Christ: Christ's Vicars, not
the Popes Delegates: and so all the Apostles are called in the Preface of the
Mass; quos oper is tui Vicarios eidem contulisti praeesse Pastores; they are
Pastors of the Flock and Vicars of Christ; and so also they are in express
terms called by S. Ambrose, In epist. 1. ad Corin. cap. 3. and in epist. ad
Roman. c. 1.
and therefore it is a strange usurpation, that the Pope arrogates that to
himself by Impropriation, which is common to him with all the Bishops of
Christendom.

The consequent of this is, that by the law of Christ, one Bishop is not
superior to another: Christ gave the power to all alike; he made no Head of the
Bishops; he gave to none a supremacy of power or universality of jurisdiction.
But this the Pope has long challenged, and to bring his purposes to pass, has
for these Six hundred years bygone invaded the rights of Bishops, and
delegated matters of order and jurisdiction to Monks and Friars; insomuch that
the power of Bishops was greatly diminished at the erecting of the Cluniac and
Cistercian Monks about the year ML: but about the year MCC, it was almost
swallowed up by privileges granted to the Begging Friars, and there kept by the
power of the Pope: which power got one great step more above the Bishops, when
they got it declared that the Pope is above a Co^ncil of Bis^ops: and at last
it was turned into a new doctrine by Cajetane (who for his prosperous invention
was made a Cardinal) that all the whole Apostolic or Episcopal power is
radical and inherent in the Pope, in whom is the fullness of the Ecclesiastical
authority; and that Bishops receive their portion of it from him: and this was
first boldly maintained in the Council of Trent by the Jesuits; and it is now
the opinion of their Order: but it is also that which the Pope challenges in
practice, when he pretends to a power over all Bishops, and that this power is
derived to him from Christ; when he calls himself the Universal Bishop, and the
Vicarial Head of the Church, the Churches Monarch, he from whom all
Ecclesiastical Authority is derived, to whose sentence in things Divine every
Christian under pain of damnation is bound to be subject Extravi Com lib 1.
tit. 9. de mayor. and obed. cap. Vnam Sanctam.
.

Now this is it which as it is productive of infinite mischiefs, so it is an
Innovation and an absolute deflexion from the primitive Catholic Doctrine, and
yet is the great groundwork and foundation of their Church. This we shall
represent in these following testimonies. Pope Eleutherius (...) Arch^^pisc.
Granate^si in Council. ^rid.
in an Epistle to the Bishops of France says that Christ committed the
Universal Church to the Bishops; Vbi sup^a.
and S. Ambrose says that the Bishop holds the place of Christ, and is his
substitute^ But famous are the words of S. Cyprian, (...) 4 (...) 2
[ The Church of Christ is one through the whole world, divided by him into
many members, and the Bishopric is but one, diffused in the agreeing plurality
of many Bispops.] And again, [ To every Pastor a portion of the flock is given,
which let every one of them rule and govern.] By which words it is evident that
the primitive Church understood no Prelation of one and Subordination of
another, commanded by Christ, or by virtue of their Ordination; but only what
was for orders sake introduced by Princes and consent of Prelates. And it was
to this purpose very full which was said by Pope Symmachus: Ap^d Ba^^. ^^m. 6.
A.D. 499. n. 36.
As it is in the holy Trinity, whose power is one and undivided, (or to use the
expression in the Athanasian Creed, none is before or after other, none is
greater or less than another) so there is one Bishopric amongst diverse
Bishops, and therefore why should the Canons of the ancient Bishops be violated
by their Successors? Now these words being spoken against the invasion of the
rights of the Church of Arles by Anastasius, and the question being in the
exercise of Jurisdiction, and about the institution of Bishops, does fully
declare that the Bishops of Rome had no superiority by the laws of Christ over
any Bishop in the Catholic Church, and that his Bishopric gave no more power
to him, than Christ gave to the Bishop of the smallest Diocese.

And therefore all the Church of God, whenever they reckoned the several orders
and degrees of Ministry in the Catholic Church, reckon the Bishop as the last
and supreme, beyond whom there is no spiritual power but in Christ. Dionys.
Ar^op. de Eccles. hierarch. de sacer. p^rfect.
For as the whole Hierarchy ends in Jesus, so does every particular one in its
own Bishop. Beyond the Bishop there is no step, till you rest in the great
Shepherd and Bishop of souls. Under him every Bishop is supreme in spirituals,
and in all power which to any Bishop is given by Christ. E^is^. ad S^^^^^ne^^
and ad P^^^a^^^.
S. Ignatius therefore exhorts that all should obey their Bishop, and the
Bishop obey Christ, as Christ obeyed his Father. There are no other intermedial
degrees of Divine institution. But (as Origin teaches) The Apostles, and they
who after them are ordain^d by God, that is, the Bishops, have the supreme
place in the Church, and the Prophets have the second place. The same also is
taught by P. Gelasius Did. 97. c. Duo sunt.
, by S. Hierom In Ierem. hom. 7. and adver. Lucif.
, and Fulgentius In Conc^^. Pari^. l. 1. c. 3
, and indeed by all the Fathers who spoke any thing in this matter: Insomuch
that when Bellarmine is in this question pressed out of the book of Nilus by
the Authority of the Fathers standing against him, he answers, Papam Patres non
habere in Ecclesia, sed Filios omnes; The Pope acknowledges no Fathers in the
Church, for they are all his Sons.

Now although we suppose this to be greatly sufficient to declare the Doctrine
of the primitive Catholic Church, concerning the equality of power in all
Bishops by Divine right: yet the Fathers have also expressly declared
themselves, that one Bishop is not superior to another, and ought not to judge
another, or force another to obedience. They are the words of S. Cyprian to a
Council of Bishops: In Co^cil^ Cart^ag.
[ None of us makes himself a Bishop of Bishops, or by tyrannical power drives
his colleagues to a necessity of obedience, since every Bishop according to the
license of his own liberty and power, has his own choice, and cannot be judged
by another, nor yet himself judge another; but let us all expect the judgment
of our L. Jesus Christ, who only and alone has the power of setting us in the
Government of his Church, and judging of what we do.] This was^spoken and
intended against P. Stephen, who did then begin dominari in clero, to lord it
over Gods heritage, and to excommunicate his brethren, as Demetrius did in the
time of the Apostles themselves: but they both found their reprovers. Demetrius
was chastised by S. John for this usurpation, and Stephen by S. Cyprian, De
Bapt. contr. Dinat^s^^l 3. c. ^.
and this also was approved by S. Austin. We conclude this particular with the
words of S. Gregory Bishop of Rome, who because the Patriarch of Constantinople
called himself Universal Bishop, said, Lib. 4. ep. 76, 78, 31, 34, 38, 39^ and
lib. 6. ep. 24.
It was a proud title, profane, sacrilegious, and Antichristian: and therefore
he little thought that his successors in the same See should so fiercely
challenge that Antichristian title; much less did the then Bishop of Rome in
those ages challenge it as their own peculiar; for they had no mind to be, or
to be esteemed Antichristian. Romano pontifici oblatum est, sed nullus unquam
eorum hoc singularitatis nomen assump sit. His predecessors (it seems) had been
tempted with an offer of that title, but none of them ever assumed that name of
singularity, Lib 4 p 32. (...) ^st (...), cont^a Ca^^n^m decret^. novum sibi
usurpare nomen praesumit? Videatur Epistola S. Hieron. a^ Evagrium, Council.
Ch^^ced. action. 16. Council. Nicen. can. 6. and can. 7. and Conci^. C. P can.
3. and Nov^l. Justin. 131.
as being against the law of the Gospel and the Canons of the Church.

Now this being a matter of which Christ spoke not one word to Saint Peter, if
it be a matter of faith and salvation, as it is now pretended, it is not
imaginable he would have been so perfectly silent. But though he was silent of
any intention to do this, yet S. Pau^ was not silent that Christ did otherwise;
for he has set in his Church primum Apostolos; first of all, Apostles; not
first S. Peter and secondarily Apostles; but all the Apostles were first. It is
also evident that S: Peter did not carry himself so as to give the least
overture or umbrage to make any one suspect he had any such pre-eminence; but
he was (as St. Chrysostom truly says) (...), In Acta Apost. hom. 3.
he did all things with the common consent, (...), nothing by special authority
or principality: and if he had any such, it is more than probable that the
Apostles who survived him, had succeeded him in it, rather than the Bishop of
Rome: and it being certain (as the Bishop of Canaries confesses) That there is
in Scripture no revelation that the Bishop of Rome should succeed Peter in it,
(...) loc. lib. 6 c. 8 p 23^. Ed. S^^man^. 1563.
and we being there told that S. Peter was at Antioch, but never that he was at
Rome; C^ncor. Cu^^ l. 2. c. 34 S^nt. l. 4 (...) 24 q 2 (...) 4 c. 3.
it being confessed by some of their own parties, by Cardinal Cusanus, Soto,
Driedo, Canus and Segovius, that this succession was not addicted to any
particular Church, nor that Christ's institution of this does any other way
appear; that it cannot be proved that the Bishop of Rome is Prince of the
Church: it being also certain that there was no such thing known in the
primitive Church, but that the holy Fathers both of Africa and the East did
oppose Pope Victor and Pope Stephen, when they began to interpose with a
presumptive Authority in the affairs of other Churches; and that the Bishops of
the Church did treat with the Roman Bishop as with a brother, not as their
superior: and that the General Council held at Chalcedon did give to the
Bishops of C. P. equal rights and preeminence with the Bishops of Rome: and
that the Greek Churches are at this day and have been a long time great
opponents of this pretension of the Bishops of Rome: and after all this, since
it is certain that Christ, who foreknows all things, did also know that t^ere
would be great disputes and challenges of this preeminence, did indeed suppress
it in his Apostles, Luke 22.25. Mat. 20.26, 27.
and said not it should be otherwise in succession, and did not give any
command to his Church to obey the Bishops of Rome as his Vicars, more than what
he commanded concerning all Bishops; it must be certain that it cannot be
necessary to salvation to do so, but that it is more than probable tha^ (...)
never intended any such thing, and (...) the Bishops of Rome have to the great
prejudice of Christendom made a great schism, and usurped a title which is not
their due, and challenged an authority to which they have no right, and have
set themselves above others who are their equals, and impose an Article of
Faith of their own contriving, and have made great preparation for Antichrist,
if he ever get into that Seat, or be in already, and made it necessary for all
of the Roman Communion to believe and obey him in all things.

Sect. XI^
THere are very many more things in which the Church of Rome has greatly
turned aside from the Doctrines of Scripture, and the practice of the Catholic
Apostolic and primitive Church.

Such are these: The Invoc^^^n of Saints: the Insufficiency of S^^^^ures
without Traditions of Faith unto Salvation: their absolving sinners before they
have by canonical penances and the fruits of a good life testified their
repentance: their giving leave to simple Presbyters by Papal dispensation, to
give confirmation or chrism: selling Masses for Ninepences: Circumgestation of
the Eucharist to be adored: The dangerous Doctrine of the necessity of the
Priests intention in collating Sacraments; by which device they have put it
into the power of the Priest to damn whom he please of his own parish: their
affirming that the Mass is a proper and propitiatory sacrifice for the quick
and the dead: Private Masses, or the Lords Supper without Communion; which is
against the doctrine and practice of the ancient Church of Rome it self, and
contrary to the tradition of the Apostles, if we may believe Pope Calixtus, and
is also forbidden under pain of Excommunication. De consecra. d^st. 2. cap.
Peracta. Vide etiam ib. cap. In coena, and cap. Si quis.
Peracta consecratione omnes communicent, qui noluerint ecclesiasticis carere
liminibus; sic autem etiam Apostoli statuerunt, and sancta Romana tenet
Ecclesia. When the consecration is finished let all communicate that will not
be thrust from the bounds of the Church; for so the Apostles appointed, and so
the Holy Church of Rome does hold. The same also was decreed by P. Soter and P.
Martin in a Council of Bishops, and most severely enjoined by the Canons of the
Apostles as they are cited in the Canon Law. De consecr. did. 1. c. Omnes
fidel. Omnes fideles qui convenient in solennitatibus sacris ad Ecclesiam and
Scripturas Apostolorum and Evange^^a audian^. Qui autem non perseverant in
oratione usque dum Missa peragatur, nec Sanctam Commu^ienem percipiunt, velut
inquie^udines Ecclesiae commove^es convenit communione privari.


There are diverse others; but we suppose that those Innovations which we have
already noted, may be sufficient to verify this charge of Novelty. But we have
done this the rather, because the Roman Emissaries endeavor to prevail amongst
the ignorant and prejudicate by boasting of Antiquity; and calling their
Religion, the Old Religion and the Catholic: so insnaring others by ignorant
words in which is no truth; their Religion as it distinguishes from the
Religion of the Church of England and Ireland, being neither the Old nor the
Catholic Religion; but New and superinduced by arts known to all who with
sincerity and diligence have looked into their pretenses.

But they have taught every Priest that can scarce understand his Breviary, (of
which in Ireland there are but too many) and very many of the people, to ask
where our Religion was before Luther? Whereas it appears by the premises, that
it is much more easy for us to show our Religion before Luther, than for them
to show theirs before Trent. And although they can show too much practice of
their Religion in the degenerate ages of the Church, yet we can and do clearly
show ours in the purest and first ages; and can and do draw lines pointing to
the times and places where the several rooms and stories of their Babel was
builded, and where polished, and where furnished.

But when the Keepers of the field slept, and the Enemy had sown tares, and
they had choked the wheat, and almost destroyed it: when the world complained
of the infinite errors in the Church, and being oppressed by a violent power,
durst not complain so much as they had cause: and when they who had cause to
complain were yet themselves very much abused, and did not complain in all they
might; when diverse excellent persons, S. Bernard, Clemangis, Grosthead,
Marsilius, Ocham, Alvarus, Abbat Ioachim, Petrarch, Savanarola, Valla, Erasmus,
Mantuan, Gerson, Ferus, Cassander, Andre as Fricius, Modrevius, Hermannus
Coloniensis, Wasseburgius Archdeacon of Verdun, Paulus Langius In Chron^
Zilizensi.
, Staphilus, Telesphorus de Cusentia, Doctor Talheymius, Francis Zabarel the
Cardinal, and Pope Adrian himself, with many others; not to reckon Wiclef, Hus,
Hierom of Prague, the Bohemians, and the poor men of Lions, whom they called
Heretics, and confuted with fire and sword; when almost all Christian Princes
did complain heavily of the corrupt state of the Church and of Religion, and no
remedy could be had, but the very intended remedy made things much worse; then
it was that diverse Christian Kingdoms, and particularly the Church of England,
Tum primum senio docilis, tua saecula Roma
Erubuit, pudet exacti jam temporis, odit
Praeteritos foedis cum relligionibus annos.
Being ashamed of the errors, superstitious, her^^^es and impieties which had
deturpated the face of the Church; looked into the glass of Scripture and pure
Antiquity, and washed away those stains with which time, and inadvertency and
tyranny had besmeared her; and being thus cleans'd and washed, is accused by
the Roman parties of Novelty, and condemn^d because she refuses to run into the
same excess of riot and deordination. But we cannot deserve blame who return to
our ancient and first health, by preferring a New cure before an Old sore.

CHAP. II. The Church of Rome, as it is at this day disordered, teaches
Doctrines, and uses Practices, which are in themselves, or in their true and
immediate Consequences, direct Impieties, and give warranty to a wicked Life.
Sect. I.
OUr First instance is in their doctrines of Repentance. For the Roman Doctors
teach, that unless it be by accident, or in respect of some other obligation, a
sinner is not bound presently to repent of his sin as soon as he has committed
it. Some time or other he must do it, and if he take care so to order his
affairs that it be not wholly omitted, but so that it be done one time or
other, he is not by the precept or grace of Repentance bound to do more. Scotus
and his Scholars say that a sinner is bound, viz. by the precept of the Church,
to repent on Holy days, especially the great ones. But this is thought too
severe by Soto and Medina, who teach that a sinner is bound to repent but once
a year, that is, against Easter. These Doctors indeed do differ concerning the
Churches sense; which according to the best of them is bad enough; full as bad
as it is stated in the charge: but they agree in the worst part of it, viz.
that though the Church calls upon sinners to repent on Holy days, or at Easter;
yet that by the Law of God they are not tied to so mu^^, but only to repent in
the danger or article of death. This is the express Doctrine taught in the
Church of Rome by their famous Navar; Enchyr. c. 1. ^. 31.
and for this he quotes Pope Adrian and Cardinal Cajetan, and finally affirms
it to be the sense of all men. The same also is taught by Reginaldus, saying,
It is true, and the opinion of all men, Praxis fori aenit. l. 5. c 2. s^ct. 4
n. 23.
that the time in which a sinner is bound by the commandment of God to be
contrite for his sins, is the imminent article of natural or violent death.

We shall not need to aggravate this sad story by the addition of other words
to the same purpose in a worse degree; such as those words are of the same
Reginaldus, There is no precept that a sinner should not persevere in enmity
against God. There is no negative precept forbidding such a perseverance. These
are the words of this man, but the proper and necessary consequent of that
which they all teach, and to which they must consent. For since it is certain
that he who has sinned against God and his Conscience, is in a state of
enmity, we say he therefore o^ght to repent presently, because until he has
repented he is an enemy to God^ This they confess, but they suppo^e it
concludes nothing; for though they consider and confess this, yet they still
saying, a man is not bound by Gods Law to repent till the article of death, do
consequently say the same thing that Reginaldus does, and that a man is not
bound to come out^ of that state of enmity till he be in those circumstances
that it is very probable if he does not then come out, he must stay in it for
ever. It is something worse than this yet that D^m. a Soto in quart. sent.
did. 17. qu. 2. art. 6. conel. secu^d^.
So^^^ says, [ even to resolve to d^fer our repentance, and i^ refuse to repent
for a certain time, is but a venial sin.] But Non est dubium quin ^d li^itum
sit. Cod. de pae^^^en. ^ract. 1. q. 6. p. 18. edit. Sa^mantic. A. D. 1553.
Medina says it is none at all.

If it be replied to this, that though God has left it to a sinners liberty to
repent when he please, yet the Church has been more severe than God has been,
and ties a sinner to repent, by collate^^l positive laws; for having bound
every one to confess at Easter^ consequently she has tied every one to repent
at Easter, and so, by her laws, can lie in the sin without interruption but
twelve months or thereabouts; yet there is a secret in this, which
nevertheless themselves have been pleased to discover for the ease of tender
consciences, viz. that the Church ordains but the means, the exterior
solemnity of it, and is satisfied if you obey her laws by a Ritual repentance,
but the holiness and the inward repentance, which in charity we should have
supposed to have been designed by the law of Festivals, Regina^d li^. de
con^rit. c. 2. cap. 4.
Non est id quod per praeceptum de observatione Festorum injungitur, is not
that which is enjoined by the Church in her law of Holydays. So that still
sinners are left to the liberty which they say God gave; even to satisfy our
selves with all the remaining pleasures of that sin for a little while, even
during our short mortal life: only we must be sure to repent at last.

We shall not trouble our selves or our charges with con^uting this impious
Doctrine. For it is evident that this gives countenance and too much warranty
to a wicked life; and that of it self is confutation enough, and is that which
we intended to represent.

If it be answered, that this is not the doctrine of their Church, but of some
private Doctors; we must tell you, that, if by the Doctrine of their Church
they mean such things only as are decreed in their Councils; it is to be
considered, that but few things are determined in their Councils; nothing but
articles of belief, and the practice of Sacraments relating to public order^
and if they will not be reproved for any thing but what we prove to be false i^
the articles of their simple belief, the^ take a liberty to say and to do wha^
they list, and to corrupt all the Worl^ by their rules of conscience. But, tha^
this is also the Doctrine of their Church their own men tell us. Communis
o^^nium. It is the Doctrine of all the men; so they affirm, as we have cite^
their own words above: who also un^dertake to tell us in what sense their
Church intends to tie sinners to actual repentance; not as soon as the sin is
committed, but at certain seasons, and then also to no more of it, than the
external and ritual part. So that if their Church be injuriously charged,
themselves have done it, not we. And besides all this: it is hard to suppose or
expect that the innumerable cases of conscience which a whole Trade of Lawyers
and Divines amongst them have made, can be entered into the records of Councils
and public decrees. In these cases we are to consider, who teaches them? Their
Gravest Doctors, in the face of the Sun, under the intuition of Authority in
the public conduct of souls, in their allowed Sermons, in their books licensed
by a curious and inquisitive authority, not passing from them but by warranty
from several hands entrusted to examine them, ne fides Ecclesiae aliquid
detrimenti patiatur; that nothing be published but what is consonant to the
Catholic faith. And therefore these things cannot be esteemed private opinions
Non illico ut^ h^mo se re^m se^^t cuipae p^enitentiae lege poenitere
con^^ringitur. Haec profecto conclusio more and usu Ecclesiae sa^^^ vide^ur
constabilita. Dom. ^ Soto. in quart. sent. d^st. 17. qu. 2. art. 6.
: especially, since if they be, yet they are the private opinions of them all,
and that we understand to be public enough: and are so their Doctrine, as what
the Scribes and Pharisees taught their Disciples, though the whole Church of
the Jews had not passed it into a law. So this is the Roman Doctrine; though
not the Roman law. Which difference we desire may be observed in many of the
following instances, that this objection may no more interpose for an escape,
or an excuse. But we shall have occasion again to speak to it, upon new
particulars.

But this, though it be infinitely intolerable, yet it is but the beginning of
sorrows. For the guides of Souls in the Roman Church have prevaricated in all
the parts of Repentance, most sadly and dangerously.

The next things therefore that we shall remark are their Doctrines concerning
contrition: which when it is genuine and true, that is, a true cordial sorrow
for having sinned against God; a sorrow proceeding from the love of God, and
conversion to him, and ending in a dereliction of all our sins, and a walking
in all righteousness, both the Psalms and the Prophets, the Old Testament and
the New, the Greek Fathers and the Latin have allowed as sufficient for the
pardon of our sins through faith in Jesus Christ (as our Writers have often
proved in their Sermons and books of Conscience) yet first, the Church of Rome
does not allow it to be of any value, unless it be joined with a desire to
confess their sins to a Priest; saying, that a man by contrition is not
reconciled to God, without their Sacramental or Ritual penance, actual or
votive; and this is decreed by the Council of Trent, which thing besides that
it is against Scripture, Sessio 4. c 4.
and the promises of the Gospel, and not only teaches for Doctrine the
Commandments of Men, but evacuates the goodness of God by their traditions, and
weakens and discourages the best repentance, and prefers repentance toward
men, before that which the Scripture calls Repentance toward God, and faith in
our Lord Jesus Christ.

But the malignity of this Doctrine and its influence it has on an evil life
appears in the other corresponding part of this Doctrine. For as contrition
without their ritual and sacramental confession will not reconcile us to God:
so attrition (as they call it) or contrition imperfect, proceeding from fear of
damnation, together with their Sacrament will reconcile the sinner. Contrition
without it will not: attrition with it, will reconcile us; and therefore by
this doctrine, which is expressly decreed a^ Trent, there is no necessity of
Contrition at all; and attrition is as good to all intents and purposes of
pardon: and a little repentance will prevail as well as the greatest, the
imperfect as well as the perfect. So Gu^lielmus de Rubeo explains this
doctrine. In 4. ^^n^. d^st. ^ ^. q. 1.
He that confesses his sins, grieving but a little, obtains remission of his
sins by the Sacrament of Penance ministered to him by the Priest absolving him.
So that although God working Contrition in a penitent, has not done his work
for him without the Priests absolution, in desire at least; yet if the Priest
do his part, he has done the work for the penitent, though God had not wrought
that excellent grace of contrition in the penitent.

But for the contrition it self; it is a good word, but of no severity or
affrightment by the Roman Doctrine: One contrition, one act of it, Lib. 3.
i^strus. sacerdot. cap. 5 n. 4.

Sum qu. 16. art. 1.


though but little and remiss, can blot out any, even the greatest sin (always
understanding it in the sense of the Church, that is in the Sacrament of
Penance) says Cardinal Tolet. A certain little inward grief of mind is
required to the perfection of Repentance, said Maldonat. De contrit. number 107.
Q^aecunque (...) contra ^^^atum, in quocunque instanti sufficient ad
consequend^m m^s^ri^^^diam and (...): sionem. Ibid. n. 106^
And to Contrition a grief in general for all our sins is sufficient; but it is
not necessary to grieve for any one sin more than another, said Franciscus de
Victoria. The greatest sin and the smallest, as to this, are all alike; and as
for the Contrition it self, any intension or degr^e whatsoever, in any instant
whatsoever, is sufficient to obtain mercy and remission, said the same Author.

Now let this be added to the former, and the sequel is this, That if a man
live a wicked life for threescore or ^ourscore years together, yet if in the
article of his death, sooner than which God has not commanded him to repent,
he be a little sorrowful for his sins, then resolving for the present that he
will do so no more; and though this sorrow has in it no love of God, but only
a fear of Hell, and a hope that God will pardon him, this, if the Priest
absolves him, does instantly pass him into a state of salvation. The Priest
with two fingers and a thumb can do his work for him; only he must be greatly
disposed and prepared to receive it: Greatly, we say, according to the sense of
the Roman Church; for he must be attrite, or it were better if he were
contrite; one act of grief, a little one, and that not for one sin more than
another, and this at the end of a long wicked life, at the time of our death,
will make all sure.

Upon these terms, it is a wonder that all wicked men in the world are not
Papists; where they may live so merrily, and die so securely, and are out of
all danger, unless peradventure they die very suddenly, which because so very
few do, the venture is esteemed nothing, and it is a thousand to one on the
sinners side.

Sect. II.
WE know it will be said, That the Roman Church enjoins Confession, and imposes
Penances, and these are a great restraint to sinners, and gather up what was
scattered before. The reply is easy, but it is very sad. For,

1. For Confession: It is true, to them who are not used to it, as it is at the
first time, and for that once it is as troublesome as for a bashful man to speak
Orations in public: But where it is so perpetual and universal, and done by
companies and crowds, at a solemn set time, and when it may be done to any one
besides the Parish Priest, to a Friar that begs, or to a Monk in his Dorter,
done in the ear, it may be, to a person that has done worse, and therefore
has no awe upon me, but what his Order imprints, and his Viciousness takes
off; when we see Women and Boys, Princes and Prelates do the same every day:
And as oftentimes they are never the better, so they are not at all ashamed;
but men look upon it as a certain cure, like pulling off a man's clothes to go
and wash in a river, and make it by use and habit, by confidence and custom, to
be no certain pain, and the women blush or smile, weep or are unmoved, as it
happens under their veil, and the men under the boldness of their Sex: When we
see that men and women confess to day, and sin to morrow, and are not
affrighted from their sin the more for it; because they know the worst of it,
and have felt it often, and believe to be eased by it, certain it is that a
little reason, and a little observation will suffice to conclude, that this
practice of Confession has in it no affrightment, not so much as the horror
of the sin it self has to the Conscience. For they who commit sins
confidently, will with less regret (it may be) confess it in this manner, where
it is the fashion for every one to do it. And when all the world observes how
loosly the Italians, Spaniards and French do live in their Carnivals, giving to
themselves all liberty and license to do the vilest things at that time, not
only because they are for a while^ to take their leave of them, but because
they are (as they suppose) to be so soon eased of their crimes by Confession,
and the circular and never-failing hand of the Priest; they will have no reason
to admire the severity of Confession, which as it was most certainly intended
as a deletory of sin, and might do its first intention, if it were equally
managed; so now certainly it gives confidence to many men to sin, and to most
men to neglect the greater and more effective parts of essential repentance.

We shall not need to observe how Confession is made a Minister of State, a
Pick-lock of secrets, a Spy upon families, a Searcher of inclinations, a
Betraying to temptations; for this is wholly by the fault of the Men, and not
of the Doctrine; but even the Doctrine it self, as it is handled in the Church
of Rome, is so far from bringing peace to the troubled Consciences, that it
intromits more scruples and cases than (...) can resolve.

For be^ides, that it self is a question, and they have made it dangerous by
pretending that it is by Divine Right and Institution, (for so some of the
Schoolmen Vide Bicl. l. 4. did. 17. q. 1. and Scotum ibid. and Bonavent. i^.
n. 72.
teach, and the Canonists say the contrary, Me^ius dicitur came institutam
suisse a quadam universali Ecclesiae traditione, quam ex novi vel vete^is
Testa^enti authoritate, and tamon negatur haec traditio esse universalis.
Confessio non est necessaria apud Graeco^, quiae non ^^anavit ad illos
traditionaliter. De panit. d^st 5. in principio Gloss. ibid. Vide etiam
Panormit^n. super Decr^^a l. 5. cap. Quod au^em, c. Omnis utriusque se^^^, sect
18. extrav. Gloss. Maldonatus sa^ctur omnes Canonistas in hanc sententiam
con^^^sisse. Disp. de Sacram. ^om. 2. c 2. d^ cons^^ss. orig.
and that it is only of humane and positive Constitution) and by this
difference in so great a point, have made the whole O^conomy of their
repentance, which relies upon the supposed necessity of Confession, to fail, or
to shake vehemently, and at the best, to be a foundation too uncertain to build
the hopes of salvation on it; besides all this, we say, Their Rules and
Doctrines of Confession, enjoin some things that are of themselves dangerous,
and lead into temptation. An instance of this is in that which is decreed in
the Canons of Trent, Sess. 4^ can. 7.
That the Penitent must not only confess every mortal sin which after diligent
inquiry he remembers, but even his very sinf^l thoughts in particular, and his
secret desires, and every circumstance which changes the kind of the sin, or
(as some add) does notably increase it: and how this can be safely done, and
who is sufficient for these things, and who can tell his circumstances without
tempting his Confessor, or betraying, and defaming another person, (which is
forbidden) and in what cases it may be done, or in what cases omitted; and
whether the confession be valid upon infinite other considerations, and whether
it be to be repeated in whole or in part, and how often, and how much? these
things are so uncertain, casual and contingent, and so many cases are
multiplied upon every one of these, and these so disputed and argued by their
greatest Doctors, by Thomas, and Scotus, and all the Schoolmen, and by the
Casuists, that as Beatus Rhenanus complains, it was truly observed by the
famous John Geilerius, that according to their cases, inquiries and
conclusions, it is impossible for any man to make a right Confession. So that
although the shame of private Confession be very tolerable and easy, yet the
cases and scruples which they have introduced, are neither easy nor tolerable,
and though (as it is now used) there be but little in it, to restrain sin, yet
there is very much danger of increasing it, and of receiving no benefit by it.

Sect. III.
BUt then for Penances and Satisfactions of which they boast so much, as being
so great restraints to sin, these as they are publicly handled, are nothing
but words and ineffective sounds. For, first, if we consider what the Penances
themselves are which are enjoined; they are reduced from the ancient Canonical
Penances to private and arbitrary, from years to hours, from great severity to
gentleness and flattery, from fasting and public shame to the saying over
their Beads, from cordial to ritual, from smart to money, from heartiness and
earnest to pageantry and theatrical images of Penance; and if some Confessors
happen to be severe, there are ways enough to be eased. For the Penitent may
have leave to go to a gentler, or he may get Commutations, or he may get
somebody else ^man. ^ ^. V. S(...). n 10 T(...) ^ instr. sa^^r^^. (...). 11.
n.^.
to do them for him: and if his Penances be never so great, or never so little,
yet it may be all supplied by Indulgencies; of which there are such store in
the Lateran at Rome, that as Pope Boniface said, No man is able to number them;
yet he confirmed them all.

In the Church of Sancta Maria de Popolo there are for every day in the year
two thousand and eight hundred years of pardon, besides fourteen thousand and
fourteen Carentanes; which in one year amount to more than a Million: all which
are confirmed by the Pope Paschal I. Boniface VIII. and Gregory IX. In the
Church of S. Vitu^ and Modestus there are for every day in the year seven
thousand years and seven thousand Carentanes of pardon, and a pardon of a third
part of all our sins besides; and the price of all this is but praying before
an Altar in that Church. At the Sepulcre of Christ in Venice there is hung up a
prayer o^ S. Augustine, with an Indulgence o^ fourscore and two thousand years,
granted by Boniface the VIII. (who was of all the Popes the most bountiful of
the Churches treasure) and Benedict the XI. to him that shall say it, and that
for every day toties^ quoties. The Divine pardon of Sica gave a plenary
Indulgence to every one that being confessed and communicated should pray there
in the Franciscan Church o^ Sancta Maria de gli Angeli, and this pardon is
abomni poena and culpa. The English of that we easily understand, but the
meaning of it we do not, because they will not own that these Indulgences do
profit any one whose guilt is not taken away by the Sacrament of Penance. But
this is not the only snare in which they have inextricably entangled
themselves: but be it as they please for this; whatever it was it was since
enlarged by Sixtus IV. and Sixtus V. to all that shall wear S. Francis Cord.
The saying a few Pater nosters and Ave's before a privileged Altar can in
innumerable places procure vast portions of this Treasure; and to deliver a
soul out of Purgatory, whom they list, is promised to many upon easy terms,
even to the saying of their Beads over with an appendent Medal of the Popes
benediction. Every Priest at his third or fourth Mass is ^s sure (as may be) to
deliver the souls of his parents: And a thousand more such stories as these are
to be seen every where and every day.

Once for all: There was a book printed at Paris by Francis Regnault^ A. D.
1536. May 25. called The hours of the most blessed Virgin Mary, according to
the use of Sarum; in which for the saying three short prayers written in Rome
in a place called The Chapel of the holy Cross of seven Romans, are promised
fourscore and ten thousand years of pardon of deadly sin. Now the meaning of
these things is very plain. By these devices they serve themselves, and they do
not serve God. They serve themselves by this Doctrine: Tolet. instr. sacerd.
lib. 3. cap. 11. n. 6.
For they teach that wha^ Penance is ordinarily imposed, doe^ not take away all
the punishment th^^ is due; for they do not impose wh^^ was anciently enjoined
by the Penite^tial Canons, but some little thing i^stead of it: and it may be,
that wha^ was anciently enjoined by the Penite^tial Canons, is not so much as
Go^ will exact, (for they suppose that (...) will forgive nothing but the guilt
a^^ the eternity; but he will exact all th^^ can be demanded on this side Hell,
(...) to the last farthing he must be (...) some way or other, even when the
(...) is taken away) but therefore to prevent any failing that way, they have
given Indulgences enough to take off what was due by the old Canons, and what
may be due by the severity of God; and if these fail, they may have recourse to
the Priests, and they by their Masses can make supply: so that their Disciples
are well, and the want of ancient Discipline shall do them no hurt.

But then how little they serve Gods end by treating the sinner so gently, will
be very evident. For by this means they have found out a way, that though it
may be God will be more severe than the old Penitential Canons; and although
these Canons were much more severe than men are now willing to suffer, yet
neither for the one or the other shall they need to be troubled: they have
found out an easier way to go to Heaven than so. An Indulgence will be no great
charge, but that will ^ake off all the supernumerary Penan^es which ought to
have been impo^ed by the ancient Discipline of the Church, and may be required
by God. A little alms to a Priest, a small oblation to a Church, a pilgrimage
to the image or relics of a Saint, wearing S. Francis Cord, saying over the
Beads with an hallowed Appendent, entering into a Fraternity, praying at a
privileged Altar, leaving a Legacy for a Soul-Mass, visiting a privileged
Cemetery, and twenty other devices will secure the sinner from suffering
punishment here or hereafter, more than his friendly Priest is pleased gently
to impose.

To them that ask, what should any one need to get so many hundred thousand
years of pardon, as are ready to be had upon very easy terms? They answer as
before; That whereas it may be for Perjury the ancient Canons enjoined Penance
all their life Vide Council. Tribur. c. 54. Burc^ard. l. 19. Tertul. lib. de
poenitentia.
; that will be supposed to be twenty or forty years, or suppose an hundred; if
the man have been perjured a thousand times, and committed adultery so often,
and done innumerable other sins, for every one of which he deserves to suffer
forty years penance, and how much more in the account of God he deserves, he
knows not; if he be attrite, and confessed so that the guilt is taken away, yet
as much temporal punishment remains due as is not paid here: but the
Indulgences of the Church will take off so much as it comes to, even of all
that would be suffered in Purgatory. Now it is true, that Purgatory (at least
as is believed) cannot last a hundred thousand years; but yet God may by the
acerbity of the flames in twenty years equal the Canonical Penances of twenty
thousand years: to prevent which, these Indulgences of so many thousand years
are devised. A wise and thrifty Invention sure, and well contrived, and rightly
applotted according to every man's need, and according as they suspect his Bill
shall amount to.

This strange Invention, as strange as it is, will be owned, for this is the
account of it which we find in Bellarmine: D^ Indulgen. l. 1. c. 9. sect.
Existit aute^.
and although Gerson and Domini^us a Soto are ashamed of these prodigious
Indulgences, and suppose that the Popes Quaestuaries did procure them, yet it
must not be so disowned; truth is truth, and it is notoriously so; and
therefore a reason must be found out for it, and this is it which we have
accounted. But the use we make of it is this; That since they have declared,
that when sins are pardoned so easily, yet the punishment remains so very
great, and that so much must be suffered here or in Purgatory; it is strange
that they should not only in effect pretend to show more mercy than God does,
or the primitive Church did; but that they should directly lay aside the
primitive Discipline, and while they declaim against their Adversaries for
saying they are not necessary, yet at the same time they should devise tricks
to take them quite away, so that neither Penances shall much smart here, nor
Purgatory (which is a device to make men be Mulata's, as the Spaniard calls,
half Christians, a device to make a man go to Heaven and to Hell too) shall not
torment them hereafter. However it be, yet things are so ordered, that the
noise of Penances need not trouble the greatest Criminal, unless he be so
unfortunate as to live in no Country and near no Church, and without Priest,
or friend, or money, or notice of any thing that is so loudly talked of in
Christendom. If he be, he has no help but one; he must live a holy and a
severe life, which is the only great calamity which they are commanded to
suffer in the Church of England: but if he be not, the case is plain, he may by
these Doctrines take his ease.

Sect. IV.
WE doubt not but they who understand the proper sequel of these things, will
not wonder that the Church of Rome should have a numerous company of
Pro^elytes, made up of such as the beginnings of David's Army were. But that we
may undeceive them also, for to their souls we intend charity and relief by
this Address, we have thought fit to add one Consideration more, and that is,
That it is not fit that they should trust to this, or any thing of this, not
only because there is no foundation of truth in these new devices, but because
even the Roman Doctors themselves, when they are pinched with an Objection, let
their hold go, and to escape do in remarkable measures destroy their own new
building.

The case is this: To them who say, that if there were truth in these
pretensions, then all these, and the many millions of Indulgences more, and the
many other ways of releasing souls out of Purgatory, the innumerable Masses
said every day, the power of the Keys so largely employed, would in a short
time have emptied Purgatory of all her sad inhabitants, or it may be very few
would go thither, and they that unfortunately do, cannot stay long; and
consequently, besides that this great softness and easiness of procedure would
give confidence to the greatest sinners, and the hopes of Purgatory would
destroy the fears of Hell, and the certainty of doing well enough in an
imperfect life, would make men careless of the more excellent: besides these
things, there will need no continuation of Pensions to pray for persons dead
many years ago: To them, I say, who talk to them at this rate, they have enough
to answer.

Deceive not your selves, there are more things to be reckoned for than so. For
when you have deserved great punishments for great sins, and the Guilt is taken
off by Absolution, and (you suppose) the Punishment by Indulgences or the
Satisfaction of others; it may be so, and it may be not so.

For 1. it is according as your Indulgence is. Suppose it for forty years, or
it may be an hundred, or a thousand, (and that is a great matter) yet
peradventure according to the old penitential rate you have deserved the
Penance of forty thousand years; or at least you may have done so by the more
severe account of God: If the Penance of forty years be taken off by your
Indulgence, it does as much of the work as was promised or intended; but you
can feel little ease, if still there remains due the Penance of threescore
thousand years. No man can tell the difference when what remains shall be so
great as to surmount all the evils of this life; and the abatement may be
accounted by pen and ink, but will signify little in the perception: it is
like the casting out of a Devil out of a miserable Demoniack, when there still
remains fifty more as bad as he that went away; the man will hardly find how
much he is advanced in his c^^e.

But 2. you have with much labor and some charge purchased to your self so
many Quadragenes or Lents of pardon; that is, you have bought off the Penances
of so many times forty days. It is well; but were you well advised? it may be
your Quadragenes are not Carenes, that is, are not a quitting the severest
Penances of fasting so long in bread and water: for there is great difference
in the manner of keeping a penitential Lent, and it may be you have purchased
but some lighter thing; and then if your demerit arise to so many Carenes, and
you purchased but mere Quadragenes, without a minute and table of particulars,
you may stay longer in Purgatory than you expected.

3. But therefore your best way is to get a plenary Indulgence; and that may be
had on reasonable terms: but take heed you do not think your self secure, for a
plenary Indulgence does not do all that it may be you require; for there is an
Indulgence more full, and another most full, Vide Joan. d^ Turrecrem^ta in
comment. did. 1. de poenitent.
and it is not agreed upon among the Doctors whether a plenary Indulgence is to
be extended beyond the taking off those Penances which were actually enjoined
by the Confessor, or how far they go further. And they that read Turrecremata,
Navar, Cordubensis, Fabius Incarnatus, Petrus de Soto, Armilla aurea, Aquinas,
Tolet, Cajetan, in their several accounts of Indulgences, will soon perceive
that all this is but a handful of Smoke, when you hold it, you hold it not.

4. But further yet; all Indulgences are granted upon some inducement, and are
not ex mero motu, or acts of mere grace without cause; and if the cause be not
reasonable, they are invalid: and whether the cause be sufficient will be very
hard to judge. And if there be for the Indulgence, yet if there be not a
reasonable cause for the quantity of the Indulgence, you cannot tell how much
you get: and the Preachers of Indulgences ought not to declare how valid they
are assertive, that is, by any confidence; but opinative or recitative, they
can only tell what is said, or what is their own opinion.

5. When this difficuly is passed over, yet it may be the person is not capable
of them; for if he be not in the state of Grace all is nothing; and if he be,
yet if he does not perform the condition of the Indulgence actually; his mere
endeavor or good desire is nothing. And when the conditions are actually done,
it must be enquired whether in the time of doing them you were in charity;
whether you be so at least in the last day of finishing them: it is good to be
certain in this, lest all evaporate and come to nothing. But yet suppose this
too, though the work you are to do as the condition of the Indulgence, be done
so well that you lose not all the Indulgence, yet for every degree of
Imperfection in that work you will lose a part of the Indulgence, and then it
will be hard to tell whether you get half so much as you propounded to your
self. But here Pope Adrian troubles the whole affair again: Hist. Con^il.
Trident. l. 1. page 20. Londin. ^dit.
for if the Indulgence be only given according to the worthiness of the work
done, then that will avail of it self without any Grant from the Church; and
then it is hugely questionable whether the Popes Authority be of any use in
this whole matter.

6. But there is yet a greater heap of dangers and uncertainties; for you must
be sure of the Authority of him that gives the Indulgence, and in this there
are many doubtful Questions; but when they are over, yet it is worth inquiry,
(for some Doctors are fearful in this point) whether the intromission of Venial
sins, without which no man lives, does hinder the fruit of the Indulgence; for
if it does, all the cost is lost.

7. When an Indulgence is given, put case to abide forty days on certain
conditions, whether these forty days are to be taken collectively or
distributively; for, because it is confessed that the matter of Indulgences is
res odibilis, Fab. Incar^at. serutin. Sacerd. de. Indulgent.
an hateful and an odious matter, it is not to be understood in the sense of
favor, but of greatest severity; and therefore it is good to know beforehand
what to trust to, to inquire how the Bull is penned, and what sense of Law
every word does bear; for it may be any good man's case. If an Indulgence be
granted to a place for so many days in every year, it were fit you inquire for
how many years that will la^t; for some Doctors say, That if a definite number
of years be not set down, it is intended to last but twenty years. And
therefore it is good to be wise early.

8. But it is yet of greater consideration: If you take out a Bull of
Indulgence, relating to the Article of death, in case you recover that sickness
in which you thought you should use it, you must consider, whether you must not
take out a new one for the next fit of sickness; or will the first^ which stood
for nothing, keep cold, and without any sensible error serve when you shall
indeed die?

9. You must also inquire and be rightly informed, whether an Indulgence
granted upon a certain Festival will be valid if the day be changed, (as they
were all at once by the Gregorian Calendar) or if you go into another Country
where the Feast is not kept the same day, as it happens in movable Feasts, and
on S. Bartholomews-day, and some others.

10. When your Lawyers have told you their opinion of all these Questions, and
given it under their hands, it will concern you to inquire yet further, whether
a succeeding Pope have not or cannot revoke an Indulgence granted by his
Predecessor; for this is often done in matters of favor and privileges; and
the German Princes complained sadly of it; C^ntura gravam. Ge^m.
and it was complained in the Council of Lions, that Martin the Legate of Pope
Innocent the VIII. revoked and dissipated all former Grants: Idem fatere volu^t
Paulus quintus in Venetorum causa.
and it is an old Rule, Papa nunquam sibi ligat manus, The Pope never binds his
own hands. But here some caution would do well.

11. It is worth inquiry, whether in the year of Jubilee all other Indulgences
be suspended; for though some think^ they are not, yet Navar and Emanuel S a
affirm that they are; and if they chance to say true, (for no man knows whether
they do or no) you may be at a loss that way. And when all this is done, yet

12. Your Indulgences will be of no avail to you in reserved cases, which are
very many. A great many more very fine scruples might be moved, and are so; and
therefore when you have gotten all the security you can by these, you are not
sa^e at all. ^ut therefore be sure still to get Masses to be said.

So that now the great Objection is answered; you need not fear that saying
Masses will ever be made unnecessary by the multitude of Indulgences: The
Priest must still be employed and entertained in subsidium, since there are so
many ways of making the Indulgence good for nothing: And as for the fear of
emptying Purgatory by the free and liberal use of the Keys, it is very
needless; because the Pope cannot evacuate Fabius Incarnatus Scrutin. Sacerdot.
de indulgent. sect. antepen. edit. Barcinon. 1628.
Purgatory, or give so many Indulgences as to take out all souls from thence:
And therefore if the Popes, and the Bishops, and the Legates, have been already
too free, it may be there is so much in arrear, that the Treasure of the Church
is spent, or the Church is in debt for souls; or else, though the Treasure be
inexhaustible, yet so much of her Treasure ought not to be made use of, and
therefore it may be that your souls shall be post-pon'd, and must stay and take
its turn God knows when. And therefore we cannot but commend the prudence of
Cardinal Albernotius, Apud Genes-Sepulvedam in vita Egidii Albernoti^ Cardinal.
who by his last will took order for fifty thousand Masses to be said for his
soul; for he was a wise man, and loved to make all as sure as he could.

But then to apply this to the Consciences of the poor people of the Roman
Communion. Here is a great deal of Treasure of the Church pretended, and a
great many favors granted, and much ease promised, and the wealth of the
Church boasted of, and the peoples money gotten; and that this may be a
perpetual spring, it is clear amongst their own Writers, that you are not sure
of any good by all that is past, but you must get more security, or this may be
nothing. But how easy were it for you now to conclude, that all this is but a
mere cozenage, an art to get money? but that is but the least of the evil, it is
a certain way to deceive souls. For since there are so many thousands that
trust to these things, and yet in the confession of your own Writers there are
so many fallibilities in the whole, and in every parr, why will you suffer your
selves so weakly and vainly to be cozened out of your souls with promises that
signify nothing, and words without virtue, and treasures that make no man
rich, and Indulgences that give confidence to sin, but no ease to the pains
which follow?

Besides all this, it is very considerable, that this whole affair is a state
of temptation; for they that have so many ways to escape, will not be so
careful of the main stake, as the interest of it requires. He that hopes to be
relieved by many others, will be tempted to neglect himself: There is a (...),
an Unum necessarium, even that we work out our own salvation with fear and
trembling. A little wisdom, and an easy observation were enough to make all
men that love themselves, wisely to abstain from such diet which does not
nourish, but fills the stomach with wind and imagination. But to return to the
main Inquiry.

We desire that it be considered, how dangerously good life is undermined, by
the Propositions collaterally taught by their Great Doctors, in this matter of
Indulgences; besides the main and direct danger and deception.

1. Venial sins preceding or following the work enjoined for getting
Indulgences, hinder not their fruit: But if they intervene in the time of doing
them, then they hinder. Fab. Incarn. ^bi supra.
By this Proposition there is infinite uncertainty concerning the value of any
Indulgence; for if venial sins be daily incursions, who can say that he is one
day clean from them? And if he be not, he has paid his price for that which
profits not, and he is made to rely upon that which will not support him. But
though this being taught, does evacuate the Indulgence, yet it is not taught to
prevent the sin; for before and after, if you commit venial sins, there is no
great matter in it: The inconvenience is not great, and the remedy is easy;
you are told of your security as to this point before hand.

2. Pope Adrian taught a worse matter. He that will obtain indulgence for
another, if he does perform the work enjoined, though himself be in deadly sin,
yet for the other he prevails: Apud Petrum de Soto lect. de instit. Sace^d. de
necessariis ad effectum indu^g.
as if a man could do more for another than he can do for himself; or as if God
would regard the prayers of a vile and a wicked person when he intercedes for
another, and at the same time, if he prays for himself, his prayer is an
abomination. God first is entreated for our selves, and when we are more
excellent persons, admits us to intercede, and we shall prevail for others; but
that a wicked person who is under actual guilt, and obliged himself to suffer
all punishment, can ease and take off the punishment due to others by any
externally good work done ungratiously, is a piece of new Divinity without
color of reason or religion. Others in this are something less scandalous; and
affirm, that though it be not necessary that when the Indulgence is granted the
man should be in the state of grace, yet it is necessary that at some time or
other he should be; at any time (it seems) it will serve. For thus they turn
Divinity and the care of souls into Mathematics and Clockwork, and dispute
minutes and periods with God, and are careful to tell their people how much
liberty they may take, and how far they may venture, lest they should lose any
thing of their sins pleasure, which they can possibly enjoy, and yet have hopes
of being saved at last.

3. But there is worse yet. If a man willingly commits a sin in hope and
expectation of a Iubilee, and of the Indulgences afterward to be granted, he
does not lose the Indulgence, but shall receive it: which is expressly affirmed
by Navar In tract. de j^bila^ n^ ab. 34. n. 4. and 6.
, and Antonius Cordubensis Q^. 37. de indu^g. ^r. p. 3
, and Bellarmine Lib. 1. de indu^g. c. 10. Sect. Alt^ra dubitatio.
, though he asks the question, denies it not. By which it is evident that the
Roman Doctrines and Divinity teach contrary to Gods way; who is most of all
angry with them that turn his grace into wantonness, and sin, that grace may
abound.

4. If any man by reason of poverty, cannot give the prescribed Alms, he cannot
receive the Indulgence. Serutin. Sacerd. ubi supra.
Now since it is sufficiently known, that in all or most of the Indulgences a
clause is sure to be included, that something be offered to the Church, to the
Altar, to a Religious House, etc. The consequent of this will be soon seen,
that Indulgences are made for the rich, and the Treasures of the Church are to
be dispensed to them that have Treasures of their own, for Habenti dabitur. But
then God help the poor; for them Purgatory is prepared, and they must burn: For
the rich it is pretended, but the smell of fire will not pass upon them.

From these premises we suppose it but too evident, that the Roman Doctors
prevaricate in the whole Doctrine of Repentance, which indeed in Christ Jesus
is the whole Economy of Justification and Salvation; it is the hopes and staff
of all the world, the remedy of all evils past, present, and to come. And if
our physic be poisoned, if our staff be broken, if our hopes make us ashamed,
how shall we appear before Christ at his coming? But we say, that in all the
parts of it their Doctrine is infinitely dangerous.

1. Contrition is sufficient if it be but one little act, and that in the very
Article of Death; and before that time it is not necessary by the Law of God,
nay it is indeed sufficient; but it is also insufficient, for without
Confession in act or desire it suffices not. And though it be thus
insufficiently sufficient, yet it is not necessary: For Attrition is also
sufficient, if a Priest can be had, and then any little grief proceeding out of
the fear of Hell will do it, if the Priest do but absolve.

2. Confession might be made of excellent use, and is so among the pious
Children of the Church of England; but by the Doctrines and Practices in the
Church of Rome it is made, not the remedy of sins by proper energy, but the
excuse, the alleviation, the confidence, the ritual, external and sacramental
remedy, and serves instead of the labors of a holy and a regular life; and yet
is so entangled with innumerable and inextricable cases of conscience, orders,
humane prescripts, and great and little artifices, that scruples are more
increased than sins are lessened.

3. For Satisfactions and Penances, which, if they were rightly ordered, and
made instrumental to kill the desires of sin, or to punish the Criminal, or
were properly the fruits of repentance, that is, parts of a holy life, good
works done in charity, and the habitual permanent grace of God, were so
prevailing, as they do the work of God; yet when they are taken away, not only
by the declension of primitive Discipline, but by new Doctrines and
Indulgences, regular and offered Commutations for money, and superstitious
practices, which are sins themselves, and increase the numbers and weights of
the account, there is a great way made for the destruction of souls, and the
discountenancing the necessity of holy life; but nothing for the advantage of
holiness, or the becoming like to God.

And now at last for a Cover to this Dish, we have thought fit to mind the
World, and to give caution to all that mean to live godly in Christ Jesus, to
what an infinite scandal and impiety this affair has risen in the Church of of
Rome, we mean in the instance of their Taxa Camerae, seu Cancellariae
Apostolicae, the Tax of the Apostolical Chamber or Chancery; a book publicly
printed, and exposed to common sale; of which their own Esp^ncaeus gives this
account, Digres. 2. ad cap. 1. epist ad Titum.
That it is a book in which a man may learn more wickedness, than in all the
Summaries of vices published in the World: And yet to them that will pay for
it, there is to many given a License, to all an Absolution for the greatest and
most horrid sins. There is a price set down for his Absolution that has killed
his Father or his Mother, Brother, Sister, or Wife, or that has lien with his
Sister or his Mother. We desire all good Christians to excuse us for naming
such horrid things; Nomina sunt ipso pene timenda sono. But the Licenses are
printed at Paris in the year 1500. by Tossan Denis. Pope Innocent the VIII.
either was Author or Inlarger of these Rules of this Chancery-tax, and there
are Glosses upon them, in which the Scholiast himself who made them affirms,
that he must for that time conceal some things to avoid scandal. But how far
this impiety proceeded, and how little regard there is in it to piety, or the
good of souls, is visible that which Augustinus de Ancona teaches, [ That the
Pope ought not to give Indulgences to them who have a desire of giving money,
De potest. Papae q. 3. ad. 3.
but cannot as to them who actually give. And whereas it may be objected, that
then poor men's souls are in a worse condition than the rich; he answers, That
as to the remission of the punishment acquired by the Indulgence, in such a
case it is not inconvenient that the rich should be in a better condition than
the poor.] For in that manner do they imitate God, who is no respecter of
persons.

Sect. VI.
THese Observations we conceive to be sufficient to deter every well meaning
person from running into, or abiding in such temptations. Every false
Proposition that leads to impiety, is a stock and fountain of temptations; and
these which we have reckoned in the matter of Repentance, having influence upon
the whole life, are yet much greater, by corrupting the whole mass of Wisdom
and Spiritual Propositions.

There are indeed many others. We shall name some of them, but shall not need
much to insist on them. Such as are, 1. That one man may satisfy for another
Sa aphor. verb. satisfa^^um. 10.

Serutin. Sacerd. tract. de Indulg. sect. penult.

Suarez. part. 4. in 3. disp. 38. sect. 9.


. It is the general Doctrine of their Church: The Divines and Lawyers consent
in it, and publicly own it: The effect of which is this, that some are made
rich by it, and some are careless; But qui non solvit in aere, luat in corpore,
is a Canonical rule; and though it was spoken in the matter of public
penances, and so relates to the exterior Court, yet it is also practiced and
avowed in satisfactions or penances relating to the inward Court of Conscience,
and penance Sacramental; and the rich man is made negligent in his duty, and is
whipped upon another man's back, and his purse only is the Penitent; and which
is worst of all, here is a pretense of doing that, which is too near blasphemy
but to say. For by this Doctrine, it is not to be said of Christ alone, that he
was wounded for our transgressions, that he only satisfied for our sins; for
in the Church of Rome it is done frequently, and pretended daily, that by
another man's stripes we are healed. 2. They teach, That a habit of sin, is not
a sin, distinct from those former actions by which the habit was contracted.
The secret intention of which Proposition, and the malignity of it, consists in
this, that it is not necessary for a man to repent speedily; and a man is not
bound by repentance to interrupt the procedure of his impiety, or to repent of
his habit, but of the single acts that went before it. For as for those that
come after, they are excused, if they be produced by a strong habit; and the
greater the habit the less is the sin: But then as the repentance need not for
that reason, be hasty and presently; so because it is only to be of single
acts, the repentance it self need not be habitual, but it may be done in an
instant; whereas to mortify a habit of sin (which is the true and proper
repentance) there is required a longer time, and a procedure in the methods of
a holy life. By this, and such like Propositions, and careless Sentences, they
have brought it to that pass, that they reckon a single act of Contrition, at
any time to be sufficient to take away the wickedness of a long life. Granat.
in materia de peccatis, tract 8. desp. 1. sect. 1. F. Knot against
Chillingworth in his Infidelity unmasked, p. 105, 106, 107, etc.
Now that this is the avowed Doctrine of the Roman Guides of souls, will
sufficiently appear in the Writings of their chiefe^t, of which no learned man
can be ignorant. The thing was of late openly and professedly disputed against
us, and will not be denied. And that this Doctrine is infinitely destructive of
the necessity of a good life, cannot be doubted of, when themselves do own the
proper consequents of it, even the unnecessariness of present repentance, or
before the danger of death; of which we have already given accounts. But the
reason why we remark it here, is that which we now mentioned, because that by
the Doctrine of vicious habits, having in them no malignity or sin but what is
in the single preceding acts, there is an excuse made for millions of sins: For
if by an evil habit the sinner is not made worse, and more hated by God, and
his sinful acts made not only more, but more criminal; it will follow, that
the sins are very much lessened: For they being not so voluntary in their
exercise and distinct emanation, are not in present so malicious; and therefore
he that has gotten a habit of drunkenness or swearing, sins less in every act
of drunkenness, or profane oath, than he that acts them seldom, because by his
habit he is more inclined, and his sins are almost natural, and less
considered, less chosen, and not disputed against; but pass by inadve^tency,
and an untroubled consent, easily and promptly, and almost naturally from that
principle: So that by this means, and in such cases when things are come to
this pass, they have gotten an imperfect warrant to sin a great deal, and a
great while, without any new great inconvenience: Which evil state of things
ought to be infinitely avoided by all Christians that would be saved by all
means; and therefore all such Teachers, and all such Doctrines, are carefully
to be declined, who give so much easiness, not only to the remedies, but to
the sins themselves, But of this, we hope it may be sufficient to have given
this short warning. 3. The distinction of Mortal and Venial sins, as it is
taught in the Church of Rome, is a great cause of wickedness, and careless
conversation. For although we do with all the ancient Doctors admit of the
distinction of sins Mortal and Venial; yet we also teach, That in their own
nature, and in the rigor of the Divine Justice, every sin is damnable, and
deserves Gods anger, and that in the unregenerate they are so accounted, and
that in Hell the damned suffer for small and great in a common mass of torment;
yet by the Divine mercy and compassion, the smaller sins which come by
surprise, or by invincible ignorance, or inadvertency, or unavoidable
infirmity, shall not be imputed to those who love God, and delight not in the
smallest sin, but use caution and prayers, watchfulness and remedies against
them. But if any man delights in small sins, and heaps them into numbers, and
by deliberation or licentiousness they grow numerous, or are in any sense
chosen, or taken in by contempt of the Divine Law, they do put us from the
favor of God, and will pass into severe accounts. And though sins are greater
or less by comparison to each other, yet the smallest is a burden too great
for us, without the allowances of the Divine mercy.


But the Church of Rome teaches, that there is a whole kind of sins, which are
venial in their own nature; such, which if they were all together, all in the
world conjoined, could not equal one mortal sin Bellar. l. 1. de amiss.
gratiae. cap 13. sect. alterum est. Et de Sacram Eucha. l. 4. c. 19. sect.
responde^.
, nor destroy charity, nor put us from the favor of God; such, for which no
man can perish, Cap. 14. sect. a^^^po, (...).
etiam si nullum pactum esset de remissione, though Gods merciful Covenant of
Pardon did not intervene. And whereas Christ said, Of every idle word a man
shall speak, he shall give account at the day of judgment; and, By your words
ye shall be justified; D^ (...). lib. 1. cap. 11. sect probatur ultimo.
and, By your words ye shall be condemned: Bellarmine expressly affirms, It is
not intelligible, how an idle word should in its own nature be worthy of the
Eternal wrath of God, and Eternal flames. Many other desperate words are spoken
by the Roman Doctors in this Question, which we love not to aggravate, because
the main thing is acknowledged by them all.

But now we appeal to the reason and Consciences of all men, Whether this
Doctrine of sins Venial in their own nature, be not greatly destructive to a
holy life? When it is plain, that they give rest to men's Consciences for one
whole kind of sins; for such, which because they occur every day, in a very
short time (if they be not interrupted by the grace of Repentance) will swell
to a prodigious heap. But concerning these we are bidden to be quiet; for we
are told, that all the heaps of these in the world cannot put us out of Gods
favor. Add to this, that it being in thousands of cases, impossible to tell
which are, and which are not Venial in their own nature, and in their appendent
circumstances, either the people are cozened by this Doctrine into an useless
confidence; and for all this talking in their Schools, they must nevertheless
do to Venial sins, as they do to Mortal, that is, mortify them, fight against
them, repent speedily of them, and keep them from running into mischief; and
then all their kind Doctrines in this Article, signify no comfort or ease, but
all danger and difficulty, and useless dispute; or else, if really they mean,
that this easiness of opinion be made use of, then the danger is imminent, and
carelessness is introduced, and licentiousness in all little things is easily
indulged; and men's souls are daily lessened without repair, and kept from
growing toward Christian perfection, and from destroying the whole body of
sin; and in short, despising little things, they perish by little and little.

^his Doctrine also is worse yet in the handling. For it has infinite
influence to the disparagement of holy life, not only by the uncertain, but as
it must frequently happen, by the false determination of innumerable cases of
conscience. For it is a great matter both in the doing and the thing done, both
in the caution and the repentance, whether such an action be a venial or a
mortal sin. If it chance to be mortal, and your Confessor says it is venial,
your soul is betrayed. And it is but a chance what they say in most cases; for
they call what they please venial, and they have no certain rule to answer by;
which appears too sadly in their innumerable differences which is amongst all
their Casuists in saying what is, and what is not mortal; and of this there
needs no greater proof than the reading the little Summaries made by their most
leading guides of Consciences, Navar, Cajetane, Tolet, Emanuel Sa, and others;
where one says such a thing is mortal, and two say it is venial.

And lest any man should say or think, this is no great matter, we desire that
it be considered that in venial sins there may be very much fantastic
pleasure, and they that retain them do believe so, for they suppose the
pleasure is great enough to outweigh the intolerable pains of Purgatory; and
that it is more eligible to be in Hell a while, than to cross their appetites
in such small things. And however it happen in this particular, yet because the
Doctors differ so infinitely and irreconcileably, in saying what is, and what
is not Venial, whoever shall trust to their Doctrine, saying that such a sin is
Venial; and to their Doctrine, that says it does not exclude from Gods favor,
may by these two Propositions be damned before he is aware.

We omit to insist upon their express contradicting the words of our Blessed
Savior, who taught his Church expressly, That we must work in the day time; for
the night comes, and no man works: Let this be as true as it can in the
matter of Repentance and Mortification, and working out our pardon for mortal
sins; yet it is not true in Venial sins, if we may believe their great In 4
Sent. did 21. q. 1. art. 2.
S. Thomas, whom also Bellarmine Lib. 1 cap. 14. de Purga^or. ^e^t. (...). e^g^
^pinio vera.
follows in it; for he affirms, That by the acts of Love and Patience in
Purgatory, Venial sins are remitted; and that the acceptance of those
punishments, proceeding out of Charity, is a virtual kind of penance. But in
this particular we follow not. S. Thomas nor Bellarmine in the Church of
England and Ireland; for we believe in Jesus Christ, and follow him: If men
give themselves liberty as long as they are alive to commit one whole kind of
sins, and hope to work it out after death by acts of Charity and Repentance,
which they would not do in their life time; either they must take a course to
sentence the words of Christ as savouring of Heresy, or else they will find
themselves to have been at first deceived in their Proposition, and at last in
their expectation. Their faith has failed them here, and hereafter they will
be ashamed of their hope.

Sect. VII.
THere is a Proposition, which indeed is new, but is now the general Doctrine
of the Leading Men in the Church of Rome; and it is the foundation on which
their Doctors of Conscience rely, in their decision of all cases in which
there is a doubt or question made by themselves; and that is, That if an
Opinion or Speculation be probable, it may in practice be safely followed: And
if it be inquired, What is sufficient to make an opinion probable; the Answer
is easy, Sufficit opinio alicujus gravis Doctoris aut Bonorum exemplum:
Emanuel Sa aphor. verb. Dubium.

Escobar. The. moral. Exa. 3. c. 3. de Conscientia probabili, etc.


The opinion of any one grave Doctor is sufficient to make a matter probable;
nay, the example and practice of good men, that is, men who are so reputed; if
they have done it, you may do so too, and be safe. This is the great Rule of
their Cases of Conscience.

And now we ought not to be pressed with any ones saying, that such an opinion
is but the private opinion of one or more of their Doctors. For although in
matters of Faith this be not sufficient, to impute a Doctrine to a whole
Church, which is but the private opinion of one or more; yet because we are now
speaking of the infinite danger of souls in that communion, and the horrid
Propositions by which their Disciples are conducted, to the disparagement of
good life, it is sufficient to allege the public and allowed sayings of their
Doctors; because these sayings are their Rule of living: and because the
particular Rules of Conscience, use not to be decreed in Councils, we must
derive them from the places where they grow, and where they are to be found.

But besides, you will say, That this is but the private opinion of some
Doctors; and what then? Therefore it is not to be called the Doctrine of the
Roman Church. True, we do not say, It is an Article of their Faith, but, a rule
of manners: This is not indeed in any public Decree; but we say, that although
it be not, yet neither is the contrary. And if it be but a private opinion,
yet, is it safe to follow it, or is it not safe? For that is the question, and
therein is the danger. If it be safe, then this is their rule, A private
opinion of any one grave Doctor may be safely followed in the questions of
Virtue and Vice. But if it be not safe to follow it, and that this does not
make an opinion probable, or the practice safe; Who says so? Does the Church?
No; Does Dr. Cajus? or Dr. Sempronius say so? Yes: But these are not safe to
follow; for they are but private Doctors: Or if it be safe to follow them,
though they be no more, and the opinion no more but probable, then I may take
the other side, and choose which I will, and do what I list in most cases, and
yet be safe by the Doctrine of the Roman Casuists; which is the great line, and
general measure of most men's lives; and that is it which we complain of. And we
have reason; for they suffer their Casuists to determine all cases, severely
and gently, strictly and loosly; that so they may entertain all spirits, and
please all dispositions, and govern them by their own inclinations, and as they
list to be governed; by what may please them, not by that which profits them;
that none may go away scandalized or grieved from their penitential chairs.

But upon this account, it is a sad reckoning which can be made concerning
souls in the Church of Rome. Suppose one great Doctor amongst them (as many of
them do) shall say, it is lawful to kill a King whom the Pope declares
Heretic. By the Doctrine of probability here is his warranty. And though the
Church do not declare that Doctrine; that is, the Church does not make it
certain in Speculation, yet it may be safely done in practice: Here is enough
to give peace of conscience to him that does it. Nay, if the contrary be more
safe, yet if the other be but probable by reason or Authority, you may do the
less safe, and refuse what is more. For that also is the opinion of some grave
Doctors Eman. Sa. aphorism. V^rb. Dubium. Escobar. d^ conscientia probabiti.
: If one Doctor says, it is safe to swear a thing as of our knowledge, which we
do not know, but believe it is so, it is therefore probable that it is lawful
to swear it, because a grave Doctor says it, and then it is safe enough to do
so.

And upon this account, Apud Nauclerum. generat. 21. 2^.
who could find fault with Pope Constantine the IV. who when he was accused in
the Lateran Council for holding the Sea Apostolic when he was not in Orders,
justified himself by the example of Sergius Bishop of Ravenna, and Stephen
Bishop of Naples. Here was exemplum bonorum, honest men had done so before him,
and therefore he was innocent. Did. 82. Can. Presbyter in glossa.
When it is observed by Cardinal Campegius, and Albertus Pighius did teach,
That a Priest lives more holily and chastely that keeps a Concubine, than he
that has a married wife; 3 Qu. 7. Lata Extravag. de bigamis. Quta circa.
C^mmuniter dicitur quod Clericus pro simplici fornicatione depo^i non debet
did. 81. Maximianus, Glossa in Gratian.
and then shall find in the Popes Law, That a Priest is not to be removed for
fornication; who will not, or may not practically conclude, that since by the
Law of God, marriage is holy, and yet to some men, fornication is more lawful,
and does not make a Priest irregular, that therefore to keep a Concubine is
very lawful; especially since abstracting from the consideration of a man's
being in Orders or not, fornication it self is probably no sin at all? For so
says Durandus, ^e^t. l. 4. did. 33.
Simple fornication of it self is not a deadly sin according to the Natural
Law, and excluding all positive Law; and Martinus de Magistris says, Lib. de
Temp. qu. 2. de luxuria.
to believe simple fornication to be no deadly sin, is not heretical, because
the testimonies of Scripture are not express. These are grave Doctors, and
therefore the opinion is probable, and the practice safe. Vide Dan. Tilen. de
Verbo non scripto, l. 4. c. 8.
When the good people of the Church of Rome hear it read, That P. Clement the
VIII. in the Index of Prohibited books says, That the Bible published in vulgar
Tongues, ought not to be read and retained, no not so much as a compend of the
History of the Bible; and Bellarmine says, That it is not necessary to
salvation, to believe that there are any Scriptures at all written; and that
Cardinal Hosius says, Perhaps it had been better for the Church, if no
Scriptures had been written: They cannot but say, that this Doctrine is
probable, and think themselves safe, when they walk without the light of Gods
Word, and rely wholly upon the Pope, or their Priest, in what he is pleased to
tell them; and that they are no way obliged to keep that Commandment of Christ,
Search the Scriptures. Instruct. Sacerd. l. 5. c. 6. n. 15.
Cardinal Tolet says, That if a Nobleman be set upon, and may escape by going
away, he is not tied to it, but may kill him that intends to strike him with a
stick: Lib. 4. c. 13. n. 4.
That if a man be in a great passion, and so transported, that he considers not
what he says, if in that case he does blaspheme, he does not always sin: L^b.
5. c. 10. n. 3.
That if a man be beastly drunk, and then commit fornication, that fornication
is no sin: Lib. 5. c. 13. n. 10.
That if a man desires carnal pollution, that he may be eased of his carnal
temptations, or for his health, it were no sin: Lib. 5. c. 11. n. 5.
That it is lawful for a man to expose his bastards to the Hospital to conceal
his own shame. He says it out of Soto, and he from Thomas Aquinas: That if the
times be hard, or the Judge unequal, a man that cannot sell his wine at a due
price, Lib. 8. c. 49. n. 4.
may lawfully make his measures less than is appointed; or mingle water with
his wine, and sell it for pure, so he do not lie; and yet if he does, it is no
mortal sin, nor obliges him to restitution. Emanuel Sa, Aphor. tit. Debi^um
Conjugale. 6.
affirms, That if a man lie with his intended wife before Marriage, it is no
sin, or a light one; nay, quinetiam expedit si multum illa differatur, it is
good to do so, if the benediction or publication of Marriage be much deferred:
That Infants in their cradles may be made Priests, is the common opinion of
Divines and Canonists, says Tolet; Lib. 1. cap. 6^.
and that in their Cradles they can be made Bishops, said the Archdeacon and
the Provost; Ibid.
and though some say the contrary, yet the other is the more true, says the
Cardinal. Vasques says, De Adorat. l. 3. disp. 1. c. 2.
That not only an Image of God, but any creature in the world, reasonable or
unreasonable, may without danger be worshipped together with God, as his Image:
Ibid c. 5. sect. 33.
That we ought to adore the Relics of Saints, though under the form of Worms;
and that it is no sin to worship a Ray of Light in which the Devil is invested,
if a man supposes him to be Christ: And in the same manner, if he supposes it
to be a piece of a Saint, which is not, he shall not want the merit of his
Devotion. And to conclude, Pope Celestine the III. (as Alphonsus a Castro
reports himself to have seen a Decretal of his to that purpose) affirmed, That
if one of the Married Couple fell into Heresy, the Marriage is dissolved, and
that the other may marry another; and the Marriage is nefarious, Con^il. C^ P.
6 c^n. 76.
and they are Irritae Nuptiae, the Espousals are void, if a Catholic and a
Heretic marry together, said the Fathers of the Synod in Trullo. And though
all of this be not owned generally, yet if a Roman Catholic marries a Wife
that is or shall turn Heretic, he may leave her, and part bed and board,
according to the Doctrine taught by the Cap. fin. de conver. conjug. c. 2. de
Divortiis.
Canon Law it self, by the Lawyers and Divines, as appears in De Matrim. part.
2. cap. 7. sect. 5. n. 4.
Covaruvias, In sent. 4. d. 39. art. 1. concl. ult.
Mathias Aquarius, and Lib. 1. de Matrim. c. 14. sect. secundo ^ine consensu.
Bellarmine.

These Opinions are indeed very strange to us of the Church of England and
Ireland, but no strangers in the Church of Rome, and, because they are taught
by great Doctors, by Popes themselves, by Cardinals, and the Canon Law
respectively, do at least become very probable, and therefore they may be
believed and practiced without danger; according to the Doctrine of
Probability. And thus the most desperate things that ever were said by any,
though before the Declaration of the Church they cannot become Articles of
Faith, yet besides that they are Doctrines publicly allowed, they can also
become Rules of practice, and securities to the conscience of their disciples.

To this we add, that which is usual in the Church of Rome, the Praxis
Ecclesiae, the Practice of the Church. Thus if an Indulgence be granted upon
condition to visit such an Altar in a distant Church; the Nuns that are shut
up, and Prisoners that cannot go abroad, if they address themselves to an Altar
of their own with that intention, they shall obtain the Indulgence. Id enim
confirmat Ecclesiae praxis, says Fabius; Scrutin. Sacerd. de Indulg.
The practice of the Church in this case gives first a probability in
speculation, and then a certainty in practice. This instance, though it be of
no concern, yet we use it as a particular to show the Principle upon which they
go. But it is practicable in many things of greatest danger and concern. If the
question be, Whether it be lawful to worship the Image of the Cross, or of
Christ, with Divine worship? First, there is a Doctrine of S. Thomas for it,
and Vasquez, and many others; therefore it is probable, and therefore is safe
in practice; and ^ie est Ecclesiae praxis, (...) 25. art. 4.

Vide eti^m (...), 163.


the Church also practices so, as appears in their own Offices: And S. Thomas
makes this use of it; Illi exhibemus cultum latriae in quo ponimus spem
salutis: sed in cruce Christi ponimus spem ^alutis. Cantat enim Ecclesia, O
Crux ave spes unica, Hoc passionis tempore, Auge piis justitiam, Reisque do^a
veniam. Ergo Crux Christi est adoranda adoratione Latriae. We give Divine
worship (says he) to that in which we put our hopes of salvation; but in the
Cross we put our hopes of salvation; for so the Church sings, (it is the
practice of the Church) Hail O Cross, our only hope in this time of suffering;
increase righteousness to the godly, and give pardon to the guilty: therefore
the Cross of Christ is to be adored with Divine Adoration.

By this Principle you may embrace any Opinion of their Doctors safely,
especially if the practice of the Church do intervene, and you need not trouble
your self with any further inquiry: and if an evil custom get amongst men, that
very custom shall legitimate the action, if any of their grave Doctors allow
it, or Good men use it; and Christ is not your Rule, but the Examples of them
that live with you, or are in your eye and observation, that is your Rule. We
hope we shall not need to say any more in this affair; the pointing out this
rock may be warning enough to them that would not suffer shipwreck, to decline
the danger that looks so formidably.

Sect. VIII.
AS these Evil Doctrines have general influence into Evil Life; so there are
some others, which if they be pursued to their proper and natural issues; that
is, if they be believed and practiced, are enemies to the particular and
specific parts of Piety and Religion. Thus the very prayers of the Faithful
are, or may be, spoiled by Doctrines publicly allowed, and prevailing in the
Roman Church.

For 1. they teach, That prayers themselves ex opere operato, or by the natural
work it self, do prevail: For it is not essential to prayer for a man t^ think
particularly of what he says; it is not necessary to think of the things
signified by the words: De Crat. l. 3. c. 4.
So Suarez teaches^ Nay, it is not necessary to the essence of prayer, that he
who prays should think de ipsa locutione, of the speaking it self. And indeed
it is necessary that they should all teach so, or they cannot tolerably pretend
to justify their prayers in an unknown Tongue. But this is indeed their
public Doctrine: For prayers in the mouth of the man that says them are like
the words of a Charmer, they prevail even when they are not understood, says
Salmeron. Su^. part. 3. ^it. 23.
Or as Antoninus, They are like a precious stone, of as much value in the hand
of an unskilful man, as of a Ieweller. Vide etiam Iacobum de Graffiis de orat.
l. 2. Instruct. Sa^er. c. 13. n. 5. and 6.
And therefore Attention to, or Devotion in our prayers, is not necessary: For
the understanding of which, says Cardinal Tolet, when it is said that you must
say your prayers or offices attently, reverently and devoutly, you must know
that Attention or Advertency to your prayers is manifold: 1. That you attend to
the words, so that you speak them not too fast, or to begin the next verse of a
Psalm, before he that recites with you has done the former verse; and this
attention is necessary. But 2. there is an attention which is by understanding
the sense, and that is not necessary: For if it were, very extremely few would
do their duty, when so very few do at all understand what they say. 3. There is
an attention relating to the end of prayer, that is, that he that prays,
considers that he is present before God, and speaks to him; and this indeed is
very profitable, but it is not necessary: No, not so much. So that by this
Doctrine no attention is necessary, but to attend that the words be all said,
and said right. But even this attention is not necessary that it should be
actual, but it suffices to be virtual, that is, that he who says his office,
intend to do so, and do not change his mind, although he does not attend: And
he who does not change his mind, that is, unless observing himself not to
attend, he still turn his mind to other things, he attends: meaning, he attends
sufficiently, and as much as is necessary; though indeed speaking naturally and
truly, he does not attend^ If any man in the Church of England and Ireland, had
published such Doctrine as this, he should quickly and deservedly have felt the
severity of the Ecclesiastical Rod; but in Rome it goes for good Catholic
Doctrine.

Now although upon this account Devotion is (it may be) good; and it is good to
attend to the words of our prayer, and the sense of them; yet that it is not
necessary, is evidently consequent to this. But it is also expressly affirmed by
the same hand; Ibid. n. 7.
There ought to be devotion, that our mind be inflamed with the love of God,
though if this be wanting, without contempt, it is no deadly sin. Ecclesiae
satisfit per opus externum, n^c aliud jubet, Vbi supra.
says Reginaldus: If ye do the outward work, the Church is satisfied, neither
does she command any thing else. Good Doctrine this! And it is an excellent
Church, that commands nothing to him that prays, but to say so many words.

Well! but after all this, if Devotion be necessary or not, if it be present or
not, if the mind wander, or wander not, if you mind what you pray, or mind it
not, there is an easy cure for all this: For Pope Leo granted remission of all
negligences in their saying their offices and prayers to them, who after they
have done, shall say this prayer, [ To the Holy and Undivided Trinity, To the
Humanity of our Lord Jesus Christ crucified; To the fruitfulness of the most
Blessed, and most Glorious Virgin Mary, and to the University of all Saints, be
Eternal praise, honor, virtue and glory, from every Creature; and to us
remission of sins for ever and ever, Amen. Blessed are the bowels of the Virgin
Mary, which bore the Son of the Eternal God; and blessed are the paps which
suckled Christ our Lord: Vbi supra cap. 13.
Pater noster. Ave Maria.] This prayer, to this purpose, is set down by Navar,
and Cardinal Tolet.

This is the sum of the Doctrine, concerning the manner of saying the Divine
offices in the Church of Rome, in which greater care is taken to obey the
Precept of the Church, than the Commandments of God: [ For the Precept of
hearing Mass is not, to intend the words, but to be present at the Sacrifice,
though the words be not so much as heard, and they that think the contrary,
think so without any probable reason,] says Tolet. Ibid. n. 6.
It seems there was not so much as the Authority of one grave Doctor to the
contrary; for if there had, the contrary opinion might have been probable; but
all agree upon this Doctrine, all that are considerable.

So that between the Church of England, and the Chnrch of Rome, the difference
in this Article is plainly this. They pray with their lips, we with the heart;
we pay with the understanding, they with the voice; we pray, and they say
prayers. We suppose that we do not please God, if our hearts be absent; they
say, it is enough if their bodies be present at their greatest solemnity of
prayer, though they hear nothing that is spoken, and understand as little. And
which of these be the better way of serving God, may soon be determined, if we
remember the complaint which God made of the Jews, This people draws near me
with their lips, but their hearts are far from me: But we know, that we are
commanded to ask in faith, which is seated in the understanding, and requires
the concurrence of the will, and holy desires; which cannot be at all, but in
the same degree in which we have a knowledge of what we ask. The effectual,
fervent prayer of a righteous man prevails: But what our prayers want of this,
they must needs want of blessing and prosperity. And if we lose the benefit of
our prayers, we lose that great instrumentality by which Christians are
receptive of pardon, and strengthened in faith, and confirmed in hope, and
increase in charity, and are protected by Providence, and are comforted in
their sorrows, and derive help from God: Ye ask, and have not, because ye ask
amiss^; that is Saint James his rule. They that pray not as they ought, shall
never obtain what they fain would.

Hither is to be reduced, their fond manner of prayer, consisting in vain
repetitions of Names, and little forms of words. The Psalter of our Lady, is an
hundred and fifty Ave Mary's, and at the end of every tenth, they drop in the
Lords Prayer, and this with the Creed at the end of the fifty, makes a perfect
Rosary. This indeed is the main entertainment of the peoples Devotion; for
which cause Mantuan called their Religion, -- Relligionem
Quae fil^ insertis numerat sua
murmura baccis.
A Religion that numbers their murmurs by berries filled upon a string: This
makes up so great a part of their Religion, that it may well be taken for one
half of its definition. But because so few do understand what they say, but all
repeat, and ^tick to their numbers, it is evident they think to be heard for
that. For that or nothing; for besides that, they neither do nor understand:
And all that we shall now say to it is, That our Blessed Savior reproved this
way of Devotion, in the Practice and Doctrines of the Heathens: Very like to
which is that which they call the Psalter of Jesus; in which are fifteen short
Ejaculations, as [ Have mercy on me*, Strengthen me *, Help me *, Comfort me,
etc.] and with every one of these, the name of Jesus is to be said thirty
times, that is in all, four hundred and fifty times. Ohe jam de^^ne Deo^ uxor
gratulando ^btundere, ^^si illos tuo e^ ingenio judi^as, ut nil cr^das
intellige^e nisi idem dic^um est cen^^es.

He^uton^im. act. 5. scen. 1.


Now we are ignorant how to distinguish this from the (...), or vain repetition
of the Gentiles; for they did just so, and Christ said, they did not do well;
and that is all that we pretend to know of it. They thought to be heard the
rather for so doing; and if the people of the Roman Church do not think so,
there is no reason why they should do so. But without any further arguing about
the business, they are not ashamed to own it. For the Author of the Preface to
the Jesus Psalter, printed by Fouler at Antwerp, promises to the repetition of
that sweet Name, Great aid against temptations, and a wonderful increase of
grace.

Sect. IX.
BUt this mischief is gone further yet: Summa Cajetan. v. oration.
For as Cajetan affirms, Prayers ought to be well done; Saltem non male, at
least not ill. But besides, that what we have now remarked is so, not well,
that it is very ill; that which follows is directly bad, and most intolerable.
For the Church of Rome in her public and allowed offices, prays to dead men
and women, who are, or whom they suppose to be beatified; and these they
invocate as Preservers, Helpers, Guardians, Deliverers in their necessity; and
they expressly call them, their Refuge, their Guard and Defense, their Life, and
Health: Which is so formidable a Devotion, that we for them, and for our selves
too, if we should imitate them, are to dread the words of Scripture, Jerem.
17.5. Psalm. 115. 9. and 146. 3. and 118.^ and 50. 15^
Cursed is the man that trusts in man. We are commanded to call upon God in
the time of trouble; Heb. 4.16. Mat. 11. 28. John 6. 37.
and it is promised, that he will deliver us, and we shall glorify him. We
find no such command to call upon Saints; neither do we know who are Saints,
excepting a very few; and in what present state they are, we cannot know, nor
how our prayers can come to their knowledge; and yet if we did know all this,
it cannot be endured at all, that Christians, who are commanded to call upon
God, and upon none else, and to make all our prayers through Jesus Christ, and
never so much as warranted to make our prayers through Saints departed, should
yet choose Saints for their particular Patrons, or at all rely upon them, and
make prayers to them in such forms of words, which are only fit to be spoken to
God; prayers which have no testimony, command, or promise in the Word of God,
and therefore, which cannot be made in faith, or prudent hope.

Neither will it be enough to say, that they only^ desire the Saints to pray
for them; for though that be of it self a matter indifferent, if we were sure
they do hear us when we pray, and that we should not by that means, secretly
destroy our confidence in God, or lessen the honor of Christ our Advocate; of
which because we cannot be sure, but much rather the contrary, it is not a
matter indifferent: Yet besides this, in the public Offices of the church of
Rome, there are prayers to Saints made with confidence in them, with derogation
to Gods glory and prerogative, with diminution to the honor of Christ, with
words in sound, and in all appearance the same with the highest that are
usually expressed in our prayers to God, and his Christ: And this is it we
insist upon, and reprove, as being a direct destruction of our sole confidence
in God, and too near to blasphemy, to be endured in the Devotions of
Christians. We make our words good by these Allegations;

1. We shall not need here to describe out of their didactical writings, what
kind of prayers, and what causes of confidence they teach toward the Blessed
Virgin Mary, and all Saints: Only we shall recite a few words of Antonnius
their great Divine, and Archbishop of Florence, Sum part. 4. tit. 15.
It is necessary that they to whom she converts her eyes, being an^ Advocate
for them, shall be justifi^d and saved. And whereas it may be objected out of
John, 1 Jo. c. 2.1,2.
that the Apostle says, If any man sin, we have an Advocate with the Father,
Jesus Christ the Righteous. (He answers) That Christ is not our Advocate alone,
but a Judge: and since the just is scarce secure, how shall a sinner go to him,
as to an Advocate? Therefore God hat^ provided us of an Advocatess, who is
gen^le, and sweet, in whom nothing that is sh^rp is to be found. And to those
words of St. Paul, Come boldly to the Throne of Grace: (He says) That Mary is
the Throne of Christ, in whom he rested, to he^ therefore let us come with
bold^ess, that we may obtain mercy, and fi^d grace in time of need; and adds,
th^^ Mary is c^lled full of grace, because she is t^^ means and cause of Grace,
by transfusing grace to mankind;] and many other such dangerous Propositions:
Of which who please to be further satisfied (if he can endure the horror of
reading blasphemous sayings) he may find too great abundance in the Mariale of
Bernardine, Bernardin de b^sti^, d^ Concept. Mariae. 1. part. sermon. 1. part. 2.
which is confirmed by public Authority, Iacobus Perez de Valentia In Canti^.
Mar. Magnificat.
, and in Ferdinand Quirinus de Salazar Comment. in 8. Proverb. in verse 19.
, who affirms, That the Virgin Mary by offering up Christ to God the Father,
was worthy to have (after a certain manner) that the whole salvation and
redemption of mankind should be ascribed to her; and that this was common to
Christ and the blessed Virgin his Mother, that she did offer and give the price
of our Redemption truly and properly; and that she is deservedly called the
Redeemer, the Repairer, the Mediator, the Author and cause of our salvation.
Many more horrid blasphemies are in his notes upon that Chapter; and in his
Defense of the Immaculate Conception, published with the Privilege of Philip
the III of Spain, and by the Authority of his Order. But we insist not upon
their Doctrines delivered by their great Writers, though every wise man knows
that the Doctrines of their Church are delivered in large and indefinite terms,
and descend not to minute senses, but are left to be explicated by their
Writers, and are so practiced and understood by the people; and at the worst,
the former Doctrine of Probability will make it safe enough: But we shall
produce the public practice of their Church.

And first, it cannot be supposed, that they intend nothing but to desire their
prayers; for they rely also on their merits, and hope to get their desires, and
to prevail by them also: For so it is affirmed by the Roman Catechism, Ti^. ^e
Sanctu.
made by the Decree of the Council of Trent, and published by the Popes
command; [ The Saints are therefore to be invocated, because they continually
make prayers for the health of mankind, and God gives us many benefits by their
merit and favor: And it is lawful to have recourse to the favor or grace of
the Saints, and to use their help; for they undertake the Patronage of us.] And
the Council of Trent does not only say it is good to fly to their prayers,
Sess. 9.
but to their aid, and to their help; and that is indeed the principal, and the
very meaning of the other. We pray that the Saints should intercede for us, id
est, ut merita eorum nobis suffragentur; that is, that their Merits should help
us, said the Master of the Sentences. Atque id confirmat Ecclesiae praxis, to
use their own so frequent expression in many cases. Continet hoc Templum
Sanctorum corpora pura,
A quibus auxilium suppleri, poscere cura.
This Distich is in the Church of S. Laurence in Rome. This Church contains the
pure bodies of Saints, from whom take care to require that help be supplied to
you. But the practice of the Church tells their secret meaning best. For
besides what the Common people are taught to do, as to pray to S. Gall for the
health and ^ecundity of their Geese, to S. Wendeline for their Sheep, to S.
Anthony for their Hogs, to S. Pelagius for their Oxen; and that several Trades
have their peculiar Saints; and the Physicians are patronized by Cosmas and
Damian, the Painters by S. Luke, the Potters by Goarus, the Huntsmen by
E^stachius, the Harlots (for that also is a Trade at Rome) by S. Afra and S.
Mary Magdalene; they do also rely upon peculiar Saints for the cure of several
diseases; S. Sebastian and S. Roch have a special privilege to cure the Plague,
S. Petronilla the Fever, S. John and S. Bennet the Abbot to cure all Poison, S.
Apollonia the Toothache, S. Otilia Sore eyes, S. Apollinaris the French Pox,
(for it seems he has lately got that employment, since the discovery of the
West Indies) S. Vincentius has a special faculty in restoring stolen goods,
and S. Liberius (if he please) does infallibly cu^e the Stone, and S. Felicitas
(if she be heartily called upon) will give the teeming Mother a fine Boy. It
were strange if nothing but Intercession by these Saints were intended, that
they cannot as well pray for other things as these; or that they have no
Commission to ask of these any thing else, or not so confidently; and that if
they do ask, that S. Otilia shall not as much prevail to help a Fever as a
Cataract; or that if S. Sebastian be called upon to pray for the help of a poor
femal sinner, who by sad diseases pays the price of her lust, he must go to S.
Apollinaris in behalf of his Client.

But if any of the Roman Doctors say, That they are not tied to defend the
Superstitions of the Vulgar, or the abused: They say true, they are not indeed,
but rather to reprove them, as we do, and to declare against them, and Council
of Trent very goodly forbids all ^uperstitions in this Article, but yet tells
us not what are Superstitions, and what not; and still the world goes on in the
practice of the same intolerable follies, and every Nation has a particular
Guardian-Saint, and every City, every Family, and almost every House, and every
Devouter person almost chooses his own Patron-Saint, whose Altars they more
devoutly frequent, whose Image they more religiously worship, to whose Relics
they more readily go in Pilgrimage, to whose Honor they say more Pater
nosters, whose Festival they more solemnly observe; spoiling their prayers, by
their confidences in unknown persons, living in an unknown condition, and
diminishing that affiance in God and our Lord Jesus Christ, by importune and
frequent addresses to them that cannot help.

But that these are not the faults of their people only, running wilfully into
such follies, but the practice of their Church, and warranted and taught by
their Guides, appears by the public prayers themselves; such as these, O
generous Mary, Ex cursu ^o^arum l^a ^ Mariae. ^.
beauteous above all, obtain pardon for us, apply grace unto us, prepare glory
for us. Hail, thou Rose, thou Virgin Mary, etc. Grant to us to use true wisdom,
and with the elect to enjoy grace, that we may with melody praise thee; and do
thou drive our sins away: O Virgin Mary give us joys. These, and diverse others
like these, are in the Anthem of our Lady. In the Rosary of our Lady this Hymn
is to be said; Reparatrix and Salvatrix desperantis animae,
Irroratrix and Largitrix Spiritualis gratiae,
Quod requiro, quod suspiro, measana vulnera,
Et da menti te poscenti gratiarum munera,
Ut sim castus and modestus, etc.........
Cord prudens, ore studens veritatem dicere,
Malum nolens, Deum volens pio semper opere.
That is, [Thou Repairer and Savior of the despairing Soul, the Dew-giver and
Bestower of spiritual grace, heal my wounds, and give to the mind that prays to
thee, the gifts of grace, that I may be chaste, modest, wise in heart, true in
my sayings, hating evil, loving God in holy works:] and much more to the same
purpose. There also the blessed Virgin Mary, after many glorious Appellatives,
is prayed to in these words, [Joyn me to Christ, govern me always, enlighten my
heart, defend me always from the snare of the Enemy, deliver us from all evil,
and from the pains of Hell.

So that it is no wonder that Pope Leo Ad Recanatenses do Lauretana imagine,
apud Bembum l. 8. ep. 17.
the X. calls her a Goddess, and Turcelin In epis^ d^dicat. histor. Lauretan.
the Jesuit, Divinae majestatis, potestatisque sociam. Huic olim coelestium,
mortaliumque principatum detulit. Ad hujus arbitrium (quoad hominum tutela
postulat) t^rras, maria, coelum, naturamque moderatur. Hac annuente, and per
hanc, divinos thesauros, and coelestia dona largitur; the companion or partner
of the Divine Majesty and Power. To her he long since gave the principality of
all heavenly and mortal things. At her will (so far as the guardianship of Men
requires) he rules the Earth and Seas, Heaven and Nature: And she consenting,
he gives Divine treasures and Celestial gifts. Nay, in the Mass-books penned
1538. and used in the Polonian Churches, they call the B. Virgin Mary, Fol.
323, 324,325.
Viam ad vitam, totius mundi gubernatricem, peccatorum cum Deo
reconciliatricem, fontem remissionis peccatorum, lumen luminum; the way to
life, the Governess of all the world, the Reconciler of sinners with God, the
Fountain of Remission of sins, Light of Light, and at last salute her with an
Ave universae Trinitatis Matter, Fol. 327. Vide ^pist. Andr. Dudi^hi^ quinque
Eccles. episc. edit. A.D. 1590. sine loci and ^ypographi nomine.
Hail thou Mother of the whole Trinity.

We do not pick out these only, as the most singular, or the wor^t forms; for
such as these are very numerous, as is to be seen in their Breviaries, Missals,
Hours of our Lady, Rosary of our Lady, the Letany of our Lady, called Litania
Mariae, the Speculum Rosariorum, the Hymns of Saints, Portuises and Manuals.
These only are the instances which amongst many others presently occurr. Two
things only we shall add, instead of many more that might be represented.

The first is, That in a Hymn which they (from what reason or Etymology we know
not, neither are we concerned) call a Sequence, the Council of Constance did
invocate the B. Virgin, in the same manner as Councils did use to invocate the
Holy Ghost; They call her the Mother of Grace, the remedy to the miserable, the
fountain of mercy, and the light of the Church; attributes proper to God and
incommunicable; they sing her praises, and pray to her for graces, ^hey sing to
her with the heart, they call themselves her sons, they declare her to be their
health and comfo^t in all doubts, and call on her for light from Heaven, and
trust in her for the destruction of Heresies, and the repression of Schisms,
and for the lasting Confederations of peace.

The other thing we tell of, is, That there is a Psalter of our Lady, of great
and ancient account in the Church of Rome; it has been several times printed,
at Venice, at Paris, at Leipsich; and the title is, [The Psalter of the Blessed
Virgin, compiled by the Seraphical Doctor St. Bonaventure, Bishop of Alba, and
Presbyter Cardinal of the Holy Church of Rome.] But of the Book it self, the
account is soon made; for it is nothing but the Psalms of David, an hundred and
fifty in number are set down; altered indeed, to make as much of it as could be
sense so reduced: In which the name of Lord is left out, and that of Lady put
in; so that whatever David said of God and Christ, the same prayers, and the
same praises they say of the Blessed Virgin Mary; and whether all that can be
said without intolerable blasphemy, we suppose needs not much disputation.

The same things, but in a less proportion and frequency, they say to other
Saints. In Cantici^ quae vocant sequentia.

Dominic. ante as^ensionem Domini.




O Maria Magdalena
Audi vota laud plena,
Apud Christum chorum istum
Clementer Concilia.
Ut fons summae pietatis
Qui te lavit a peccatis,
Servos suos, atque tuos
Mundet dat a venia.
O Mary Magdalen, hear our prayers, which are full of praises, and most
clemently reconcile this company unto Christ: That the Fountain of Supreme
Piety, who cleansed thee from thy sins, giving pardon, may cleanse us who are his
servants and thine. These things are too bad already, we shall not aggravate
them by any further Commentary; but apply the premises.

Now therefore we desire it may be considered, That there are as the effects of
Christ's death for us, three great products, which are the rule and measure of
our prayers, and our confidence; 1. Christ's merits. 2. His Satisfaction. 3. His
Intercession. By these three we come boldly to the Throne of Grace, and pray to
God through Jesus Christ. But if we pray to God through the Saints too, and
rely upon their 1. Merits. 2. Satisfaction. 3. And Intercession; Is it not
plain that we make them equal with Christ, in kind, though not in degree? For
it is publicly avowed and practiced in the Church of Rome, to rely upon the
Saints Intercession; Vide spe^uli in R^sa^i^r^ s^q^entias; and Bre^^^r. Romans
and this intercession to be made valid by the Merits of the Saints: [We pray
thee, O S. Jude the Apostle, that by thy Merits thou would draw me from the
custom of my sins, and snatch me from the power of the Devil, and advance me to
the invisible powers;] and they say as much to others. And for their
Satisfactions, the treasure of the Church for Indulgences is made up with them,
and the satisfactions of Christ: So that there is nothing remaining of the
honor due to Christ our Redeemer, and our Confidence in him, b^t the same in
every kind is by the Church of Rome imputed to the Saints: And therefore the
very being and Economy of Christianity, is destroyed by these prayers; and the
people are not, cannot be good Christians in these devotions; and what hopes
are laid up for them, who repent to no purpose, and pray with derogation to
Christ's honor, is a matter of deepest consideration. And therefore we desire
our charges not to be seduced by little tricks and artifices of useless and
laborious distinctions, and protestations against evidence of fact, and with
fear and trembling to consider, what God said by the Prophet, Jerem. 2.13.
My people have done two great evils, they have forsaken me, fortem, vivum, the
strong and the living God; fontem vivum, so some copies read it, the living
fountain, and have dug for themselves cisterns, that is, little fantastic
helps, that hold no water, that give no refreshment; or, as S. Paul expresses
it, they worship and invocate the creature (...) besides the Creator; Romans 1.
25.
so the word properly signifies, and so it is used by the Apostle in other 1
Cor. 3.1. Gal. 1. 8. 2 Kings 17. l^b. 1. ^a^^. de V^itation. in^^^^orum^ ^
^r^p. S. A^.
places. And at least let us remember those excellent words of S. Austin,
Tutius and jucundius loquar ad meum Iesum, quam ad aliquem sanctorum spirituum
Dei; I can speak safer and more pleasantly or cheerfully to my Lord Jesus, than
to any of the Saints and Spirits of God. For that we have Commandment, for this
we have none; for that we have example in Scriptures, for this we have none;
there are many promises made to that, but to this there is none at all; and
therefore we cannot in faith pray to them, or at all rely upon them for helps.

Which Consideration is greatly heightened by that prostitution of Devotion
usual in the Church of Rome, (...)^ to every Upstart, to every old and new
Saint. And although they have a story among themselves, That it is ominous for
a Pope to Canonize a Saint, and he never survives it above a twelve-moneth, as
Pierre Mathieu observes in the instances of Clement the IV. and Adrian the VI.
yet this hinde^s not, but that they are tempted to do it frequently. But
concerning the thing it self, the best we can say, is what Christ said of the
Samaritans, John 4^ 22.
They worship they know not what. Such are S. Fingare, S. Anthony of Padua, S.
Christopher, Charles Borromaeus, Ignatius Loyola, Xaverius, and many others;
Vide libr. de Sanctis Hibernisis nuper Latin edit. p^^ D. Pica^dum Par^s^ensem.
of whom Cardinal Bessarion A^ud B^din. in me^h^d. histor^ l 4. A^ud Aug.
Triumphum de Aneona, q. 14 ad. 4. and quaes^. 17. ad. 4. ver^. H^rman^u^.
complained, that many of them were such persons whose life he could not
approve; and such, concerning whom they knew nothing, but from their Parties,
and by pretended Revelations made to particular and hypochondriacal persons. It
is a famous saying of S. Gregory, That the bodies of many persons are
worshipped on Earth, whose souls are tormented in Hell: and Augustinus
Triumphus affirms, That all who are canonized by the Pope cannot be said to be
in Heaven^ And this matter is beyond dispute; for Prateolus tells, that Herman,
the Author of the Heresy of the Fratricelli, was for twenty years together
after his death honored for a Saint, but afterward his body was taken up and
burnt. But then since (as Ambrosius Catharinus and Vivaldus observe) if one
Saint be called in question, then the rest may; what will become of the
Devotions which are paid to such Saints which have been canonized within these
last five ^enturies? Concerning whom we can have but slender evidence that they
are in Heaven at all. And therefore the Cardinal of Cambray, Li^. de Re^^r^^.
Ec^les.
Petrus de Alliaco, wi^es that so many new Saints were not canonized. They are
indeed so many, that in the Church of Rome the Holy Days, which are called
their Greater Doubles, are threescore and four, besides the Feasts of Christ
and our Lady, and the Holy Days which they call Half double Festivals, together
with the Sundays, are above one hundred and thirty. So that besides many
Holy Days kept in particular places, there are in the whole year about two
hundred Holy Days, if we may believe their own Gavantus; which, De Fasti^
Sanctor. 7.10
besides that it is an intolerable burden to the poor Labourer, who must keep
so many of them, that on the rest he can scarce earn his bread, they do also
turn Religion into Superstition, and habituate the people to idleness, and
disorderly^ Festivities, and impious celebrations of the day with unchristian
merriments and licentiousness. We conclude this with those words of S. Paul,
Romans 10.14.
How shall we call on him on whom we have not believed? Christ said, Ye believe
in God, believe also in me. But he never said, Ye have believed in me, believe
also in my Saints. No: 1 Timothy 2.5.
For there is but one Mediator between God and man, the man Christ Jesus. And
therefore we must come to God, not by Saints, but only by Jesus Christ our
Lord.

Sect. X.
THere is in the Church of Rome a horrible impiety taught and practiced, which,
so far as it goes, must needs destroy that part of holy life which consists in
the holiness of our Prayers; and indeed is a Conjugation of Evils, of such
evils, of which in the whole world a society of Christians should be least
suspected; we mean the infinite Superstitions and Incantations, or Charms used
by their Priests in their Exorcising possessed persons, and conjuring of Devils.

There was an Ecclesiastical book called Ordo Baptizandi cum modo Visitandi,
printed at Venice A. D. 1575. in which there were damnable and diabolical
^harms, insomuch that the Spanish Inquisitors in their Expurgatory Index,
printed at Madrid A. D. 1612. commanded deleatur tota exorcismus Ne mir^tur
lector erud^^u^ quod exorcismus apud Inquis^^ores sit foeminini generis.
fortasse dispe^saetum fuit cum bonis viris in hoc a^ticulo. An po^^us factum
quia bonus Angelus nunquam, mali autem Genii saepissime sub forma foeminina
apparuere: quod notavit T^ithemius.
Luciferina, cujus initium est, Adesto Domine tui famuli; that all that
Luciferian Exorcism be blotted out. But whoever looks into the Treasure of
Exorcisms and horrible Conjurings (for that is the very title of the Book
printed at Colein A. D. 1608) shall find many as horrid things, and not
censured by any Inquisitors as yet, so far as we have ever read or heard. Nay,
that very Luciferina, or Devilish Exorcism, is reprinted at Lions, A. D. 16^4.
in the institutio baptizandi, which was restored by the Decree of the Council
of Trent: So that though it was forbidden in Spain, it was allowed in France.
But as bad as that are allowed every where in the Church of Rome: The most
famous, and of most public use are The Treasure of Exorcisms, of which we but
now made mention; the Roman Ritual, The Manual of Exorcisms, printed at
Antwerp, A. D. 1626. with Approbation of the Bishop, and privilege of the
Archdukes; the Pastorals of several Churches, especially that of Ruraemund; and
especially the Flagellum Daemonum, The Devils whip, by Father Hierom Mengus a
Friar Minor; which the Clergy of Orleans did use in the Exorcising of Martha
Brosser, A. D. 1599. the story whereof is in the Epistles of Cardinal D' Ossat,
^ib. 133.
and the History of the Excellent Thuanus.

Now from these Books, especially this last, we shall represent their manner of
casting our Devils; and then speak a word to the thing it self.

Their manner and form is this,

Flag^^lum (...). 3.
First, They are to try the Devil by Holy water, Incense, Sulphur, Rue, which
from thence, as we suppose, came to be called Herb of Grace, and especially S.
John's wort, which therefore they call Devils flight; Vid^ Raimun (...). lib 2
de (...)
with which if they cannot cast the Devil out, yet they may do good to the
Patient; for so Pope Alexander the first promised and commanded the Priests to
use it for the sanctifying and pacifying the people, and driving away the
snares of the Devil: And to this, it were well if the Exorcist would rail upon,
mock and jeer the Devil; for he cannot endure a witty and a sharp taunt, and
loves jeering and railing, no more than he loves holy water; and this was well
tried of old against an Empuse that met Apollonius Tyanaeus at Mount Caucasus,
P^ilostrat. de vita Apolloii.
against whom he railed and exhorted his company to do so.

Next to this, the Exorcist may ask the Devil some questions; What is his name?
How many of them there are? For what cause, and at what time he entered? and,
for his own learning, by what persons he can be cast out? and by what Saint
adjur'd? who are his particular enemies in Heaven? and who in Hell? by what
words he can be most afflicted? (for the Devils are such fools that they cannot
keep their own counsel, nor choose but tell, and when they do, they always tell
true:) He may also ask him by what Covenant, or what Charm he came there, and
by what he is to be released? Then he may call Lucifer to help him, and to
torment that Spirit (for so they cast out Devils, by Beelzebub the Prince of the
Devils;) and certainly Lucifer dares not but obey him. Next to this, the
Exorcist is cunningly to get out of the Devil, the confession of some Article
of Faith, for the edification of the standers by (whom he may by this means
convince of the truth of Transubstantiation, the reality of Purgatory, or the
value of Indulgences) and command him to knock his head three times against the
ground, in adoration of the Holy Trinity. But let him take heed what Relics
he apply to the Devil; for if the Relics be counterfeit, the Devil will be
too hard for him. However, let the Exorcising Priest be sure to bless his
pottage, his meat, his ointment, his herbs; and then also he may use some
Schedules, or little rolls of paper, containing in them holy words; but he must
be sure to be exercised and skilful in all things that belong to the conjuring
of the Devil: These are the preparatory documents, which when he has observed,
then let him fall to his prayers.

Now for the prayers, they also are publicly described in their Offices before
cited; and are as follows,

The Priest ties his stole about the neck of the possessed with three knots,
and says, O ye abominable Rebels against God, I conjure you Spirits, and adjure
you, I call, I constrain, I call out, I contend and contest, where ever you are
in this Man, by the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost [then ^e makes three ] by the
most powerful name of God, Heloy, the strong and admirable, I exorcise you, and
adjure you, and command you, by the power I have, that you incontinently hear
the words of my conjuring, and perceive your selves overcome, and command you
not to depart without license, and so I bind you with this stole of jucundity;
in the name of the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, Amen. Then he makes two and
thirty crosses more, and calls over one and thirty names of God in false
Hebrew, and base Greek, and some Latin, signifying the same names; and the two
and thirtieth is by the sign of the Cross, praying God to deliver them from
their enemies. Then follow more prayers, and more adjurations, and more
conjurations (for they are greatly different you must know) and aspersions of
holy water, and shewings of the Cross, and signings with it. Then they adjure
the Devil (in case the names of God will not do it) by S. Mary, and S. Anne, by
S. Michael, and St. Gabriel, by Raphael, and all Angels and Archangels, by the
Patriarchs, and by the Prophets, and by his own infirmity, by the Apostles, and
by the Martyrs; [and then after all this, if the Devil will not come out, he
must tarry there still, till the next Exorcism; in which] The Exorcist must
rail at the Devil, and say over again the Names of God, and then ask him
questions, and read over the sequences of the Gospels; and after that tell him,
that he has power over him, for he can transubstantiate bread into Christ's
body; and then conjure him again, and call him damned Devil, unclean Spirit,
and as bad as he can call him; and so pray to God to cast him out of the man's
mouth and nose, lips and teeth, jaws and cheeks, eyes and forehead, eyebrows,
and eyelids, his feet, and his members, his marrow, and his bones, and must
reckon every part of his body [to which purpose, we suppose it would be well if
the Exorcist were well skilled in Laurentius, or Bauhinus his Anatomy] And if
he will not go out yet, there is no help but he must choose, till the third
Exorcism: In which, besides many prayers and conjurations in other words to the
same purpose, the Exorcist must speak louder [especially if it be a deaf Devil,
for then indeed it is the more necessary] and tell the Devil his own, and
threaten him terribly, and conjure him again, and say over him about some
twenty or thirty names or titles of Christ, and forbid the Devil to go any
whither, but to the center of the world, and must damn him eternally to the
Sulphurous flames of Hell, and to be tormented worse than Lucifer himse^f, for
his daring to resist so many great Names; and if he will not now obey, let him
take fire and brimstone, and make a fume, whether the possessed will or no,
until the Devil tells you all his mind in what you ask him: [the liver of
Tobias his fish were a rare thing here, but that is not to be had for love or
money:] And after this he conjures him again by some of the names of God, and
by the Merits, and all the good things which can be spoken or thought of the
Most Blessed Virgin, and by all her names and titles, which he must reckon, one
and forty in number, together with her Epithets, making so many, and by these
he must cast him headlong into Hell.

But if the Devil b^ ^^ubborn (for some of them are very disobedient) there is
a fourth, and a fifth, and a sixth Exorcism, and then he conjures the earth,
the water, and the fire to make them of his party, and commands them not to
harbor such villainous Spirits, and commands Hell to hear him, and obey his
word, and conjures all the Spirits in Hell to take that Spirit to themselves
(for it may be they will understand their duty better than that stubborn Devil,
that is broke loose from thence.) But if this chance to fail, there is yet left
a remedy that will do it. He must make the picture of the Devil, and write his
name over the head of it, and conjure the fire to burn it most horribl^ and
hastily; [and if the picture be upon wood or paper, it is ^en to one that may
be done.] After all this ^tir, Sprinkle more holy water, and take Sulphur,
Galbanum, Assa foetida, Aristolochia, Rue, St. John's wort; all which being
distinctly blessed, the Exorcist must hold the Devils picture over the fire,
and adjure the Devil to hear him; and then he must not spare him but tell him
all his faults, and give him all his names, and Anathematize him, and curse not
only him, but Lucifer too, and Beelzebub, and Satan, and Astaroth, and
Behemot, and Beherit, and all together; [for indeed there is not one good
natured Devil amongst them all;] and then pray once more, and so throw the
Devils picture into the fire, and then insult in a long form of crowing over
him, which is there set down.

And now after all, if he will not go out, there is a seventh Exorcism for him
with new Ceremonies. He must show him the consecrated Host in the Pix, pointing
at it with his finger, and then conjure him again, and rail at him once more;
to which purpose, there is a very fine form taken out of Prierius, and set down
in the Flagellum Daemonum; and then let the Exorcist pronounce sentence against
the Devil, and give him his oath, and then a commandment to go out of the
several parts of his body, always taking care that at no hand he remain in the
upper parts; and then is the Devils Qu. to come out, if he have a mind to it
(for that must be always supposed) and then follows the thanksgivings.

This is the manner of their devotion, described for the use of their
Exorcists; in which is such a heap of folly, madness, superstition, blasphemy,
and ridiculous guises and playings with the Devil, that if any man amongst us
should use such things, he would be in danger of being tried at the next
Assizes for a Witch, or a Conjurer; however, certain it is, what ever the Devil
loses by pretending to obey the Exorcist, he gains more by this horrible
debauchery of Christianity. There needs no confutation of it, the impiety is
visible and tangible; and it is sufficient to have told the story.

Only this we say, as to the thing it self.

The casting out of Devils is a miraculous power, and given at first for the
confirmation of Christian Faith, as the gifts of Tongues and Healing were, and
therefore we have reason to believe, that because it is not an ordinary power,
the ordinary Exorcisms cast out no more Devils, than Extreme Unction cures
sicknesses. We do not envy to any one, any grace of God, but wish it were more
modestly pretended, unless it could be more evidently prov'd^ Origin condemned
this whole procedure of conjuring Devils long since. Tract. 35. in Matthew.
Quaeret aliquis si convenit vel Daemones adjurare. Qui aspicit Iesum
imperantem Daemonibus, sed etiam potestatem dantem Discipulis super omnia
daemonia, and ut infirmitates sanarent, dicet, quoniam non est secundum
Potestatem datam a salvatore adjurare Daemonia. Iudaicum enim est: If any one
asks, Whether it be fit to adjure Devils? He that beholds Jesus commanding over
Devils, and also giving power to his Disciples over all unclean spirits, and to
heal diseases, will say, that to adjure Devils is not according to the power
given by our Blessed Savior; For it is a Jewish trick: In i^^s verba, [Qui
credit in me majora facie^.]
and S. Chrysostom spoke soberly and truly, We poor Wretches cannot drive away
the flies, much less Devils.

But then as to the manner of their Conjurations and Exorcisms; this we say, If
these things come from God, let them show their warranty, and their books of
Precedents: If they come not from God, they are so like the Enchantments of
Balaam, the old Heathens, and the modern Magicians, that their Original is soon
discovered.

But yet from what principle it comes, that they have made Exorcists an
Ecclesiastical Order, with special words and instruments of collation; and that
the words of Ordination giving them power only over possessed Christians,
Catechumens or Baptized, should by them be extended and exercised upon all
Infants, as if they were all possessed by the Devil; and not only so, but to
bewitched Cattle, to Mice and Locusts, to Milk and Lettice, to Houses and
Tempests; as if their Charms were Prophilactick, as well as Therapeutick; and
could keep, as well as drive the Devil out, and prevent storms like the old
(...), Quast. nam^ l 4. c. 6.
of whom Seneca makes mention: Of these things we cannot guess at any probable
principle, except they have derived them from the Jewish Cabala, or the
Exorcisms, which it is said Solomon used, when he had consented to Idolatry.

But these things are so unlike the wisdom and simplicity, the purity and
spirituality of Christian devotion; ar^ so perfectly of their own devising, and
wild imaginations; are so full of dirty superstitions, and ignorant fancies,
that there are not in the world many things, whose sufferance and practice can
more destroy the Beauty of Holiness, or reproach a Church, or Society of
Christians.

Sect. XI.
TO put our trust and confidence in God only, and to use Ministeries of his
own appointment and sanctification, is so essential a duty owing by us to God,
that whoever trusts in any thing but God, is a breaker of the first
Commandment; and he that invents instrumental supports of his own head, and
puts a subordinate ministerial confidence in them, usurps the rights of God,
and does not pursue the interests of true Religion, whose very essence and
formality is to glorify God in all his attributes, and to do good to man, and
to advance the honor and Kingdom of Christ. Now how greatly the Church of Rome
prevaricates in this great Soul of Religion, appears by too evident and
notorious demonstration: For she has invented Sacramentals of her own, without
a Divine warrant, Cyril Hieros^ Cat^ch. 4.
(...), said S. Cyril. Concerning the holy and Divine mysteries of Faith or
Religion, we ought to do nothing by chance, or of our own heads, nothing
without the Authority of the Divine Scriptures: But the Church of Rome does
otherwise; invents things of her own, and imputes spiritual effects to these
Sacramentals; and promises not only temporal blessings and immunities, and
benedictions, but the collation or increment of Spiritual graces, and remission
of venial sins, and alleviation of pains due to mortal sins, to them who shall
use these Sacramentals: Which because God did not institute, and did not
sanctify, they use them without faith, and rely upon them without a promise,
and make themselves the fountains of these graces, and produce confidences,
whose last resort is not upon God, who neither was the Author, nor is an
Approver of them.

Of this nature are Holy Water, the Paschal Wax, Oil, Palm-boughs, Holy Bread
(not Eucharistical) Hats, Agnus Dei's, Meddals, Swords, Bells, and Roses
hallowed upon the Sunday called Laetare Jerusalem; such as P. Pius the second
sent to James the II. of Scotland, B^llarm. de cultis ^anct. lib 3. cap^ 7
sect. s^c^^d^ pr^^^sit^^, and s^ct s^^^^d ad d^leti^nem.
and Sixtus Quintus to the Prince of Parma: Concerning which, their Doctrine is
this, That the blood of Christ is by these applied unto us, that they do not
only signify, but produce spiritual effects, that they blot out venial sins,
that they drive away Devils, that they cure diseases, and that though these
things do not operate infallibly, as do the Sacraments, and that God has made
no express Covenant concerning them, yet by the devotion of them that use them,
and the prayers of the Church, they do prevail.

Now though it be easy to say, and it is notoriously true in Theology, that
the prayers of the Church can never prevail, but according to the grace which
God has promised; and either can only procure a blessing upon natural things,
in order to their natural effects, or else an extraordinary supernatural
effect, by virtue of a Divine promise; and that these things are pretended to
work beyond their natural force, and yet God has not promised to them a
supernatural blessing (as themselves confess;) yet besides the falseness of the
Doctrine, on which these superstitions do rely, it is lso as evident, that
these instrumentalities produce an affiance and confidence in the Creature, and
estrange men's hearts from the true Religion and trust in God, while they think
themselves blessed in their own inventions, and in digging to themselves
Cisterns of their own, and leaving the Fountain of Blessing and Eternal Life.

To this porpose the Roman Priests abuse the people with Romantic stories out
of the Dialogues of S. Gregory, and venerable Bede; making them believe, that
S. Fortunatus cured a man's broken thigh with Holy Water, and that S. Malachias
the Bishop of Down and Conor, cured a madman with the same medicine; and that
Saint Hilarion cured many sick persons with Holy Bread and Oil (which indeed is
the most likely of them all, as being good food, and good medicine;) and
although not so much as a Chicken is now a days cured of the Pip by Holy Water,
yet upon all occasions they use it, and the common people throw it upon
Childrens Cradles, and sick Cows Horns, and upon them that are blasted; and if
they recover by any means, it is imputed to the Holy Water: And so the
Simplicity of Christian Religion, the Glory of our Dependence on God, the Wise
Order and Economy of Blessings in the Gospel, the Sacredness and
Mysteriousness of Sacraments and Divine Institutions, are disordered and
dishonored: The Bishops and Priests inventing both the Word and the Element,
institute a kind of Sacrament, in great derogation to the Supreme Prerogative
of Christ; and men are taught to go in ways which Superstition has invented,
and Interest does support.

But there is yet one great instance more of this irreligion. Upon the
Sacraments themselves they are taught to rely, with so little of Moral and
Virtuous Dispositions, that the efficacy of one is made to lessen the necessity
of the other; and the Sacraments are taught to be so effectual by an inherent
virtue, that they are not so much made the instruments of Virtue, as the
Suppletory; not so much to increase, as to make amends for the want of Grace:
On which we shall not now insist, because it is sufficiently remarked in our
reproof of the Roman Doctrines, in the matter of Repentance.

Sect. XII.
AFter all this, if their Doctrines as they are explicated by their practice,
and the Commentaries of their greatest Doctors, do make their Disciples guilty
of Idolatry, there is not any thing greater to deter men from them, than that
danger to their Souls which is imminent over them, upon that account.

Their worshipping of Images we have already reproved upon the account of its
novelty and innovation in Christian Religion. But that it is against good life,
a direct breach of the second Commandment, an Act of Idolatry, as much as the
Heathens themselves were guilty of, in relation to the second Commandment, is
but too evident by the Doctrines of their own Leaders.

For if to give Divine honor to a Creature be Idolatry, then the Doctors of
the Church of Rome teach their people to commit Idolatry: For they affirm, That
the same worship which is given to the Prototyp or Principal, the same is to be
given to the Image of it. As we worship the Holy ^rinity, and Christ, so we may
worship the Images of the Trinity, and of Christ; that is, with Latria, or
Divine honor. This is the constant sentence of the Divines, The Image is to be
worshipped with the same honor and worship, with which we worship those whose
image it is, Instit. moral. par. 1. l. 9. c. 6.
said Azorius, their great Master of Casuistical Theology. And this is the
Doctrine of their great St. Thomas, of Alexander of Ales, Bonaventure,
Albertus, Richardus, Capreolus, Cajetan, Coster, Valentia, Vasquez, the
Jesuists of Colein, Triers and Mentz, approving Coster's opinion.

Neither can this be eluded by saying, that though the same worship be given to
the Image of Christ, as to Christ himself, yet it is not done in the same way;
for it is terminatively to Christ or God, but relatively to the image, that is,
to the image for God's or Christ's sake. For this is that we complain of, that
they give the ^ame worship to an image, which is due to God; for what cause
soever it be done, it matters not, save only that the excuse makes it in some
sense, the worse for the Apology. For to do a thing which God has forbidden,
and to say it is done for God's sake, is to say, that for his sake we displease
him; for his sake we give that to a Creature, which is God's own propriety. But
besides this, we a^firm, and it is of it self evident, that whoever, Christian
or Heathen, worships the image of any thing, cannot possibly worship that image
terminatively, for the very being of an image is relative; and therefore if the
man understands but common sense, he must suppose and intend that worship to be
relative, and a Heathen could not worship an image with any other worship; and
the second Commandment, forbidding to worship the likeness of any thing in
Heaven and Earth, does only forbid that thing which is in Heaven to be
worshipped by an image, that is, it forbids only a relative worship: For it is
a contradiction to say, this is the image of God, and yet this is God; and
therefore it must be also a contradiction, to worship an image with Divine
worship terminatively, for then it must be that the image of a thing, is that
thing whose image it is. And therefore these Doctors teach the same thing which
they condemn in the Heathens.

But they go yet a little further: The Image of the Cross they worship with
Divine honor; and therefore although this Divine worship is but relative, yet
cons^quently, the Cross it self is worshipped terminatively by Divine
adoration. For the Image of the Cross has it relatively, and for the Crosses
sake, therefore the Cross it self is the proper and full object of the Divine
adoration. Now that they do and teach this, we charge upon them by undeniable
Records: For in the very Pontifical published by the Authority of Pope Clement
the VIII. these words are found, The Legates Cross must be on the right hand,
Edit. Roman. p. 672.
because Latria, or Divine honor is due to it. And if Divine honor relative
be due to the Legates Cross, which is but the Image of christ Cross, then this
Divine worship is terminated on Christ's Cross, which is certainly but a mere
Creature. To this purpose are the words of Almain, The Images of the Trinity,
and of the Cross, are to be adored with the worship of Latria; that is, Divine.
Now if the Image of the Cross be the intermedial, then the Cross it self, whose
Image that is, must be the last object of this Divine worship; and if this be
not Idolatry, it can never be told, what is the notion of the Word. But this
passes also into other real effects: And well may the Cross it self be
worshipped by Divine worship, when the Church places her hopes of salvation on
the Cross; for so she does, says Aquinas, and makes one the argument of the
other, and proves that the Church places her hopes of salvation on the Cross,
that is, on the instrument of Christ's Passion, by a hymn which she uses in her
offices; but this thing we have remarked above, upon another occasion. Now
although things are brought to a very ill state, when Christians are so
probably and apparently charged with Idolatry, and that the excuses are too
fine to be understood by them that need them; yet no excuse can acquit these
things, when the most that is, or can be said is this, that although that which
is Gods due, is given to a Creature, yet it is given with some difference of
intention, and metaphysical abstraction, and separation; especially, since, if
there can be Idolatry in the worshipping of an Image, it is certain, that a
relative Divine worship is this Idolatry^ for no man that worships an Image (in
that consideration or formality) can make the Image the last object: Either
therefore the Heathens were not Idolaters in the worshipping of an Image, or
else these men are. The Heathens did indeed infinitely more violate the first
Commandment; but against the second, precisely and separately from the first,
the transgression is alike.

The same also is the case in their worshipping the consecrated Bread and Wine:
Of which how far they will be excused before God by their ignorant pretensions
and suppositions, we know not; but they hope to save themselves harmless by
saying, that they believe the Bread to be their Savior, and that if they did
not believe so, they would not do so. We believe that they say true; but we are
afraid that this will no more excuse them, that it will excuse those who
worship the Sun and Moon, and the Queen of Heaven, whom they would not worship,
if they did not believe to have Divinity in them: And it may be observed, That
they are very fond of that persuasion, by which they are led into this worship.
The error might be some excuse, if it were probable, or if there were much
temptation to it: But when they choose this persuasion, and have nothing for it
but a tropical expression of Scripture, which rather than not believe in the
natural, useless, and impossible sense, they will defy all their own reason,
and four of the five operations of their soul, Seeing, Smelling, Tasting and
Feeling, and contradict the plain Doctrine of the Ancient Church, before they
can consent to believe this error, that Bread is changed into God, and the
Priest can make his Maker: We have too much cause to fear, that the error is
too gross to admit an excuse; and it is hard to suppose it invincible and
involuntary, because it is so hard, and so untempting, and so unnatural to
admit the error. We do desire that God may find an excuse for it, and that they
would not. But this we are most sure of, that they might, if they pleased, find
many excuses, or rather just causes for not giving Divine honor to the
Consecrated Elements; because there are so many contingencies in the whole
conduct of this affair, and we are so uncertain of the Priests intention, and
we can never be made certain, that there is not in the whole order of causes
any invalidity in the Consecration; and it is so impossible that any man should
be sure that Here, and Now, and This Bread is Transubstantiated, and is really
the Natural body of Christ; Nemini po^ est per fidem constare se recepisse vel
minimum sa^ramentum. Estque hoc i^a certum ex fide ac clarum est nos vivere.
Nulla est ^ia, qua cit^a revelationem nosse possumus intentionem ministrantis,
vel evidenter, vel certo ex fide. Andreas Vega, lib. 9. de j^st^fic. c. 17.

Non potest quis esse certus certitudine fidei se percipere verum Sacram^ntum^
Cum Sacramentum sine int^ntione Ministri non conficiatur, and intentionem
al^erius nemo videre potest. Bellarm. lib. 3. cap. 8. sent. Dicent.


that it were fit to omit the giving Gods due to that which they do not know to
be any thing but a piece of bread, and it cannot consist with holiness, and our
duty to God, certainly to give Divine Worship to that thing, which though their
doctrine were true, they cannot know cetainly to have a Divine being.

Sect. XIII.
AND now we shall plainly represen^ to our charges, how this whole matter
stands. The case is this, The Religion of a Christian consists in Faith, and
Hope, Repentance and Charity, Divine Worship and ^elebration of the Sacraments,
and finally in keeping the ^ommandments of God. Now in all these, both on
Doctrines and Practices, the Church of R^me does dangerously err, and teaches
men so to do.

They do injury to Faith, by creating new Articles, and enjoining them as of
necessity to salvation. * ^hey spoil their Hope, by placing it upon Creatures,
and devices of their own. * They greatly sin against Charity, by damning all
that are not of their opinion, in things false or uncertain, right or wrong. *
They break in pieces the salutary Doctrine of Repentance, making it to be
consistent with a wicked life, and little or no amendment. * They worship they
know not what, and pray to them that hear them not, and trust on that which
helps them not. * And as for the ^ommandments, they leave one of them out of
their Catechisms and Manuals, and while they contend earnestly against some
Opponents for the possibility of keeping them all, they do not insist upon the
necessity of keeping any in the course of their lives, till the danger or
article of their death. * And concerning the Sacraments, they have egregiously
prevaricated in two points. For not to mention their reckoning of seven
Sacraments, which we only reckon to be an unnecessary, and unscholastical
error; they take the one half of the principal away from the Laity; and they
institute little sacraments of their own, they invent Rites, and annex
spiritual graces to them, what they please themselves, of their own heads,
without a Divine Warrant or Institution: and, * At last persuade their people
to that which can never be excused, at least, from Material Idolatry.

If these things can consist with the duty of Christians, not only to eat what
they worship, but to adore those things with Divine Worship, which are not God:
To reconcile a wicked life with certain hopes and expectations of Heaven at
last, and to place these hopes upon other things than God, and to damn all the
World that are not Christians at this ra^e, then we h^ve lost the true measures
of Christianity; and the Doctrine and Discipline of Christ is not a Natural and
Rational Religion; not a Religion that makes men holy, but a confederacy under
the conduct of a Sect, and it must rest in Forms and Ceremonies, and Devices of
Man's Invention. And although we do not doubt, but that the goodness of God does
so prevail over all the follies and malice of mankind, that there are in the
Roman communion many very good Christians; yet they are not such as they are
Papists, but by some thing that is higher, and before that, something that is
of an abstract and more sublime consideration. And though the good people
amongst them are what they are by the grace and goodn^ss of God, yet by all or
any or these opinions they are not so: But the very best suffer diminution, and
allay by these things; and very many more are wholly subverted and destroyed.

CHAP. III. The Church of Rome teaches Doctrines, which in many things are
destructive of Christian Society in general, and of Monarchy in special: Both
which, the Religion of the Church of England and Ireland does by her Doctrines
greatly, and Christianly support.
Sect. I.
THat in the Church of Rome, it is publicly taught by their greatest Doctors,
That it is lawful to lie, or d^ceive the question of the Magistrate, to conceal
their name, and to tell a false one, to elude all examinations, and make them
insignificant and toothless, cannot be doubted by any man that knows how the
Engli^h Priests have behaved themselves in the times of Queen Elizabeth, King
James, and the Blessed Martyr King Charles I. Emonerius wrote in defense of it;
and Father Barnes who wrote a Book against Lying and Equivocating, was
suspected for a Heretic, and smarted severely under their hands.

To him that asks you again for what you have paid him already, you may safely
say, you never had any thing of him, meaning so as to owe it him now. It is the
Doctrine of Emanuel Sa and Sanchez; which we understand to be a great lie, and
a great sin, it being at the best a deceiving of the Law, that you be not
deceived by your Creditor; that is, a doing evil to prevent one; a sin, to
prevent the losing of your money.

If a man asks his wife if she be an Adulteress, though she be, yet she may
say, she is not, if in her mind secretly she say [ not with a purpose to tell
you: (...) Sa^^^ l 4. ^. 21. ^. 22.
] so Cardinal Tolet teaches. And if a man swears he will take such a one to his
wife, being compelled to swear; he may secretly mean, [if hereafter she do
please me.] And if a man swears to a Thief, that he will give him Twenty
Crowns, he may secretly say, [If I please to do so,] and then he is not bound.
And of this Doctrine Vasquez brags, In^ Tom. 4. qu. 93. ar^. 5. (...). 13.
as of a rare, though new invention, saying, it is gathered out of St. Austin,
and Thomas Aquinas, who only found out the way of saying nothing in such cases
and questions, asked by Judges; but this invention was drawn out by assiduous
disputations. * He that promises to say an Ave Mary, and swears he will, or
vows to do it; yet sins not mortally, though he does not do it, said the great
Navar, Man^a^. c. 1^. u^ 7.
and others whom he follows. * There is yet a further degree of this iniquity;
not only in words, but in real actions, it is lawful to deceive or rob your
Brother, when to do so is necessary for the preservation of your fame: For no
man is bound to restore stolen goods, (that is) to cease from doing injury,
with the peril of his credit. So Navar, and Cardinal Cajetan and Tolet teaches;
A^ud Tolet. i^str^ct. S^l^rd l. 5 c 27.
who adds also, Hoc multi dicun, quoram sententiam potest quis tuta conscienti^
sequi. Many say the same thing; whose Doctrine any man man may follow with a
safe Conscience. Nay, to save a man's credit, an honest man that is asham^d to
beg, may steal what is necessary for him, says Diana.

Now by these Doctrines a man is taught how to be an honest Thief, In compend.
p. 335. Lugdu^, A. D. 1641.
and to keep what he is bound to restore; and by these we may not only deceive
our Brother, but the Law; and not the Law only, but God also, even with an
Oath, if the matter be but small: It never makes God angry with you, or puts
you out of the state of grace. But if the matter be great, yet to prevent a
great trouble to your self, you may conceal a truth, by saying that which is
false; according to the general Doctrine of the late Casuists. So that a man is
bound to keep truth and honesty, when it is for his turn; but not, if it be to
his own hinderance; and therefore David was not in the right, but was something
too nice in the resolution of the like case in the fifteenth Psalm. Now
although we do not affirm, that these particulars are the Doctrine of the whole
Church of Rome, because little things, and of this nature, never are considered
in their public Articles of Con^ession; yet a man may do these vile things
(for so we^ understand them to be) and find justifications and warranty, and
shall not be affrighted with the terrors of damnation, nor the imposition of
penances: he may for all these things be a good Catholic, though it may be,
not a very good Christian. But since these things are affirmed by so many, the
opinion is probable, and the practice safe, says Cardinal Tolet. Vbi ^up^a.


But we shall instance in things of more public concern, and Catholic
Authority. No Cont^acts, Leagues, Soci^ties, Promises, Vows, or Oaths, are a
su^ficient security to him that deals with one of the church of Rome, if he
shall please to make use of that liberty, which may and many times is, and
always can be granted to him. For first, it is affirmed. and was practiced by a
whole Council of Bishops at Constance, that Faith is not to be kept with
Heretics; and John Hus, and Hierom of Prague, and Savanarola, felt the
mischief of violarion of public faith; and the same thing was disputed
fiercely at Worms, in the case of Luther, to whom Caesar had given a safe
conduct, and very many would have had it to be broken; but Caesar was a better
Christian than the Ecclesiastics and their party, and more a Gentleman. But
that no scrupulous Princes may keep their words any more in such cases, or
think themselves tied to perform their safe conducts given to Heretics, there
is a way found out by a new Catholic Doctrine; Becanus shall speak this point
instead of the rest, Theol. Schol^.
[ There are two distinct Tribunals, and the Ecclesiastical is the Superior;
and therefore if a Secular Prince gives his Subjects a safe conduct, he cannot
extend it to the Superior Tribunal; nor by any security given, hinder the
Bishop or the Pope to exercise their jurisdiction:] And upon the account of
this, or the like Doctrine, the Pope and the other Ecclesiastics did prevail
at Constance, for the burning of their Prisoners, to whom safe conduct had been
granted. But these things are sufficiently known by the complaints of the
injured persons.

But not only to Heretics, but to our friends also we may break our promises,
if the Pope give us leave. It is a public and an avowed Doctrine, That if a
man have taken an Oath of a thing lawful and honest, and in his power, yet if
it hinders him from doing a greater good, the Pope can dispense with his oath,
and take off the Obligation. This is expressly affirmed by one of the most
moderate of them, Canus Bishop of the Canaries. But beyond dispute, Relect^ de
paenitent.
and even without a dispensation, they all of them own it, That if a man have
promised to a woman to marry her, and is betrothed to her, and has sworn it,
yet if he will before the consummation, enter in^o a Monastery, his Oath shall
not bind him, his promise is null; but his second promise, that shall stand.
And he that denies this, is accursed by the Council of Trent. Ses. 8. can. 6.


Not only husbands and wives espoused may break their vows and mutual
obligation, against the will of one another; but in the Church of Rome children
have leave given them to disobey their Parents, so they will but turn Friars:
And this they might do, Girls at twelve, and Boys at the age of fourteen years;
but the Council of Trent enlarged it to sixteen: But the thing was taught and
decreed by Pope Clement the III. and Thomas Aquinas did so, Cap. cum virum de
regularibu^. Aquin. 2.2. q. 88. art. 9. Lib. 1. c. 101.
and then it was made lawful by him and his Scholars; though it was expressly
against the Doctrine and Laws of the preceding ages of the Church, as appears
in the Capitulars of Charles the Great. But thus did the Pharisees teach their
Children to Cry Corban, and neglect their Parents; to pretend Religion, in
prejudice of filial piety. In this particular AErodius a French Lawyer, an
excellently learned man, suffered sadly by the loss, and forcing of a hopeful
son from him, and he complained most excellently in a book written on purpose
upon this subject.

But these mischiefs are Doctrinal, and accounted lawful: But in the matter of
Marriages and Contracts, Promises and Vows, where a Doctrine fails, it can be
supplied by the Popes power: Which thing is avowed and owned, without a cover:
For when Pope Clement the V. condemned the Order of Knights Templers, he
disowned any justice or right in doing it, but stuck to his power, Thom
Walsingham.
Quanquam de jure non possumus, tamen ex plenitudine potestatis dictum ordinem
reprobamus; that is; though by right we cannot do it, yet by the fullness of
power we condemn the said Order: For he can dispense always, and in all things
where there is cause, and in many things where there is no cause; sed sub
majori pretio, under a greater price, said the tax of the Datary; where the
price of the several dispensations, even in causa turpi, in base and filthy
causes, are set down. Intranti nummo quasi quodam Principe summo Deferunt aurum
and argentum and reportant Char^as, Car. Cusan.

Exiliunt valvae, nihil auditur nisi salve.
Nay the Pope can dispense supra jus, contra jus; above Law, and against Law
and right, said Mosconius in his books of the Majesty of the Militant Church:
Li. 1. de summo Pontif. vide etiam Iacobum de Terano: and Ravis. de concile. du
Trent.
For the Popes Tribunal and Gods is but one; and therefore every reasonable
creature is subject to the Popes Empire, said the same Autho^: And what
Dispensations he usually gives, we are best informed by a gloss of their own
upon the Canon Law, Cap. quia circa Extra. de ^igamis.
Nota mirabile, quod cum eo qui peccat Dispensatur, cum illo autem qui non
peccat non Dispensatur: It is a wonderful thing that they should dispense with
a Fornicator, but not with him who marries after the death of his first wife. *
They give Divorces for Marriages in the fourth degree, and give Dispensation to
marry in the second. These things are a sufficient charge, and yet evidently
so, and publicly owned.

^ap. proposui. de concess. praebondae, n. 20.
We need not aggravate this matter, by what Panormitan and others do say, that
the Pope has power to dispense in all the Laws of God, except the Articles of
Faith; and how much of this they own and practice, needs no greater instance,
than that which Volaterran tells of Pope Innocent the VIII. that he gave the
Norvegians a Dispensation, not only to communicate, but to consecrate in bread
only.

As the Pope by his Dispensations undertakes to dissolve the Ordinances of God;
so also the most solemn Contracts of men: Of which a very great instance was
given by Pope Clement the VII. who dispensed with the Oath which Francis the I.
of France solemnly swore to Charles the V. Emperor, after the Battle of Pavy,
and gave him leave to be perjured. And one of the late Popes dispensed with the
Bastard Son of the Conde D' Olivarez, or rather, plainly dissolved his marriage
which he made and consummated with Isabella D' Azueta, whom he had publicly
married when he was but a mean person, the son of Donna Marguerita Spinola, and
under the name of Julian Valeasar. But when the Conde had declared him his son
and heir, the Pope dissolved the first marriage, and gave him leave under the
name of Henry Philip de Guzman, to marry D. Iuana de Valesco, Daughter to the
Constable of Castile.

And now if it be considered, what influence these Doctrines have upon
Societies and Communities of men, they will need no further reproof than a mere
enumeration of the mischiefs they produce. They by this means legitimate
adulterous and incestuous marriages, and disanul lawful Contracts: They give
leave to a Spouse to break his or her Vow and Promise; and to Children to
disobey their Parents, and perhaps to break their Mothers heart, or to undo a
Family. No words can bind your faith, because you can be dispensed with; and if
you swear you will not procure a Dispensation, you can as well be dispensed
with for that perjury as the other; and you cannot be tied so fast, but the
Pope can unloose you. So that there is no certainty in your promise to God, or
faith to men, in Judicatories to Magistrates, or in Contracts with Merchants;
in the duty of Children to their Parents, of Husbands to their Wives, or Wives
to their contracted Husbands, of a Catholic to a Heretic; and last of all a
Subject to his Prince cannot be bound so strictly, but if the Prince be not of
the Popes persuasion, or be by him judged a Tyrant, his Subjects shall owe him
no obedience. But this is of particular consideration, and reserved for the
III. Sect.

Sect. II.
THere is yet another instance, by which the Church of Rome does intolerable
prejudice to Governments and Societies: In which although the Impiety is not so
apparent; yet the evil is more owned, and notorious, and defended; and that is,
the Exemption of their Clergy from the Jurisdiction of Secular Princes and
Magistrates, both in their Estates and Persons: Not only in the matters of
Simony, Heresy, and Apostasy, but in matters of Theft, Perjury, Murder,
Adultery, Blasphemy and Treason: In which cases they suffer not a Clergy man to
be judged by the Secular power, until the Church has quit him, and turned him
over, and given them leave to proceed. This was verified in the Synod of
Dalmatia, Si Imperator did. 96. etc. E^clesia ^. M de co^stitut.

A.D. 1199. Can. 5.

De Clericis l. 1 c. 30. sect. quarto objiciunt.


held by the Legates of Pope Innocent the III. and is now in the Church of Rome,
pretended to be by Divine Right: [ For it cannot be proved, that Secular
Princes are the Lawful Superiors and Judges of Clergy men, unless it can be
proved, that the Sheep are better than the Shepherd, or Sons than their
Fathers, or Temporals than Spirituals,] said Bellarmine: De Offic. Christiani
Prin. l. 1. c. 5.
And therefore it is a shame (says he) to see Princes contending with Bishops
for precedence, or for Lands. For the truth is this, (whatever the custom be)
the Prince is the Bishops Subject, not the Bishop the Princes: Suarez. defens.
contra sect. Anglic. l. 4. c. 17. sect. 15,16, and 1^.
For no man can serve two Masters, the Pope is their own Superior, and
therefore the Secular Prince cannot be. So both Bellarmine and Suarez conclude
this Doctrine out of Scripture.

And although in this, as in all things else, when he finds it for the
advantage of the Church, the Pope can dispense; and diverse Popes of Rome did
give power to the Commonwealth of Venice, to judge Clergy men, and punish them
for great offenses; yet how ill this was taken by Paulus V. at their hands, and
what stirs he made in Christendom concerning it, the World was witness; and it
is to be read in the History of the Venetian Interdict, and not without great
difficulty defended by Marcus Antonius Peregrinus, M. Antonius Othelius, and
Ioachim Scaynus of Padua, beside the Doctors of Venice.

Now if it be considered, how great a part of mankind in the Roman Communion
are Clergy men, and how great a portion of the Lands and Revenues in each
Kingdom they have; to pretend a Divine Right of Exemtion of their Persons from
Secular Judicatories, and their Lands from Secular burdens and charges of the
Commonwealth, is to make Religion a very little friend to the Public; and
causes, that by how much there is more of Religion, by so much there is the
less of Piety and Public Duty. Princes have many times felt the evil, and are
always subject to it, when so many thousand persons are in their Kingdoms, and
yet Subjects to a Foreign Power. But we need not trouble our selves to reckon
the evils consequent to this procedure, themselves have owned them, even the
very worst of things, [ The Rebellion of a Clergy man against his Prince is not
Treason, because he is not his Princes Subject.] It is expressly taught by
Emanuel Sa; Aphor. verb. Cericus.
and because the Frenchmen in zeal to their own King, could not endure this
Doctrine, these words were left out of the Edition of Paris, but still remain
in the Editions of Antwerp and Collen. But the thing is a general Rule, [ That
all Ecclesiastical persons are free from Secular Jurisdiction in causes
Criminal, whether Civil or Ecclesiastical: and this Rule is so general, that it
admits no exception; and so certain that it cannot be denied, unless you will
contradict the principles of Faith:] Defens. fid. l. 4. c. 15. sect. 1.
So Father Suarez. And this is pretended to be allowed by Councils, Sacred
Canons, and all the Doctors of Laws Humane and Divine; Apolog. p. 57.
for so Bellarmine affirms. Against which, since it is a matter of Faith and
Doctrine, which we now charge upon the Church of Rome, as an Enemy to public
Government, we shall think it sufficient to oppose against their Pretension,
the plain and easy words of S. Paul, Let every soul be subject to the higher
Powers. Rom 13.1.
Every Soul,] That is, In hunc locum.
says Saint Chrysostom, whether he be a Monk or an Evangelist, a Prophet or an
Apostle.

Of the like iniquity, when it is extended to its utmost Commentary, which the
Commenters of the Church of Rome put upon it, is, the Divine Right of the Seal
of Confession; which they make so Sacred, to serve such ends as they have
chosen, that it may not be broken up to save the lives of Princes, or of the
whole Republic, says Instruct. Sac^rd. l. 3. c. 16.
Tolet; No, not to save all the World, said De poenit. l. 2. c. 19. n. 5.
Henriquez: Not to save an Innocent, not to keep the World from burning, or
Religion from perversion, or all the Sacraments from demolition. Indeed it is
lawful, says Apol. cont. Re^. M. ^rit. c. 13.
Bellarmine, if a Treason be known to a Priest in Confession, and he may in
general words give notice to a pious and Catholic Prince, but not to a
Heretic; and that was acutely and prudently said by him, said Father Suarez.
^ontr Reg. Ang. l. 9. c. 3
Father Binet is not so kind even to the Catholic Princes; for he says, that
it is better that all the Kings of the World should perish, than that the Seal
of Confession should be so much as once broken; and this is the Catholic
Doctrine, said Eudaemon Ioannes in his Apology for Garnet: and for it he also
quotes Suarez. Cap. 13.
But it is enough to have named this. How little care these men take of the
lives of Princes, and the Public Interest; which they so greatly undervalue to
every trifling fancy of their own, is but too evident by these Doctrines.

Sect. III.
THe last thing we shall remark for the instruction and caution of our Charges
is not the least. The Doctrines of the Church of Rome are great enemies to the
Dignity and Security, to the Powers and Lives of Princes: And this we shall
briefly prove by setting down the Doctrines themselves, and their consequent
practices.

And here we observe, That not only the whole Order of Jesuits is a great
enemy to Monarchy, by subjecting the Dignity of Princes to the Pope, by making
the Pope the Supreme Monarch of Christians; but they also teach, That it is a
Catholic Doctrine, the Doctrine of the Church.

The Pope has a Supreme Power of disposing the Temporal things of all
Christians in order to a ^piritual good, De su^^. Pontis. l 5. c. 6.
says Bellarmine. And Becanus discourses of this very largely in his book of
the English Controversy, printed by Albin at Mentz, 1612. But because this
book was ordered to be purged, ( Una litura potest) we shall not insist upon
it; but there is as bad which was never censured. Ibid. c. 7.
Bellarmine says, that the Ecclesiastical Republic can command and compel the
Temporal, which is indeed its Subject, to change the Administration, and to
depose Princes, and to appoint others, when it cannot otherwise defend the
Spiritual good: and F. Suarez says the same. Defen^. F^d Cath. l. 3. c. 23
sect. 10. and sect. 18. and 20.
The power of the Pope extends it self to the coertion of Kings with Temporal
punishments, and depriving them of their Kingdoms, when necessity requires;
nay, this power is more necessary over Princes than over Subjects. The same
also is taught by Santarel in his book of Heresy and Schism, printed at Rome,
1626.

But the mischief of this Doctrine proceeds a little further.

Cardinal Tolet affirms, and our Countryman Father Bridgewater commends the
saying; Ca^ce^. Eccl. i^. (...). ^ol. 336.
That when a Prince is Excommunicate, before the Denunciation the Subjects are
not absolved from their Oath of Allegiance, (as Cajetan says well;) yet when it
is denounced, they are not only absolved from their Obedience, but are bound
not to obey, unless the fear of death, or loss of goods excuse them; which was
the case of the English Catholics in the time of Henry the VIII. In Philopat.
sect. 2. n. 160. and 162.
And F. Creswel says it is the sentence of a^l Catholics, that Subjects are
bound to expel Heretical Princes if they have strength enough; and that to
this they are tied by the Commandment of God, the most strict tie of
Conscience, and the extreme danger of their souls. Nay, even before the
sentence is declared, though the Subjects are not bound to it, yet lawfully
they may deny obedience to an Heretical Prince, T^m 3. disp. 1 q. 12 punct. 2
said Gregory de Valentia.

It were an endless labor to transcribe the horrible Doctrines which are
preached in the Jesuits School, to the shaking of the Regal Power of such
Princes which are not of the Roman Communion. The whole economy of it is well
described by Bellarmine, ^^nt. Barol. ^. 7.
who affirms, That it does not belong to Monks, or other Ecclesiastics, to
commit Murders, neither do the Popes use to proceed that way. But their manner
is, first Fatherly to correct Princes, then by Ecclesiastical Censures to
deprive them of the Communion, then to absolve their Subjects from the Oath of
Allegiance, and to deprive them of their Kingly Dignity. And what then? The
Execution belongs to others.] This is the way of the Popes, thus wisely and
moderately to break Kings in pieces.

We delight not to aggravate evil things. We therefore forbear to set down
those horrid things spoken by Sa, Mariana, Santarel, Carolus Scribanius, and
some others. It is enough that Suarez says, Vbi supra, l^ 6. c. 6. sect. 24.
An Excommunicate King may with impunity be deposed or killed by any one. This
is the case of Kings and Princes by the Sentence of the chiefest Roman Doctors.
And if it be objected, that we are commanded to obey Kings, not to speak evil
of them, not to curse them, no not in our heart: There is a way found out to
answer these little things. For though the Apostle commands that we should be
subject to higher powers, and obey Kings, and all that are in Authority: It is
true, you must, and so you may well enough for all this; for the Pope can make
that he who is a King shall be no King, and then you are disobliged: so
Bellarmine. Cont. Bar^l. c. 7.
And if after all this there remains any scruple of Conscience, it ought to be
remembered, that though even after a Prince is excommunicated, it should be of
it self a sin to depose or kill the Prince; yet if the Pope commands you, it is
no sin. For if the Pope should err by commanding sin, or forbidding virtues,
yet the Church were bound to believe that the vices were good, and the virtues
evil; unless she would sin against her Conscience. D^ To. Po^tif. l. 4. c. 5.
They are the very words of Bellarmine.

But they add more particulars of the same Bran. The sons of an Heretical
father are made sui juris, that is, free from their fathers power. A Catholic
Wife is not tied to pay her duty to an Heretical Husband, and the servants are
not bound to do service to such masters. These are the Doctrines of their great
Azorius; and as for Kings, he affirms, they may be deposed for Heresy. But all
this is only in the case of Heretical Princes: But what for others?

Even the Roman Catholic Princes are not free from this danger. All the world
knows what the Pope did to King Chilperick of France: He deposed him, and put
Pipin in his place; and did what he could to have put Albert King of the Romans
in the Throne of Philip surnamed the Fair. They were the Popes of Rome who
armed the Son against the Father, the Emperor Henry IV. and the Son fought
against him, took him prisoner, shaved him, and thrust him into a Monastery,
where he died with grief and hunger. We will not speak of the Empe^our
Frederick, Henry the sixth, Emperor; the Duke of Savoy, against whom he caused
Charles the V. and Francis the I. of France, to take arms; nor of Francis
Dandalus, Duke of Venice, whom he bound with chains, and fed him as Dogs are
fed, with bones and scraps under his Table: Our own Henry the II. and King John
were great Instances of what Princes in their case may expect from that
Religion. These were the piety of the Father of Christendom. But these were the
product of the Doctrine which Clement the V. vented in the Council of Vienna,
Omne jus Regum a se pendere: The rights of all Kings depend upon the Pope. And
therefore even their Catholic Princes are at their mercy, and they would if
they durst use them accordingly: If they do but favor Heretics or
Schismatics, receive them or defend them; if the Emperor be perjured, if he
rashly break a League made with the Sea Apostolic, if he do not keep the peace
promised to the Church, if he be sacrilegious, if he dissipate the goods of the
Church, the Pope may depose him, said Azorius. And Santarel says, ^us^i^.
Moral. part. 2. l. 10. ^. 9.
he may do it, in case the Prince or Emperor be insufficient, if he be wicked,
if he be unprofitable, if he does not defend the Church. This is very much, Vbi
supra.
but yet there is something more; this may be done, if he impose new Gabels or
Imposts upon his Subjects, without the Popes leave; for if they do not pretend
to this also, why does the Pope in Bulla Coenae Dominici excommnnicate all
Princes that do it? See Mart. Vivaldus de bulla coenae Dominici.


Now if it be inquired, by what Authority the Pope does these things? It is
answered, That the Pope has a Supreme and Absolute Authority; both the
Spiritual and the Temporal Power is in the Pope as Christ's Vicar, said Azorius
and Santarel. The Church has the right of a superior Lord over the rights of
Princes and their Temporalties; and that by her Jurisdiction she disposes of
Temporals ut de suo peculio, as of her own proper goods, said our Countreyman
Weston, Sanctuar. Iur. Pontifici^ qu. 15. sect. 5. qu. 17. sect. 6. and qu. 27.
sect. 7. Catal. lor. mundi part. 4. ^onsid. 7. ex Zoderico.
Rector of the College at D^way. Nay, the Pope has power in omnia, per omnia,
super omnia in all things, thorough all things, and over all things; and the
sublimity and immensity of the Supreme Bishop is so great, that no mortal man
can comprehend it, said Cassenaeus; no man can express it, no man can think it:
So that it is no wonder what Papirius Massonus said of Pope Boniface the VIII.
that he owned himself not only as the Lord of France, V^rb. Bonif. 8.
but of all the World.

Now we are sure it will be said, That this is but the private opinion of some
Doctors, not the Doctrine of the Church of Rome. To this we reply: 1. It is not
the private opinion of a few, but their public Doctrine owned, and offered to
be justified to all the World, as appears in the preceding testimonies. 2. It
is the opinion of all the Jesuit Order, which is now the greatest and most
glorious in the Church of Rome, and the maintenance of it, is the subject
matter of their new Vow of obedience to the Pope, that is to advance his
Grandeur. 3. Not only the Jesuits, but all the Canonists in the Church of Rome
contend earnestly for these Doctrines. 4. This they do upon the Authority of
the Decretals, their own Law De major. and obedient. unam Sanctam. In ^xtrav.
Benif. 8. council. Later. sub Iulio 2. In Extrav. Ioh. 22. cap. C^m in^er
nonnullos. In gloss. fi^al. edit. Paris. 1503. council. Viennens. sub Clem. 5.
, and the Decrees of Councils. 5. Not only the Jesuits, and Canonists, but
others also of great note amongst them, earnestly contend for these Doctrines;
particularly Cass^naeus, Zodericus Vbi supr^ in Cass^naeo.
, the Archbishop of Florence Sum 3. part. l. 22. ^. 6. sect 4.
, Petrus de Monte In s^a Monarchia quem citat Felinus in cap. Si quando, ubi
per eum extrav. de rescript.
, St. Thomas Aquinas In tract. de Rege and Regno ad Regem Cypri.
Bozius, Baronius, and many others. 6. Themselves tell^ us it is a matter of
Faith; F. Creswell In P^i opa^r. sect. 2. n. 160,162.
says, it is the sentence of all Catholics; and they that do not admit these
Doctrines, Father Rosweyd Lib. de fide h^ret. s^rvanda.
calls them half Christians, Grinners, barking Royalists, and a new Sect of
Catholics; and Eudaemon Ioannes In epist. m^^itor. ad Ioh. Barclai.
says, That without question it is a Heresy in the judgment of all
Catholics. Now in such things which are not in their Creeds, and public
Confessions, from whence should we know the Doctrines of their Church, but from
their chiefest and most leading Doctors; who it is certain, would fain have all
the World believe it to be the Doctrine of their Church? And therefore as it is
certain that any Roman Catholic may with allowance be of this opinion; so he
will be esteemed the better and more zealous Catholic if he be; and if it were
not for fear of Princes, who will not lose their Crowns for their foolish
Doctrines, there is no peradventure but it would be declared to be de fide, a
matter of faith, as diverse of them of late, do not stick to say. And of this
the Pope gives but too much evidence, since he will not take away the scandal,
which is so greatly given to all Christian Kings and Republics, by a public
and a just condemnation of it. Nay, it is worse than thus; for Sixtus Quintus
upon the XI of September, A. D. 1589. in an Oration in a Conclave of Cardinals,
did solemnly commend the Monk that killed Henry the III. of France. The Oration
was printed at Paris by them that had rebelled against that Prince, and
avouched for Authentic by Boucher, Decreil, and Ancelein: And though some
would fain have it thought to be none of his, yet Bellarmine dares not deny it,
In re^p. ad Apo^o^^ prouiam ^ide^it.
but makes for it a crude, and a cold Apology.

Now concerning this Article, it will not be necessary to declare the Sentence
of the Church of England and Ireland; because it is notorious to all the World;
and is expressly opposed against this Roman Doctrine, by Laws, Articles,
Confessions, Homilies, the Oath of Allegiance and Supremacy, the Book of
Christian Institution, and the many excellent writings of King James of Blessed
Memory, of our ^^^hops and other Learnned persons against Bellarmine, Parsons,
Eudaemon Johannes, Creswel, and others: And nothing is more notorious than that
the Church of England is most dutiful, most zealous for the right of Kings; and
within these four and twenty years, she has had many Martyrs, and very, very
many Confessors ia this cause.

It is true, that the Church of Rome does recriminate in this point, and
charges some Calvinists and Presbyterians with Doctrines which indeed they
borrowed from Rome, using their Arguments, making use of their Expressions, and
pursuing their Principles. But with them in this Article we have nothing to do,
but to reprove the men, and condemn their Doctrine, as we have done all along,
by private Writings, and public Instruments.

We conclude these our reproofs with an Exhortation to our respective Charges,
to all that desire to be saved in the day of the Lord Jesus, tha^ they decline
from these horrid Doctrines, which in their birth are new, in their growth are
scandalous, in their proper consequents are in^initely dangerous to their
souls, and hunt for their precious life: But therefore it is highly fit that
they also should perceive their own advantages, and give God praise, that they
are immured from such infinite drngers, by the Holy Precepts, and holy Faith
taught and commanded in the Church of England and Ireland; in which the Word of
God is set before them as a Lantern to their feet, and a light unto their eyes;
and the Sacraments are fully administered according to Christ's Institution, and
Repentance is preached according to the measures of the Gospel, and Faith in
Christ is propounded according to the rule of the Apostles, and the measures of
the Churches Apostolical; and obedience to Kings is greatly and sacredly urged,
and the Authority and Order of Bishops is preserved, against the usurpation of
the Pope, and the invasion of Schismatics and Aerians new and old; and Truth
and Faith to all men is kept and preached to be necessary and inviolable, and
the Commandments are expounded with just severity, and without scruples; and
holiness of life is urged upon all men, as indispensably necessary to
salvation, and therefore without any allowances, tricks, and little artifices
of escaping from it by easy and imperfect Doctrines; and every thing is
practiced which is useful to the saving of our souls; and Christ's Merits and
Satisfaction are entirely relied upon for the pardon of our sins; and the
necessity of good works is universally taught; and our prayers are holy,
unblameable, edifying and understood; they are according to the measures of the
Word of God, and the practice of all Saints. In this Church the children are
duly, carefully, and rightly baptized, and the baptized, in their due time are
Confirmed, and the Confirmed are Communicated; and Penitents are absolved, and
the Impenitents punished and discouraged; and Holy Marriage in all men is
preferr^d before unclean Concubinate in any; and Nothing is wanting that God
and his Christ has made necessary to salvation.

Behold we set before you Life and Death, Blessing and Cursing, Safety and
Danger. Choose which you will; but remember that the Prophets who are among
you, have declared to you the way of salvation. Now the Lord give you
understanding in all things, and reveal even this also unto you. Amen.

FINIS.
Books and Sermons written by J. Tailor D.D. Lord Bishop of Down and Connor.
(...), A Course of Sermons for all the Sundays of the year; together with a
discourse of the Divine Institution, Necessity, Sacredness and Separation of
the Office Ministerial, in fol. 2. The Histo^y of the ^ife and Death of the
Ever-blessed Jesus Christ, the third Edition in fol. 3. The Rule and Exercises
of holy living, in 8. 4. The Rule and Exercises of holy dying, in 8. 5. The
Golden Grove, or A Manual of daily Praye^s, fitted to the days of the week,
together with a short Method of Peace and Holiness, in 12. 6. A Collection of
Po^emical and Moral discourses in fol. newly reprinted. 7. A D^scourse of the
Nature, Offices and Measure of Frien^ship, in 12. new. 8. A Collection of
Offices or fo^ms of Prayer fitted to the needs of all Christians, taken out of
the Script^res and Ancient Li^u^gies of s^veral Churches, e^pecially the Greek,
together with the Psalter or Psalms of David after the Kings Transl^tion, in a
large ^ct^vo, newly pub. 9. Ductor Dubitantium, or the Rule of Conscience, fol.
in two volumes. 10. The Doctrine and Practice of Repentance, describ^ng the
necessities of a Strict, a Holy and a Christian Li^e: Serving as a necessary
Supplement unto the Rule of Conscience. 11. (...), A Supplement to the (...),
or course of Sermons for the whole year. All that have been Preached and
Published (since the Restoration) to which is adjoined, his Advice to the
Clergy of hi^ Diocese. 12. The Wo^thy Communicant, or a Discourse of the
Nature, Effects, and Blessings cons^quent to the worthy receiving of the Lords
Supper Printed for I. Martin. 13 A Discourse of confirmation in 8. new. 13. A
Dissuasive from Popery in 8. new.
All sold by R. Royston.


