A TREATISE Of CLEANNESS in Meats and Drinks, OF THE PREPARATION of FOOD, THE
Excellency of Good Airs, AND THE BENEFITS of Clean Sweet BEDS. Also of the
Generation of Bugs, AND THEIR CURE. To which is added, A SHORT DISCOURSE OF THE
PAIN in the TEETH, Showing from what Cause it does chiefly proceed, and also
how to prevent it. By THO. TRYON.

LONDON, Printed for the Author, and sold by L. Curtis near Fleet-Bridge. 1682.

Of Cleanness in Meats and Drinks. Of the Excellency of Good Airs, and of the
contrary. Of the Benefits of Clean Sweet Beds, and of the Inconveniences of
Feather-Beds. What Matter it is that does occasion the Generation of that
pernicious Vermin called Bugs, that so many Hundreds in this City, and other
great Towns, are infested with; more especially in Holland, Italy, New England,
Barbados, Jamaica, and in many other Places. That they are never bred but
where Beds are: And that their being generated from Wooden Bedsteads, or from
Hogs Hair in the Plaisterings of the Walls, is a mere Story, promoted
inconfiderately by Persons mistaken in the Productions of Nature: Also, How all
such Persons as are troubled with them may be cured without using Medicines,
and Directions how to avoid ever having them again.

1. Of Cleanness in Food. WHat is more profitable for all Lovers of Health and
Wisdom, than Food that is Radically Clean? And as Bread has deservedly the
first Place, together with Herbs, and various sorts of excellent Fruits; so the
next is Milk, which of it self is a brave, mild, and most friendly Food to
Nature, very fit and profitable for all Ages and Complexions; and if it do not
agree with some People, it is because their Stomachs are made sharp and sowred
by superfluity of dainty Food, and the continual use of strong Drink. Also Milk
being altered, it makes many sorts of wholesome healthy Food. Next to these, are
various sorts of Flesh, which being killed in their proper Times and Seasons,
and when they are free from their Uncleanness, Surfeits, and other
Inconveniences, which most Beasts are subject to; and if care be taken also
that they be well and moderately seasoned with Salt, and boiled in plenty of
River or Spring Water (which is the best of all Waters except Rainwater) they
become wholesome Nourishment. For, River-water has the advantage of running
through various sorts of Earth, by which it sucks into it self a fat, oily,
and saline Quality, which the Surface of the Earth does plentifully afford;
which also is the cause of all Vegitation, and the lovely Green Color which
all Vegitables are clothed with, does arise from this Saline Quality. For these
Reasons, River-water will Brew, Boil, and Wash, and it is more profitable in
all Uses in Houswifery, than Spring or Pump-water, and far wholesomer for Men
and Beasts to drink. Also your Vessel in which your Food is boiled, ought to be
uncovered all the time it boyls; for if the Air have not its free egress and
regress, the pure Spirits in the Food become as it were suffocated, and then
the Food so prepared becomes dull and heavy; for the Air is the Essential Life
of the Spirit; and all Food that has not plenty of Water, and the free
Influences of the Air, in its Preparation, does certainly lose its natural
Color, with the pure Smell and Taste: for if those three Qualities be not
preserved in all Preparations of Food, then the genuine Virtue and lively
Tinctures are in part lost. The same is to be observed in all Physical
Operations. And if the abovementioned Order be not observed, then the Food is
not so pleasant to the Palate, nor so easy of Concoction; it lies heavy in
the Stomach, dulling and stupifying the Senses; it generates a gross
Nourishment, and bad Blood, whence does proceed many Diseases: Whereas if the
abovementioned Rules be observed; and your Fire quick, that your Food do not
stand still, or cease from boiling, till it be sufficiently done, the Effects
are contrary. It is also much better the Food should be a little underprepared,
than too much: For when the gross plegmatick Body of any Food is by Preparation
digested, then presently the lively spirituous Quality is set at liberty,
whence does proceed a most pleasant Smell and Taste; which pleasant Quality,
before the Preparation, lay hid or captivated in the Body of Phlegm; but so
soon as this phlegmatic Body is in part destroyed, the Spirit becomes
Volatile; and then, if the Preparation be continued, those pure Spirits do
either become suffocated, or evaporate; and then the sweet Balsamic Body turns
as it were sour. For these Reasons, all sorts of Food, either over prepared, or
twice prepared, are of a strong fulsom taste and smell; as all Meats heat
again, and also Pottages, and all such things, do obstruct Nature, and generate
many Diseases. But if the forementioned Rules be observed, the Food so prepared
is not only more pleasant to the Palate, but far lighter of Digestion, and
breeds better Blood. For that Universal Distemper (the Scurvy) which reigns so
much in England, is chiefly caused by Food ill prepared, and the eating of too
much Flesh, and Fat things, especially in the improper Seasons of the Year,
viz. from July to the last of November. In this Season the Sun, which is the
true Life and Power of all things, declines; and all sorts of Herbage, which is
the Food of all Beasts that are generally eaten, does the same: The Grass all
this Season is fraught with a gross phlegmatic Matter; besides, it is a fainty
hot time; the Air, which is the Cherishing Life of all things, is more gross,
and full of Humidity, than all other times of the Year; the Spirits of all
sorts of Creatures are also weak, and on any Accidents are quickly wounded, or
evaporated, more especially those Beasts that come from remote Parts to great
Cities. Besides, it is then the principal time of their Generating, which
renders them unclean. Are not the People ten-fold as sickly in this Season, and
double the number die, than they do at other times? Also you may observe, That
the Rots amongst Sheep, and Murrains that attend other Beasts, are all or most
of them in this Season: Therefore all sorts of People ought to be more careful
of their Health, both in Exercises, Meats, and Drink, that they do not exceed
either in quantity, nor eat things that are improper in quality. This is the
time that all Shepherds, and also those that are Drivers of Horses, and indeed
all that have the Government of Cattle, ought to have and use double the
prudence in the management of them, than at other Seasons of the Year, as I
have more largely discoursed in a small Treatise, which I intend to put forth,
if I am permitted, of the Preservation of Sheep from the Rot, and Horses from
Surfeits.

There are three Marks by which every one may know whether the Flesh be good
The first is by its pure White and brisk Red Color, when Raw. The second is by
its continuing its firmness, being plump or swelled when boiled, having a brisk
and lively Taste, and that after eating it feels easy and pleasant in the
Stomach. The third is, by its taking Salt well; for if your Flesh be free from
Heat and Surfeits, and not over-fed, which charges the Body with gross Phlegm;
as also if it be not kept longer after it is killed (as indeed it ought not)
than it be thought to be cold, before it is salted; all such Flesh will take
Salt greedily, and it will not only keep longer from Putrefaction, but it will
eat much sweeter, and breed better Nourishment. For, if any sort of Cattle be
over-fed, furfeited, or any other Inconveniency attends them, and they be
killed before they have recovered themselves of those Injuries; or if it be in
August, September, or October, this Flesh will not take Salt so well as the
former, neither will the Salt preserve it half so long from Corruption. Also,
as it is beforementioned, if Flesh be kept too long after it be killed, such
Flesh will not receive Salt into it, as other will, which is salted as soon as
it is cold: For by keeping it does certainly lose its pure Spirituous Quality,
so that the Body becomes heavy, gross, and dull. Does not the Life and Spirits
of most sorts of Food waste and evaporate by keeping, if there be not a proper
way of Preservation used? If Flesh, by any Inconveniences, have lost its pure
lively Spirits and Virtue, Salt then has no power to preserve such Flesh from
Putrefaction: For Salt cannot preserve the Body from Corruption, but by virtue
of the pure subtle Spirits, which are a pleasant Habitation for the Salt to
incorporate it self with: For Salt will not preserve Flesh from Putrefaction,
any longer than the Virtue and Power of the Spirit does continue, as it does
appear by all salted Flesh and Fish: For through length of time the Spirits
become either suffocated, or evaporated, and then it presently falls into
Putrefaction: And yet this same Flesh does still continue Salt; for Salt does
not destroy and purge the Flesh from its Corruption, but incorporates it self
with the Essential Spirits, and those two do as it were tie or hold the corrupt
Part Captive, till the Spirit and Life of the Flesh be spent or wasted, and
then the Flesh falls into Putrefaction, which cannot be recovered, eitheir by
Salting, or any other Art, to its first state: But if the Salt had purged or
destroyed the Humidity and gross part, then there would have been no Room nor
Matter for Putrefaction, and then it would have continued firm and sound, as
many other things do, which are freed from that gross humid Matter from which
Putrefaction does proceed. Therefore Flesh is naturally the most unclean of all
Food, it being of a gross phlegmatic Nature; and if Care be not taken, and
Order and Temperance observed in the Eater, it generates abundance of crude and
noxious Humors.

2. Cleanness in Houses, especially in Beds, is a great Preserver of Health.
Now Beds for the most part stand in Corners of Chambers, and being ponderous
close Substances, the refreshing Influences of the Air have no power to
penetrate or destroy the gross. Humidity that all such Places contract, where
the Air has not its free egress and regress. In these shady dull Places Beds
are continued for many Years, and hardly see the Sun or Elements. Besides, Beds
suck in and receive all sorts of pernicious Excrements that are breathed forth
by the Sweating of various sorts of People, which have Leprous and Languishing
Diseases, which lie and die on them: The Beds, I say, receive all the^^ several
Vapors and Spirits, and the same Beds are often continued for several
Generations, without changing the Feathers, until the Ticks be rotten. Besides,
we have many Feathers that are Imported from several Countries, which are the
Drivings of old Beds, the Uncleanness whereof is not considered. As to the
Nature of Feathers, they are of a strong, hot, fulsom Quality: for, Fowls, of
all Creatures, are for the most part the hottest; and their Feathers contain
the same Nature: Therefore the constant lying on soft Feather-beds, does not
only over-heat the Back and Reins, weakening the Joints and Nerves; but they
have power also not only to receive but retain all evil Vapors and Excrements
that proceed from, and are breathed forth by various Diseased People. Hence it
comes to pass, that sundry Distempers are transferred from one to another, by
lying upon or in such Beds, which Distempers do secretly steal on a Man by
degrees, so that he cannot imagine whence the disorder proceeds, or what the
Cause thereof should be. But I would not have the Reader mistake me; all People
are not subject to get Diseases this way: There are some whose Constitutions
are strong, and their Natural Heat and Spirits are vigorous and lively, by the
Power and Virtue whereof they withstand and repel all such evil Vapors and
Scents as do proceed from such Beds, when a Man is hot and sweats in them, that
they have no power to seize the Spirit: But, on the contrary, when such People
shall lie on such Beds, whose Natural Heat is weak, their Spirits few, and
whose Central Heat is not able to withstand or repel those Vapors and Scents
which such Beds send sorth when a Man is hot in them, this last sort of People
are subject to receive Injuries, and contract Diseases: For those evil Vapors
do powerfully penetrate the whole Body; and if they are not withstood by the
Central Heat and Power of the Spirits, then these evil Vapors do seize the
Spirits, and incorporate themselves with their Likenesses: For every particular
thing does sensibly and powerfully seek out its Likeness, and wheresoever it
finds its Simile, it has power to incorporate, and become essential. These are
the chief Reasons why one Man gets Diseases by lying with Diseased Persons, and
in unclean Beds, and others not. It is a general Custom, when Men go abroad or
travel, to desire clean Sheets, imagining them to be a sufficient Bulwark to
defend them from the pernicious Fumes and Vapors of old stale Beds; bu^ it is
too short. For, it is certain, that most or all Beds do perfectly stink, not
only those in Inns and Houses of Entertainment, but others: Not but that every
ones Bed does smell indifferent well to himself; but when he lies in a strange
Bed, let a Man but put his Nose into the Bed when he is thoroughly hot, and
hardly any Common Vault is like it.

Now this sort of Uncleanness, which does proceed from old Beds, is not only
the greatest, but also the most injurious to the Health and Preservation of
Mankind, and the least care is taken to prevent it: Every one that can, will
have plentiful Changes both of Linen and Woollen Garments; for if they have
not, Experience does show, that the Excrements and Breathings of the Body will
generate Vermin. Also do not most People take care that their Furnitures are
daily brushed and rubbed, and their very Floors washed, as though they were to
eat their Food on them? But all this while they lie on Beds that have not been
changed, or hardly aired, in several Years. Let any indifferent Person judge,
which is most pleasurable and healthful, to have a clean Floor to tread on,
which costs many hard days Labor to keep so, and is dirtied in a Moments time;
or to have a clean sweet Bed to lie on. There is no Comparison to be made, the
difference is so great; the one being essential either to Health or Sickness;
the other an indifferent thing. If there was but the tenth part of the Care
taken to keep Beds clean and sweet, as there is of Clothing and Furniture, then
there would be no Matter for the getting of Diseases, nor for the Generation of
Bugs. I would have all Housewifes, and others, consider the Reasons of these
things. Are not Lice, that troublesome Vermin, bred from the Breathings of the
Body, for want of often Change both of Linen and Woollen? And will not Fleas
breed from the very Dust of Chambers where People lie? Also any Woollen that
has been used about Beds, although the cold Winter has destroyed them, yet if
these Clothes lie in any close place, where the Air has not its free egress
and regress, these very Garments will generate Fleas the Summer following: but
if these Clothes had never been used about Men and Women, they would never have
bred Fleas: for there is no Matter of Element in Wool or Cloth for the
Generation of such Creatures; but Wool, Cloth, Furs, and Hair are chiefly the
Eliment of Moths, and sometimes of small Worms; that is, if such things are
kept in Places where the refreshing Influences of the Air have not their free
egress: for all such Places do contract great store of Moisture, which, when
hot Weather comes, causes Putrefaction, whence all such Vermin do proceed. But
if those things be in daily use, and exposed to the open Element, they never
breed any Vermin: So that the Generation of those things are generally caused
by Accidents; not but that there is Matter in the Radixes of such things for
the Generation of such Vermin.

3. From the pernicious Smells and putrified Vapors that do proceed from old
Beds, are generated the Vermin called Bugs, (of which, neither the Ancients,
nor the Modern Writers of this Age, have taken any notice) according to the
Degrees of Uncleanness, Nature of the Excrements, and the Closeness of the
Places where Beds stand: for some Peoples Excremenes are not so unclean as
others: Also in all close Places, especially in Cities and Great Towns, the
Spirits and thin Vapors of the Air are suffocated, which makes the same Air
Sulphurous and Humid, whence does proceed Putrefaction. Therefore it is not to
be thought a General Rule, That all old Beds should breed Bugs, as some (who
are ignorant of the Operations of Nature) will be apt to say, If one Bed do
breed them, why not all? No, it is according to the nature of the Uncleanness,
and other Accidents that do happen: For where (as is said before) the thin pure
Air, with the refreshing Influences of the Sun and Elements, have their free
egress and regress, all such Matter is destroyed whence such Vermin is
produced. The Original of these Creatures called Bugs is from Putrefaction,
occasioned by stinking Scents and Vapors which do proceed from the Bodies and
Nature of Men and Women, and the mixing or incorporating of these Vapors with
moist and sulphurous Airs: For where there is no Heat nor Humidity, there can
begin no Putrefaction. Therefore all that have attributed the Generation of
this Vermin to Wood, as Bedsteads, and the like, are grossly mistaken in the
Productions of Nature; for there is no Matter in Wood that can generate such a
Vermin, it being productive only or chiefly of two Creatures in England, viz.
of Wood-Lice, and a small Worm. These Wood-Lice are never generated but in
Places where the Sun and Air have not their free Influences, so that there is
store of Humidity contracted; and when the Sun comes to such Degrees of the
Zodiac, this Creature is generated, which is of as different a Nature from
Bugs, as sweet Wood is from a stinking Bed. Also Wood does breed a certain
small Worm, but never till the Salts Nature and Power is decayed through length
of time; then the Air enters it, which does presently cause it to contract a
humid Quality, from whence proceeds Putrefaction, whereof, when the Sun is
powerful, this Worm is bred. But so long as Wood continues sound, and is kept
dry, the Air having its free Influences on it, I affirm, That no sort of Wood
ever breeds any kind of Vermin.

4. There are many also that attribute the Generation of this Creature to Hogs
Hair, which being mixed with Lime, and Houses Plaistered with it, does occasion
(say they) the Generation of Bugs. Now it is most certain, that there is no
possibility in Nature for this Production: For no kind of Hair ever breeds any
Living Creature, except it be put into Water or Mud when the Sun is powerful,
and then this Creature, thus generated, retains its first Species, viz. a Hair,
with a live Head, which was its Element whence it proceeded: but if you take it
out of the Water, it presently dies: So also it does when the Sun declines in
Heat, as most sorts of Vermin that are bred through Heat and Moisture do. But
Hair being mixed with Lime, all Matter of Generation is thereby totally
destroyed: For Lime does chiesly contain a harsh, fiery, keen, sharp, corroding
Quality; it is so sharp, that it does destroy all Life, and is as contrary to
it, as Light is to Darkness; the predominant Quality in it is the Salts Nature,
from which no Living Creature can be produced. Besides, if there were never so
much Matter in Hair for the Generation of such Vermin, Lime would destroy it;
for in Lime there is only a Sal-nitral fiery Virtue.

5. If the Reasons beforementioned be not sufficient to convince the Ignorant
of their erroneous Opinions in this particular, then I hope the following one
will, which is more familiar to every one. It has never been known, that this
troublesome Vermin was ever seen in Warehouses, Kitchens, Parlours,
Dining-rooms, or any Places where Beds have never been, except they have by
accident been brought into such Rooms or Warehouses, by Furniture of Chambers
that have been troubled with them, though all such Places have the same
Furniture as Chambers, except Beds.

6. From the same Substance or Matter whence Bugs are bred, is also occasioned
the Generation of many nasty Diseases in the Blood; so that the destruction of
the Matter that breeds them, is of greater Consequence than most People are
sensible of: And if these following Rules be observed, I dare affirm, That the
Generation of Bugs will cease, and also many other Inconveniences and
Distempers, that are got by this sort of Uncleanness, will be avoided.

First, You are to destroy all Press-Bedsteads which stand in Corners of Rooms,
being made up with Boards so close, that the Air cannot penetrate or dry up and
consume the moist sulphurous Vapors that are contracted. These sorts of Beds,
that stand so, are apt to have them more than others. Also you are to set your
other sorts of Beds as near as you can in the most Airie Places of your Rooms,
exposing them to the Air the most part of the day, with your Chamber-Windows
open, that the Air may freely pass, which is the most excellent Element, that
does sweeten all things, and prevents Putrefaction. In the Night also you ought
not to have your Window-Curtains drawn, nor your Curtains that are about your
Beds; for it hinders the sweet refreshing Influences of the Air, so that the
Air of all close Places becomes of a hot sulphurous Nature and Operation; the
thin pure Vapors, which do wonderfully refresh Nature, are as it were
suffocated: And this preventing the Influences of the Air, is in an especial
manner observable, when People are sick, or out of order; as though the sweet
pleasant Air had been the Cause of their Disease: such Rooms being so very
close, with great Fires in them, that if a healthy Person do but continue three
or four Hours in them, the fulsom Steams and thick Vapors will much disorder
him, and take away the edge of his Appetite: And if so, what will the Operation
be on those whose Spirits are weak and disordered with Distempers.

What is more pleasant and healthful than good Air? It chears and comforts the
Spirits, it opens the Passages of the Joints and Nerves, it purifies the Blood,
creates an Appetite, increasing Strength and Vigor: But, on the contrary, hot,
thick, sulphurous Airs do not only obstruct the Passages of the Spirits, but
suffocate them, loading the Joints and Nerves with evil Juices, whereby the
Limbs and Members become full of pain, causing a general Tenderness to possess
the whole Body, and destroying the Appetite, and the Power of the Digestive
Faculty in the Stomach. Also, do not all Houses and Places grow musty, and
contract too great store of Moisture, if the Air be any way prevented, by
Window-shutters, or the like, that it cannot have its free egress and regress?
Therefore moderate Clothing, hard Beds, Houses that stand so as that the
pleasant Briezes of Wind may air and refresh them, and also Houses that are
full of Windows, are to be preferred: For where the Air has not its free
Influences, the Spirit becomes dull and heavy, this being the true Life of the
Spirit in every thing.

7. Now the certain Means and Way not only to prevent the Generation of this
Vermin, but also to preserve* Health and Strength, are Straw, or rather
Chaff-Beds, with Ticks of Canvas, and Quilts made of Wool or Flocks to lay on
them; which certainly is the most easy and pleasant Lodging that can be
invented: and a little Custom will make it appear friendly to Nature, and in
every respect far beyond the softest Feather-beds, on which, when a Man lies
down, he sinks into them, as into an Hole, with Banks rising on each side of
him; especially if two lie together, when first they go to Bed they lie close,
and after a little time, when they begin to be hot or sweat, they are generally
willing to lie a little further off, that they may cool themselves, but cannot
do it without great difficulty and trouble, by reason of the softness of the
Bed, and those Banks that rise on each side. Besides, such soft Feather-Beds do
over-heat the Reins and Back, making all the Parts tender, and causing
Sweatings and many other Inconveniences to attend the Body. Feather-beds also
are nothing so easy as Quilts, after a little time being accustomed to them;
they are also extreme fulsom, and by their Heat they do powerfully dry up the
Radical Moisture, causing a general Faintness to attend the whole Body. But, on
the contrary, hard, even Beds, that lie smooth, are not only easy through
custom, as is mentioned before; but a Man may turn freely, both sleeping and
waking: They harden and strengthen the whole Body, especially the Back and
Reins, make the Nerves and Sinews strong, preventing the immoderate Evacuations
by Sweating, and keeping the Body in a temperate Heat. Besides, such Beds may
be often changed, with but little Trouble, and less Cost; they send forth no
stinking Fumes or Steams, as Feather-beds do; but are sweet and clean.
Certainly nothing is more healthy, next to Temperance in Meat and Drink, than
clean hard Beds.

8. All sorts of Beds, especially Feather-beds, ought to be changed, driven, or
washed, at the least three or four times in a Year; or else it is impossible to
keep them sweet and clean, and to prevent the Generation of Vermin, or the
other Inconveniences beforementioned. Would not every one condemn a Man, if
he should wear a Shirt a Year, and lie in Sheets seven Years? Which if any
should do, it would not either endanger his Health, or bring half the
Inconveniences on his Body, as old stinking Feather-beds do; which possibly
stunk before ever they were lain on, by reason of the fulsom Excrements that
the Quills of the Feathers contain. Also Feathers do certainly contain an
unclean putrified Matter, that has a near affinity with the Nature of Bugs;
and therefore Feather-beds are more apt to breed them, than Wool, or Flocks;
though both will do it, if the forementioned Rules be not observed. But if you
are not willing, or so lowly-minded, to have Straw or Chaff-Beds under your
Quilts, then you may have Flock-Beds, with Canvas Tickings, which may be both
aired and washed as often as you please, with little Trouble and Charge. If any
shall question the Truth of what I have alleged concerning Beds, I desire they
would please but to try the Experiment, by filling a Bed with the freshest and
cleanest Straw or Chaff, which will smell very pleasant; and having so done,
let them lie on it half a Year, in a corner of a Room, as Beds generally stand,
and then smell to it; and in stead of sending forth a pleasant Scent, as it did
at first, it will send forth a strong, fulsom, musty Steam or Fume. And if this
will do so, what will Feathers do, that in the Root of Nature are unclean
fulsom Excrements, of a hot strong Quality? Therefore they have the greater
power not only to attract and suck in to themselves the fulsom Excrements that
are breathed forth of the Body by Sweatin^gs, and the like; but they have also
power to retain such evil Vapors: and when others come to lie on them, and are
thoroughly hot, it awakens those pernicious Steams, which often bring many
Inconveniences on the Body. Besides, it is very unpleasant to lie in such
Beds; a Man must always be forced to keep his Nose above-board. Indeed each
Man's own Bed does not stink or smell strong to himself, because he is
accustomed to it; neither does a Tallow-Chandler smell those horrible Scents
and pernicious Fumes that old Tallow sends forth when it is melted: But let any
other Person, that is not accustomed to it, be near such things, and it will be
very offensive to him. Even so it is in all other stinking Trades, and things
of this rature: so that the greatest Slut in the World does hardly smell her
own House or Bed stink: For in Man is contained the true Nature and Property of
all things, both of Good and Evil; therefore he is both liable and also apt to
receive all Impressions, and to be wrought on by all things he shall either
communicate with or join himself to, whether it be Cleanness, or the contrary.
Also by Meats, Drinks, and Communication, all things have power, by a
Sympathetical Operation, to work on Man, because he is like unto all, bearing a
proportionable Nature unto all things. If People did understand this, they
would prefer Sobriety and Temperance, with Cleanness, far beyond what they do;
and then Men would not be subject to so many Diseases as now they are.

9. Heat and Moisture is the Root of all Putrefaction; and therefore Bugs are
bred in Summer: but they live all the Winter, though they are not then so
troublesome. They harbor in Bedsteads, Holes, and Hangings, Nitting and
breeding as Lice do in Clothes: But all Men know, that Woollen and Linen are
not the Element of Lice, but they are bred from the fulsom Scents and
Excrements that are breathed forth from the Body. The very same Radix have
Bugs; and if there be any difference, they are from a higher Putrefaction, and
therefore they are a more noisome stinking Creature.

10. The whole Preservation of Men's Health and Strength does chiefly reside in
the Wisdom and Temperance of Women. Therefore the ancient Wise Men in former
Ages, did direct and accustom their Women to a higher degree of Temperance than
the Men. Which Customs of Sobriety the Women of several Countries do maintain
to this day, as in Spain, great part of France, Italy, and many great Countries
under the Dominion of the Grand Seignior. Their Women do always drink Water,
their Food being for the most part of a mean and simple Quality; and for this
Reason neither they nor their Children are subject to several Diseases which
our Women and Children are. Wine and strong Drink should be sparingly drunk by
Women, till they are past Childbearing; because the frequent and common
drinking of strong Drinks, does generate various Distempers in the Female Sex,
such as are not fit to be discoursed of in this Place, which their Children
often bring with them into the World. If the Seed be good, yet if the Ground be
bad, it seldom brings forth good Fruit. Also Women are our Nurses for fifteen
or sixteen Years; and they do not only suffer us to be Gluttons, by letting us
eat and drink often, of their ill-prepared Food, beyond the power of the
Digestive Faculty, and more than the Stomach can bear; but many of them will
entice us to Gluttony, and some will force their Children to eat even against
their Stomachs, till they cast it up again. Now if it be a difficult Point for
a Man of Age and Experience to observe the necessary Rules of Temperance, how
careful then ought Mothers and Nurses to be in ordering their Children? A great
part of the Children that die, especially in Towns and Cities, is occasioned
either by the Intemperance of their Mothers, during the time they go with
Child, or afterward by their unnatural and badly-prepared Food, and suffering
them to eat to excess; also by their keeping of them too warm, and too close
from the Air, and lapping of them up in several Double Clothes and Swathes, so
tight, that a Man may write on them, and then putting them into warm Beds, and
covering them up close. If a strong Man was so boand up, he could not endure
it, without great injury unto his Health. Besides, the Window-Curtains are
drawn, and also the Curtains about the Bed; by which means the Air becomes so
hot and sulphurous, that it causes great Disorders to attend both the Mothers
and the Children. This ill kind of Management does also cause such a Tenderness
both in the Mother and the Child, that on every small occasion they are liable
and apt to get Colds, and diverse other Distempers.

Also Women have the entire Management of all things that concern our Healths,
during the whole time of our Lives; they prepare and dress our Food, and order
all things in our Houses, both for Bed and Board. There is not one Man of a
hundred that understands or takes any notice whether his Food be well prepared
or not; and if his Bed stinks, he is used to it, and so counts it all well.
Men's Time and Study is chiefly taken up about getting a Livelihood, and
providing things necessary for themselves and Families; so that there is not
one among a thousand that understands any thing what belongs to the
Preservation of his Healt^ Whatever the Women do and say touching the
Preparation of (...) and other ordering of Families for Health, most Men
believe, (...) making the least scruple or question of the truth thereof. And
well they may: For the chiefest Doctors of our Times do bow before them, and
are altogether as subject to the Rules and Directions of Women, as other Men.
Where are your Doctors that teach Men Sobriety in their Lives, or the proper
and natural way of preparing Meats fit for the Stomach? Which of them advises
against the evil Custom of keeping their Chambers so over-hot, when People are
sick, and in the time of Women's lying in Childbed? Why do they not advise them
not to have their Curtains so close drawn, both before the Windows and Beds,
insomuch that they are oftentimes in a manner suffocated for want of the fresh
Air? For, I affirm, That all sorts of People that do keep their Beds, let the
Occasion be what it will, have ten-fold more need of the refreshing Influences
of the Air, than others that are up: For, the Bed being much hotter than a Man's
Garments are when he is up, the thin, refreshing, moist Vapors, that do
penetrate the whole Body more powerfully when a Man is up, are thereby hindered.
This is one chief Reason why a Man cannot digest a Supper so well in Bed, as if
he sits up. All Men know, that the Bed destroys Appetite. If a Man go to Bed at
Eight a Clock, and lies till Eight in the Morning, he shall not be hungry; but
if he goes to Bed at the same time, and rises at Four in the Morning, though he
sits still without Action, yet by Eight he shall have a good stomach to eat and
drink; so great is the power of the Air: For when a Man is up, his Body is
cool, and the pure Spirits and thin moist Vapors of the Air have power to
penetrate the Body; which Element the Body sucks in like a Sponge through the
Pores; and this does not only cool and refresh the Spirits, and the whole Body,
but also powerfully strengthens the Action of the Stomach.

But I pity the young Children most, who are so tender, and of so delicate a
Nature, both in their Body and Spirits, that every Disorder does wound them to
the very Heart. Nothing is more grateful and refreshing to them, than the
pleasant Air: It comforts their Spirits, and causes a free Circulation of the
Blood and Radical Moisture, begets Appetite, and makes them grow in Strength:
But, on the contrary, hot sulphurous Airs, with great Fires, and warm Clothing,
do not only hinder the Circulation of the Blood, but suffocate the Spirits, and
destroy the Appetite, causing an unnatural Heat to possess the whole Body;
whence does proceed various Disorders and Diseases, making them to cry, and be
very froward. Also close Bindings, and over-warm Clothings, and thick hot Airs,
do often in weak-spirited Children cause Convulsions, Vapors, and Fumes to fly
into the Head, sometimes occasioning Vomiting, which People call Windy Diseases.

Again, The Food of most Children, of late Years, is so enriched with West and
East India Ingredients, that is, with Sugar and Spices, that thereby their Food
becomes so hot in operation, that it does not only breed too much Nourishment,
which generates Obstructions and Stoppages, but it heats the Body, drying up
and consuming the Radical Moisture, and infecting the Blood with a sharp
fretting Humor, which in some Complexions and Constitutions causes
Languishing Diseases, contracting the Breast and Vessels of the Stomach, and
hindering the Passages of the Spirits, so that the Joints and Nerves become
weak and feeble: in others, with the help of bad Diet, and other Uncleanliness,
does cause Botches, Boils, and various sorts of Leprous Diseases. Also many
that have wherewithal, will frequently give their Children Sack, strong Drinks,
and fat Meats, as long as they will eat, which is abominable, and absolutely
contrary to the Nature of Children.

There are a hundred other Disorders and Intemperances that many Mothers and
ignorant Nurses affect their Children with, which I have no room in this Place
to discourse of: Therefore I commend unto the Women Milk that is raw, only made
so hot as the Mothers or Nurses Milk is when the Child sucks it; and sometimes
Milk and Flower boiled together, giving it the Child about the warmness of
Breast-milk; and indeed, neither Children nor others ought to eat any Food
hotter. Also no Children ought to drink any kind of strong Drink: I could
commend Water, as the most wholesome; but it being contrary to our Custom,
ordinary Beer may do well, or rather small Ale. If Women did understand but the
hundredth part of the Evils and Diseases those indulging and intemperate Ways
do bring both to themselves and Children, they would quickly be of my mind;
which I never expect; They are too wise.

A SHORT DISCOURSE OF THE PAIN in the TEETH, Showing from what Cause it does
chiefly proceed, and also how to prevent it.
THE terrible Pains and Diseases of the Teeth do chiefly proceed from two
Causes. The first is from certain filthy phlegmy Matter which the Stomach and
Vessels do continually breathe and send forth, which does lodge or center in
the Mouth, especially between the Teeth, and on the Gums; and some People
having fouler Stomachs than others, such do breathe forth very sour, stinking,
phlegmy Matter, which does not only increase the Pain, but causes the Teeth to
become loose and rotten: And for want of continual cleansing and washing, those
Breathings and this Phlegmy Matter turns to Putrefaction, which does eat away
the Gums, as though Worms had eaten them: And this Defect is generally
attributed to the Disease called the Scurvey; but it is a mistake: the Cause is
chiefly, as is mentioned before, from the Stomach, or for want of Cleansings.

2. This Distemper of the Teeth and Gums does also proceed from the various
sorts of Meats and Drinks, and more especially from the continual eating of
Flesh, and fat sweet things, compounded of various things of disagreeing
Natures, which do not only obstruct the Stomach, but fur and foul the Mouth,
part thereof remaining upon the Gums, and between the Teeth. For all such
things do quickly turn to Putrefaction, which does by degrees corrupt both the
Teeth and Gums. Besides, our Beds take up near half the time of our Lives,
which time the Body is not only without motion, but the Bed and Coverings do
keep it much hotter than the Day-garments, especially of those that draw the
Curtains of their Windows and Beds so close, that the pure Spirits and thin
refreshing Vapors of the Air are hindered of having their free egress and
regress, which does dull and flatten the Action of the Stomach; and this is the
chief Cause why Suppers lie hard in the Stomach, and require more than double
the time for perfect Concoction, than the same Food does when a Man is up, and
in the open Air: For this Element, if it has its free Influences, is sucked
in, as by Spunges, through all the Pores of the Body, and does wonderfully
refresh, comfort, open, and cleanse all the Parts, having power to assist and
help Concoction: but hot, dull, thick Airs do destroy the Action of the
Stomach, and as it were suffocate the pure Spirits, drying up and consuming the
Radical Moisture. Therefore the Night does foul the Mouth more than the Day,
furring it with a gross slimy Matter, especially those that have foul Stomachs,
and are in Years, which ought to be well cleansed every Morning.

3. Whatsoever are the Disorders in the Body, the Mouth does always partake of
them; besides the Evils that the variety of Food, and the improper mixtures of
Flesh and Fish, and many other things, which do foul and hurt both the Teeth
and Gums. When any Person is disordered with inward Diseases, does not the
Mouth quickly complain of the Evils thereof? This very few do consider in time.

4. It is to be noted, That most People do attribute the Diseases of the Teeth
to Colds, and Rheums, and other outward Accidents. It is true, outward
Accidents will further this Disease, but then there must be Matter beforehand,
otherwise outward Colds can have no power to cause this Pain. The same is to be
understood in all Stoppages of the Breast, and other Obstructions, as Coughs,
and the like. For, if any Part be obstructed, or there be Matter for Distemper,
then, on every small occasion of outward Colds, or the like Accidents, Nature
complains. If your Teeth and Gums be sound, and free from this Matter, take
what Colds you will, and your Teeth will never complain, as daily Experience
does show. For all outward Colds, and other Accidents of the like nature, have
no power to seize any part of the Body, except first there be some inward
Defect or Infirmity: Suppose the Teeth be defective, then the Disease falls on
that Part; or if it be the Head, Eyes, Breast, Back, or any other Part or
Member of the Body, that is obstructed, the Evil is felt in that Part.
Therefore if the Mouth be kept clean by continual Washings, it will prevent all
Matter which may cause Putrefaction; and then Colds, and the like Accidents,
will have no power to seize this Part, or cause this terrible Pain. Even so it
is in all other Parts of the Body. If Temperance and Sobriety be observed in
Meats, Drinks, and Exercises, with other Circumstances belonging to Health,
then Stoppages, Coughs, Colds, and other Obstructions, would not be so frequent
on every small occasion: For Temperance has an inward Power and Operation, and
does as it were cut off Diseases in the very Bud, preventing the Generation of
Matter whence Distempers do proceed, increasing the Radical Moisture, and
making the Spirits lively, brisk, and powerful, able to withstand all outward
Colds, and other Casualties of the like nature.

5. There are many various things, of diverse Natures, prescribed by Physicians,
and others, as Washes to preserve the Teeth and Gums; but most of them, if not
all, to little or no purpose, as daily Experience teaches: For, all high, sharp
Salts, and things of a sour or keen nature, do rather cause the Teeth to
perish, than the contrary; as do all hot Spirits, be they what they will: Many
have destroyed their Teeth by the frequent use of such things, and it has
hardly ever been known that any such things have ever cured or prevented the
aching Pains of the Teeth, but Water only. Many Examples I could mention, if it
were convenient. Physicians, and others, do daily prescribe such things for the
Cure and Prevention of this Disease of the Teeth, which most of them do know by
experience can do no good, but rather the contrary: But when People come to
them, they must give them something for their Money; for Interest and Ignorance
have more affinity with this sort of People, than Virtue, and the true
Knowledge of the Nature of Things. Most certain it is, That the Shepherd and
Husbandman do know far better how to prepare the Meat for their Cattle, and
also how to preserve them from Disorders, than many Physicians do their Food or
Physic: and a Man shall understand more by conversing with some of this sort
of People, than with the Learned: For the Shepherd and Husbandman understand
something of Nature; but most of the Learned are departed from the simple Ways
of God in Nature, putting out their own Eyes, and then boasting what Wonders
they can see with other Men's: They have invented many Words to hide the Truth
from the Unlearned, that they may get the greater esteem. This has chiefly
been done to advance Pride and Interest; so that the Divine Eye is departed
from many of them, who never make any Inspexion into the true Nature of Things,
being contented to take other Men's Words, let it be right or wrong, as long as
they have Authority and Law on their sides, wherefore should they trouble their
weak Heads?

6. The best and most sure way to prevent the Diseases and Pains in the Teeth
and Gums, is every Morning to wash your Mouth with at the least ten or twelve
Mouthfuls of pure Water, cold from the Spring or River, and so again after
Dinner and Supper, swallowing down a Mouthful of Water after each Washing: For
there is no sort of Liquor in the World so pure and clean as Water; and nothing
does cleanse and free the Teeth and Gums from that foul Matter which does
proceed from the Breathings and Purgings of the Stomach, and from the various
sorts of Food, so well as Water: The use of other Washes is to little or no
purpose; but whosoever do constantly wash their Mouths with Water, as is before
mentioned, shall find an essential Remedy. All hard Rubbing and Picking of the
Teeth ought by any means to be avoided, for that is injurious to them. Also
whenever you find your Mouth foul, or subject to be slimie, as sometimes it
will more than at others, according to the good or evil state of the Stomach,
though it be not after eating; at all such times you ought to wash your Mouth.
This Rule all Mothers and Nurses ought to observe, washing the Mouths of their
Children two or three times a day; and also to cause their Children to swallow
down a little Water, which will be very refreshing to their Stomachs: For Milk
does naturally foul and fur the Mouth and Teeth, and if they be not kept clean
by continual washing, it causes the Breeding of Childrens Teeth to be the more
painful to them.

7. To keep your Teeth white, one of the best things is a piece of a China
Dish, or a piece of a fine Dutch Earthen Dish, made into fine Powder, and the
Teeth rubbed with it.

8. Few there be that understand or consider the excellent Virtues of Water, it
being an Element of a mild and cleansing Nature and Operation, friendly unto
all things, and of universal Use: But because it is so common, and so easily
procured, I am afraid that many People will be like Naaman the Syrian, when the
Prophet Elisha advised him to wash seven times in the River of Jordan to cure
his Leprosy; it being the Ignorance and Folly of most People, to admire those
things they do not know, and, on the other side, to despise and trample under
foot those Things and Mysteries they do know; which the Learned in all Ages
have taken notice of: For, should some People know what Apothecaries and others
give them, they would despise the Physic, and have but little respect for
their Doctor.

All Housewifes do know, that no sort of Liquor, be it what it will, will
cleanse and sweeten their Vessels, but only Water; all other Liquors leaving a
sour stinking Quality behind them, which will quickly cause Putrefaction: But
Water in its own nature is clean and pure, not only for all Uses in
Housewifery, and the Preservation of Health; but the Saints and Holy Men of God
have highly esteemed this Element, by using it in the exterior Acts of Divine
Worship, as having a Simile with the Eternal Water of Life, that does purify
and cleanse the Soul from Sin.

FINIS.

