A SERMON Preached before the KING ON The 30th of January, 1684/5.

Being the FAST for the Martyrdom of King CHARLES the First of Blessed Memory.

By FRANCIS Lord Bishop of Ely, and Almoner to His MAJESTY.

Published by His Majesty's special Command.

LONDON, Printed for Robert Clavell at the Peacock at the West End of St. Paul's
Churchyard. 1685.

ACTS V. 28. later part. -- And intend to bring this Man's Blood upon us.


TO direct and determine our Choice what parts of the Holy Writ are fittest to
be dwelt upon by us in our Pulpits, by you in your Closets on this Day (the
Anniversary Memorial of a most horrid Murder, but also of a most glorious
Martyrdom) Whose Judgment is so fit to be followed, as His, whom we do now
Commemorate, the Blessed and Royal Martyr, escaped from his Murderers, and out
of the reach of those hands that were deeply died in his Blood? When his Soul
was almost upon the Wing, ready to take it is flight, and the Angels stood
waiting to conduct it to the Place of Blifs, whither Christ was gone before;
Then He did with strong Consolation reflect, and with intense Devotion did He
meditate on the Story of the Passion, as the Lesson appointed of old by the
Church for this day of the Month, but then the most Seasonable, and now the
most proper Lesson for this His Day.

The Words I have chosen are in the Continuation of that Story, relating the
Consequences of the Passion, the heavy Consequences that were like to fall upon
the Betrayers and Murderers of that Just One, Titles which St. Stephen, the
next Martyr after Him, gave Them and Him. Yet I do not intend to draw any
studied Parallels between the Passion of our Lord, the Lord from Heaven, and
the Sufferings of an Earthly Prince, though as Sovereign a Prince, and as
Sacred as any of those whom the Holy Ghost has called the Christ's, or Anointed
of God: For, although the Royal Prophet has said to all other Kings, Ye are
Gods, yet our Solemn Mourning at this time is enough to put us in mind of what
he subjoyns immediately, but ye shall dye like men; of which this bloody Day
gave the most fatal Instance, and the most amazing one that was ever given. But
infinitely more astonishing was the fall of him whom the Prophet Daniel styles
Messiah the Prince, though he loved to style himself the Son of Man; yet in all
his Life and Death there was so much of a God, that we may ask concerning that
King of Kings, such a Question as himself asks concerning the Kingdom of God,
by what Comparison shall we compare him? Most Parallels are hard and stiff, and
come up lamely, but in this case they would look too bold and swelling: They
would offend the tender Piety of that most Christian King, if he in Heaven
could hear them: (...), as St. Gregory Nazianzen speaks, where he speaks in his
Rhetorical way, to the Soul of the dead Emperor, If in those Regions of Bliss
be knew what was doing here below. Therefore I shall not strain the
Circumstances of one Tragic story to make it resemble the other; yet safely I
may say in General, our most devout Prince made it his Prayer, made it the
Labor of his Life, as the Apostle had done, That he might know Christ, and the
Fellowship of his Sufferings, being made conformable to his Death: And this
Prayer of his was so favorably heard, that he might have said with an humble
Confidence after that same blessed Apostle St. Paul (who also was beheaded for
the Testimony of Jesus) I fill up that which is behind of the Afflictions of
Christ in my Flesh: And again, The Sufferings of Christ abound in me.

To let my self into my own most proper Business and Task at this time, I must
open the matter of Fact, as it stood in that Conjuncture when these words of my
Text were spoken, by some of the Chief Leaders among the Jews. They had shed
the blood of their God, their King, their Messiah; yet they would fain have
shifted off the Guilt from themselves; but still the Apostles thought it their
part to put it extremely home upon them. A cursed prevailing Party among the
Jews, the Pharisees and Sadducees, had Conspired, or in plain terms, a Race of
abominable Hypocrites, had combined with a Crew of detestable and damnable
Atheists (such a Junto, as the like never was before, nor ever since has been,
except our late Regicides) These men had at length gained the People from
Christ, and gotten them, or enough of them on their side, to be instant with loud
Clamors, Crucify him, Crucify him. When they had done the Deed, then they
would have silenced the Cry of his Blood against them. They Menaced,
Imprisoned, and Haras'd all those who had the Courage to charge them with the
Guilt, though at the same time these Preachers of the Gospel had the Charity to
show them how they might sue out their Pardon. But how ungrateful and unwelcome
a thing is Truth where it shows ill men to themselves! Though Pilate had the
hardiness to ask our Lord Christ, What is Truth? yet he durst not stay for his
Answer.

And now what would not these Miscreants give for an Act of Oblivion; that they
might forget the thing they had done, and the very Name of the Person might be
forgotten! Ye intend, say they, to bring this Man's blood upon us, but it was
grievous to them to say the Blood of Jesus. That there was such a Man put to
Death, they must needs acknowledge, that They had been the Accusers, They the
Solicitors, They the Petitioners for Justice and Execution upon him, they could
not deny. Pilate indeed would gladly have been but Passive: But for Them, so
Active were They, that no body needed to bring this Man's Blood upon them: For,
to ease that tame Wretch, the Governor, who ought to have drawn his Sword
instead of washing his Hands, they had called this Blood upon themselves, and
upon all their Posterity, His Blood be upon us, and upon our Children.

Their meaning then in my Text was this; You intend to bring this Man's Blood
upon us, as if it were Innocent Blood, nay, as if it were the Blood of our
Messiah; you would make us Guilty, not only of Homicide, but of Regicide, nay
even of Deicide, as if we had shed the Blood of God, whereas He whom ye style
your King was delivered up as a Malefactor, was Tried as a Subject, and
Condemned as a Traitor to the Government, so that it was no Murder, but an
Execution. But ye have filled Jerusalem with your Doctrines, there was the
galling Point, that these great Preachers regained the People apace; and then,
those proud Demagogues that were lately so very governing, must lose their dear
Popularity, and fall from their Empire to be marked and pointed out for the Men
of Blood.

The words being thus explained, do naturally offer and afford us these
Observations. And, 1. First, How backward are the most bloody Zealots to
Confess the guilt of Blood? How forward to acquit themselves from so just a
Charge? 2. How necessary it is, how absolutely necessary, to lay them open, to
show men of Blood their own guilt? 3. Upon whom should we intend to bring the
guilt of Blood? Upon none but those that have brought it upon themselves. And
Who are those? 4. Fourthly, In all this we should mainly intend, that which the
Apostles intended, to bring even the most Guilty to true Repentance.


1. How backward are the most bloody Zealots to Confess the Guilt of Blood? How
forward to acquit themselves from so just a Charge?

Exactly at this pass are our English Regicides; They killed and took
possession, as Eliah charges Ahab in the Case of Naboth. Yet was their Case
worse by far than that between Ahab and Naboth, a King and one Innocent
Subject; for this the Regicides did to a great number of their Innocent fellow
Subjects; and this they did to a King as Eminent for all manner of Goodness, as
Ahab was remarkable for Extreme Wickedness. Yet if the Prophet Eliah should
come again (as some are of Opinion he shall come at the end of the World, but
if he should come) at this time to deliver his Master's Errand to any of these,
he must expect no better Reception than Ahab gave Him, Have thou found me, O
mine Enemy? for he becomes their Enemy that tells them the Truth. Yet for all
That, Eliah like a Prophet from God immediately goes on, I have found thee.

How gladly would they part with this odious Business out of their own
Memories? And how do they abhor us only for doing our Duty, as the Apostles did
here, Calling their Sins to Remembrance? They apply to this matter that saying
of the Wiseman, The Repetition of a matter separateth very Friends. They would
be Friends with us, if we could find in our hearts to be their Flatterers. They
Complain as if it were ill-natured, as if it were Uncharitable and Unchristian
to mention their murdering of the King, as if it were high time the Act for
observing the Thirtieth of January were Repealed, as if it were almost as great
a Grievance as the 35th of the Queen.

To show I do this sort of men no wrong, How very few, if any of those who took
upon them to act as the King's Judges, would take the Christian shame upon
themselves, when they came to suffer, or profess the least regret for what they
had acted? Preach Repentance to them! (as was done to Several of them before
their Deaths) they would have us to know their names were enrolled in the Book
of Life, their Calling and Election was sure. And some of the last words which
the Arch-Traytor was heard to utter were such as These, I am sure I was once in
Christ, therefore ever in Christ. I have kept it ever since for a Reply upon
some well-meaning, but ill-instructed People, who are ready to Despair if they
do not satisfy themselves of their being in the State of Certainty when they
are dying; that some of These, whose hands were so full of blood, yet were as
full of this false Security, as the most glorious Martyrs were of the true One.

If it were needful to give any more Instances, I might show by later Examples
of the same Party, to what a Reprobate Sense men may be given up, that have
once Seared their Consciences to stop their own bleeding at heart while they
are shedding innocent Blood with their own hands, while they break into Houses,
massacre Innocent men in their Beds, mangle them with such Cruelty as the like
was scarce ever heard of since Dolabella performed his Barbarous Exploit in the
dead of Night, upon Trebonius: But that was for his being one of Caesar's
Murderers: Whereas these poor Sufferers were Guilty of no Crime, but their
being of his Majesty's Guards. And yet these same Monsters do in their
Declarations solemnly protest they hold no Cruel Principles, they would by no
means be mistaken for men of Blood.

But the more Confident they are of their own Innocence, and the more they turn
away their Impudent eyes from seeing their own Guilt; the more absolutely
necessary it is for us to lay it before them, which leads to my Second Part.

2. In this we do but follow the great Examples before us, we do as was done by
the Apostles: And this ought to be done not barely for the sake of those that
are guilty, but also for the securing and preserving our own Innocence; for He
that hates his Brother is a Murderer, says the Apostle, and he that Suffers Sin
upon him, or does not reprove him for it, is, in another place of Scripture,
supposed to hate him. Nor could St. Paul have entered this Protestation, I take
you to Record this Day that I am pure from the blood of all men; but that he
was able to add, for I have not shunned to declare unto you, all the Counsel of
God.

Besides, we are well aware that the voice of the meanest Blood, much more of
the Royalest, if it still cries from the Earth, will pluck down more Judgments
from Heaven: and that the most Innocent private man, the most unspotted from
Blood, may yet be involved in those public Calamities. We turn the Case upon
our Selves, the Case in the Second of Samuel, that there was a Famine in the
days of David three years, year after year, and David enquired of the Lord, and
the Lord answered, It is for Saul, and for his bloody House, because he slew
the Gibeonites, for the Children of Israel had sworn unto them, and Saul sought
to slay them.

I do very well remember how pressingly this Case of the Gibeonites was urged
in favor of those Murderers of the King, that had rendered themselves. But I
must needs say it had been more pertinently urged, if instead of Readiness putting
to Death the Gibeonites after they had made a Covenant with Israel, the
Gibeonites had put King Saul to Death by virtue of a Covenant made among
themselves, without their King, and against Him. Now suppose those Gibeonites,
that were no better than Hewers of Wood and Drawers of Water to Israel, had
Constituted some of their Draymen a High-Court of Justice to Murder King Saul,
with a show of Authority on their Side; Then had a Famine ensued, had a War
followed upon That, had a Pestilence began where the War had ended, had the
Capital City, in which such a Tragedy was acted, been reduced to Ashes, and
after all That had the Famine begun again; David would scarce have needed to
Consult the Oracle of God to Discover one great Cause of so many Judgments.

Since then Almighty God, when he makes Inquisition for Blood, he remembers
them, and forgets not the Cry of the humble, as David (the Party concerned in
the former Case) has set it down, Psalm. 9. 12. We had best make strict Enquiry,
and consider well, (as the Apostles did here before they would charge any with
the Blood of Christ,) upon whom we intend and ought to bring this fearful Guilt
of Royal Christian Bloodshed. Upon none but Those, that in a higher or lower
Degree, in a greater or less proportion, have brought it upon themselves. And
who are those? which must be my third Consideration.

3. Since Actions full of Horror and Astonishment, if they are long
deliberated, and done with Form (as was the Deed of this day) are never done
without that which the Stoics call a Prolepsis, that is a deep and firm
persuasion of mind that such Actions are both lawful and necessary to be done;
they that establish the Principle by which the minds of men are set and fixed on
Such Actions, must be Responsible for the next immediate visible and
unavoidable consequence of their own Principle.

When the Principle is once Rivetted in the heart, there is nothing so
desperate or so damnable, but men will go through it without fear. Women among
the Barbarians will ascend the Funeral Piles of their dead Husbands, and smile
as they give their own Bodies to be burnt to Ashes. Yea, very Children have
suffered Torments, not only patiently, but joyfully, for a false Religion
strongly impress't upon them, instead of the true one. Whoever therefore
confirm and harden others in King-killing Principles must bear a share in the
Guilt, though not they, but others shed the Blood of Kings, because such
Principles strike at all Kings, for they strike at the Kingly Office it self,
and they do it once for all: As the Son of Zerviah offered to Smite King Saul,
and so as he should not need to Smite him a second time.

Now upon this Supposition, as I shall show anon, that some who came into the
World since our present Gracious Sovereign began to Reign, have brought upon
themselves the blood of his Royal Father by defending the Regicide; so others
that lived some Ages before that dismal Period of time, did as it were antedate
the Guilt by introducing odious Presidents, or laying down wicked Premises
long ago, from whence these late Great Offenders followed their footsteps, or
drew their abhorred Conclusions.

Out of the many Instances of this kind, which I could easily produce, I shall
mention but a very few against two Parties. Those of the one Party do pass in
the Church of Rome for true Catholics. Those of the other Party would fain pass
among Us for the true Protestants. Both Parties are as opposite each to the
other, as they are to Us and the Truth, yet both of them agreed in the main
Design to Confound Monarchy.

Pope Zachary was (I think) the first, who pretended to exercise a power of
Absolving Subjects from their Oaths of Allegiance, whereupon a King of France,
Childeric the Third, was deposed as unfit for Government, the ancient Royal
Family was laid aside till it was at last extinguished, the Crown of France was
set on another Head, and settled on another Family.

Now I may truly say, That Bishop of Rome laid a Foundation for many a
following Rebellion, even That Rebellion arising so long after from the Holy
League. And Gregory the Seventh, the first who avowed openly that pestilent
Heresy, called by his Name, the Hildebrandian Heresy of the Deposing, and if
need were, the King-killing-power, made way for the Clements, the Ravillacs,
and the Powder-Traytors. And T. Aquin. himself, for all he is Sainted, and
stands as the Pillar of their Schools; yet delivered this for good
School Divinity, That, as soon as any Prince is denounced Excommunicate for
Apostasy from the Faith, his Subjects are ipso facto free from his Dominion
over them, and from the Oath of Fidelity by which they were bound to him. I
must needs say, whoever they are that bring such Principles as these for
Christian Doctrine into the Church, they attempt to give the State, and the
Kingly Office it self, a mortal wound; They do their best to set up the Court
of Rome as a standing High-Court of Justice over all Kings.

And then for the other Party, Knox and Buchanan, with the rest of those old
Leaders to Rebellion, as well as Milton, and several later Patrons of the Good
Old Cause, they shall one day be star'd in the face by all that precious Blood
which their Writings encouraged others to shed so prodigally. And Calvin
himself is inexcusable, who clearly enough discovers his ill-meaning, though he
thinks fit to show it but in half-lights, to disguise it with Ifs or Ands, with
a perhaps, or it may be. If there be now, says he, any popular Officers
ordained to moderate the Licentiousness of Kings (such as were the Ephori set
up of old against the Kings of Sparta, the Tribunes of the People, against the
Roman Consuls, and the Demarchi against the Athenian Senate, and with which
power, says he, perhaps, as the world now goes, the Three Estates are seized in
each several Kingdom, when they are Solemnly Assembled;) so far am I, says he,
from hindering them to put restraints upon the exorbitant Power of Kings, as
their Office binds them; that I conceive them, says he, rather to be guilty of
a perfidious Dissimulation, if they connive at Kings when they play the
Tyrants, or wantonly insult on the Common People, in that, says he, they
treacherously betray the Subjects Liberties.

This was, as a certain Learned Author justly terms it, a Stumbling Block of
Disobedience and Rebellion, cunningly laid by Calvin in the Subjects way. And
so it proved; for this Doctrine was quickly improved into Application and Use;
As the same Author tells us from another, that the Commissioners from Scotland
endeavored to justify their proceedings before Q. Elizabeth against their
unfortunate Sovereign Q. Mary, by those very words of Calvin which I have
repeated, from whence they inferred, That it was lawful for them to put evil
Princes into Prison, and also to deprive them of their Kingdoms.

Nor is it any great wonder, after this Determination from Him who was an
Oracle with them of Switzerland and Geneva, That (in spite of all that honest
Deodati had declared against our Rebellion) they afforded a friendly Reception,
and gave the right hand of Fellowship to some of those whom they knew to have
been at the Top of that bloody Cabal, which past the Sentence upon the King.

Indeed this Principle leads directly to the Trial of a King by his Subjects;
it exposes the Majesty of Princes to be made a Cruel Pageant to their People,
as one of our Republican Assassins is reported to have urged, that the King
whom they promised to make a glorious King, might be arrayed in his Robes, and
brought to the Scaffold with the Crown on his Head, to show, that together with
the Monarch they would cut off the Monarchy it self. This Principle (one of
Calvin's Institutions) in it is own natural and necessary tendency would set up
a High Court of the Three Estates in each Kingdom, as another standing High
Court of Justice over each King.

But to come nearer home to our own times, Upon whom now do we intend, and upon
whom ought we to bring the guilt of this Day?

Intending to bring the guilt of any man's blood, but especially the blood of a
King, upon any that are not guilty, and so to murder their good Name, which is
as it were a man's other Life; such a Calumny would be a Crime little less than
killing the Body of a Fellow-Subject. But on the other side to acquit the
guilty, is of equal abomination as to condemn the Innocent.

This place in the Proverbs was notoriously misapplied and abused by One, of
ever cursed Memory, whom they styled the President of their Court, when he
brought this place to justify that Diabolical Sentence he was about to pass on
an Innocent Person, and an Imperial Prince, a Crowned Head accountable to none
but God. But now the place is justly applied, when it is thus retorted upon Him
and Them, who sat in that Hellish Court of Mock Justice, who all expressed their
assent by standing up, as was before agreed and ordered. They gloried in the
Act at their Deaths, as they made it the pride of their Lives. Their Ghosts
would be offended, and think their names affronted, if they should not for ever
stand in red Letters, as they have written their own Characters in Royal Blood.

For those that fought against him, those that betrayed and delivered him into
the hands of his Murderers; Those that made Treaties with him ineffectual, by
clogging them with such hard Conditions, as neither his Honor nor his
Conscience might Comply withal; Those that bred Parliamentary Delays till the
Army had gained their point, and were come up to the City; such must be put in
mind, at least once a year, that they may apply to themselves the Case of the
Jews, who did but deliver up Christ to the Romans, and yet St. Peter tells
them, Ye have crucified him. Nay, they may apply the Case of Judas, who, it
appears by the Story, did not imagine the Jews would have gone so far against
his Lord and Master, as to press the Sentence of Death against him; for when he
saw that he was Condemned, Judas repented himself, and brought again the Thirty
pieces of Silver, a farther Step than ever I heard was made by any of these
Traitors, to make a voluntary Restitution, as he did, of the price of blood.
Very few of them would make such a Confession as he did, I have sinned in that
I have betrayed Innocent Blood.

But as that furious Crisis, that woeful Conjuncture is over; as most of those
execrable Wretches have born their own Judgment; so I would to God the Guilt of
that Sacred Blood might fall on no more Heads than such as those that stand as
Monuments of their own Barbarity. But, good God! what shall we think when men
unborn in that fatal year of Forty eight, shall act at so high a rate of almost
incredible, yet most demonstrable Villainy, as to derive that horrible Regicide
upon themselves? As the Apostle supposes that some had Crucified Christ over
afresh; So Christ himself supposes, that all the Blood shed from the time of
righteous Abel, should be required of that Generation. And so it may be of
This. And Some that had no Being in the Reign of the late good King, and others
that were none of his Subjects, may involve themselves in the same guilt by
Owning, Justifying and Glorifying (as much as they can) some others that bore a
part in it. Old Voet that abominable Divinity Professor at Vtrecht, whom
Honorable Witnesses have heard Catechizing his Scholars, and explaining the
the Sixth Commandment, Thou shall do no Murder, but putting this Answer into
their Mouths, That putting our King to Death was no Murder at all; He, though a
Foreigner, one that lived so far off, yet he brought this Blood upon himself.
And it is to be feared he left also Sanguinary stains upon the Minds of some his
too easy Disciples.

So Those that set up Fanatic Schools, and their Country Academies here at
home, on purpose to breed up their Children so as to make them Rebels, if
occasion shows; if ever they have another Day for it (as they use to speak)
such Parents go far toward the making Regicides both of themselves and their
Children. The wise Ulysses is brought upon the Stage by the Tragedian
expressing an impatience to think that the Trojans should steal away young
Astyanax the Son of Hector, as if, after an end was put to the long Trojan War,
they lived still in hopes that he might one day Head them to retrieve their
Cause: Bella Telemacho parant; They are contriving, says he, to bring the
Calamity of another War upon my Son Telemachus. So such as Spirit away our
Youth into the Disaffected Commonwealth-Party, are studying to bring New
Miseries upon our Childrens Children: They go the way to entail the Paricide
Committed on the Father of their Country, to bring it upon the Postnati, the
Children born after the Crime was acted: They communicate Sin and Mischief from
one Generation to another, as a wise Patriot said concerning the Accomplices of
Cataline, who had taken exquisite Care to Corrupt the Gentry of Rome, that
although Catiline were gone, yet if such as were of his breeding continued
among them, they would prove a Catilinarian Seminary in the Commonwealth. Nay
such among us take an effectual Course, not only to propagate, but to
perpetuate the Guilt of the Blood that was shed this day: for at this rate it
will run on in Infinitum, and till the end of the World there will be no end of
blood touching Blood, as the Prophet Hoseah speaks: and they bring it upon
themselves, all they that are in the same Association, the same Bond of
Iniquity with the mad Zealots, though they are not so far gone into the Gall of
Bitterness: Yea, they draw on their own heads the blood of those also whom the
hand of Authority strikes with the Sword of Justice; of those, upon whom they
would fain shift off from themselves the name of the Fanatic or Frantic Party.

And now if we have brought the guilt of Blood upon many who hitherto perhaps
thought themselves perfectly guiltless; how can we help it? How can they avoid
it? It Is their burden, and they must bear it. And yet, for those Guilty men who
are still in the Land of the Living, we intend to lay it upon those, only to
make them feel it as a Burden too heavy for them to bear, that they may give a
mighty Spring from under so great a Load. For,

4. In the fourth and last place (of which very briefly). We mainly intend, as
the Apostles intended, to bring even the most guilty to true Repentance.

One that was justly reputed a great Statesman, as well as a good Citizen of
Rome, and the noblest Orator, made this Complaint: Either our Foreign Enemies,
says he, are overcome in fight, and then they Serve us; or, if they are taken
into our Friendship, they are obliged to us in generosity. But if any of our
own Countrymen are once debauched into so high a degree of Frenzy, as to
declare themselves Enemies to their Country; These, says he, when you have
represt them from destroying the Commonwealth, yet you can hardly restrain them
by any Force, or reconcile them by any Favor.

By a long sad Experience we find this Observation is too true. Most of the
Shimei's that have once lift up their Voice in Curses against the King, and
lift up their Hand to sling Stones at his Sacred Head, though they be heartily
forgiven, yet they will keep no bounds, but transgress again the most easy
Conditions given them. They that have brought the Royal Blood upon themselves,
can scarce be prevailed withal to make any stop, till by some new Treasonable
Attempt, they bring their own Blood also on their own Heads: and so did these
in the Text, these whom the Apostles do thus Accuse for shedding the Blood of
Jesus: (whom ye slew and hanged on a Tree) although they were told in the very
next words, that he was ready to impart that Grace, which no earthly Prince can
bestow, to give Repentance as well as forgiveness of Sins; yet it follows, When
they heard this they were cut to the heart, and took Counsel to slay them.

And yet but two Chapters before, a great number, whom St. Peter charges Ye
have Crucified him, when they heard this, were pricked to the heart, and said
unto Peter, and to the rest of the Apostles, Men and Brethren, What shall we
do? He bids them Repent, and with many words he exhorts them, Save your selves
from this untoward Generation Whereupon a Multitude of them came over that same
day; one short plain Sermon converted three thousand of Christ's Murderers: And
I make no doubt, not a few of those that were carried away with the
Dissimulation of the men of malice among us, have been converted by the
Blessing of God, and the preaching every Thirtieth of January more than Three
thousand Sermons.

There is still a healing Principle in the Blood of Christ. The Lamb of God
that was slain; that is, designed to be slain, from the beginning of the World,
takes away the Sin of the World, that is, he gives his Grace to all that are
ready to receive it, for the taking away of Sin, all the whole heap of Sin,
even this Sin which lies so hard upon many, of Shedding the Blood of Kings. For
Christ did his part to expiate even for those that shed his own Blood, and that
was the Blood of God. No Traitor, if he be penitent, ought to Despair, but his
Spirit may be Saved in the Day of the Lord Jesus, since our Blessed Savior has
said it, St. Luke 22. This is my Blood which is shed for you (speaking to all
that were present) nevertheless the hand of him that betrayeth me, is with me
on the Table: Therefore Judas himself, the foulest Traitor, had a Share in the
Blood of Christ, if he would have put in his Claim to it, He had offered him,
if he would have accepted the Grace of Repentance.

And in that weighty Christian Duty, in order to which this Divine Grace is
extended to all Mankind, we are all of us deeply concerned: Since alas! we are
none of those whom our Savior calls just men that need no Repentance; for as
many of us as have broken our Baptismal and Sacramental Vows are Guilty of the
Death and Passion which Christ once suffered for us upon the Cross.

And for those of Us that were men, knowing Good and Evil, before this
abominable Fact of Murdering the King (for it was done within the memory of
Man, and of many in this numerous Audience) We are not able to say (u^^^ss we
deceive our selves as Pilate did) that we are Innocent of the Blood of this
just Person. The Crown is fallen from our Head, Woe unto us for we have sinned;
Such was the Lamentation of the Prophet Jeremiah upon such a Calamity as ours
was, and with great Reason, such was his Reflection on the Cause of that public
dreadful Calamity, Their National Crying Sins. And the same Account is given by
a great Divine, as well as a most wise Prince, King Solomon, That when the
Providence of God permits such strange Revolutions, and suffers Kingdoms to
degenerate into Commonwealths; it is for the Transgression of a Land many are
the Princes thereof. Our repeating the Old extreme Provocations (since God is a
Righteous Judge, Strong and Patient, and God is provoak'd every Day) may bring
upon us new Judgments, such as we cannot foresee, and such as we should not be
able to endure the sight of. Correct us, O Lord, but in thy Judgment, not in
thy Fury, least thou bring us to nothing. And God in his mercy, if it be his
blessed Will, punish us any way, rather than that his Judgments should ever
again be any thing such as the last were, that they should touch the Lord's
Anointed; or that God should suffer men to ride over our Heads, as the Psalmist
speaks; or that the Lord should cover the Daughter of Sion (the Church) with a
Cloud in his Anger, and cast down from Heaven unto Earth the Beauty of Israel.
Lamentable things to be reflected upon! But that nothing like them may ever
return upon us, it lies upon us all to pursue, with a vigorous Christian
Resolution, the Apostles Precept and Injunction upon all those, that were any
way concerned in the matter of my Text; Repent ye therefore, and be converted,
that your Sins may be blotted out, when the times of refreshment shall come
from the presence of the Lord. Which presence we may be confident the Blessed
Martyr of this day, was on this day so long ago as he became a Martyr, admitted
to enjoy: There to live and reign for ever with the Lord, in whose presence is
the fullness of joy, and at ^^^se right hand there is pleasure for ever more. To
which, etc.

FINIS.

