A Pocket-Companion; CONTAINING Things Necessary to be Known, By all that
Values their Health and Happiness: BEING A plain Way of NATURE'S own
Prescribing, to Cure most Diseases in Men, Women and Children, by
Kitchen-Physick only.

To which is Added, An Account how a Man may Live Well and Plentifully for
Twopence a day.

Collected from The Good Housewife made a Doctor,By THO. TRYON.

Licensed, October. 25th. 1693.

LONDON, Printed for George Conyers, at the Golden Ring in Little-Britain, 1694.

Notable Things.
Of Consumptions.
COnsumptions are Decays of the Radical Moisture, whereby the natural Heat of
the Stomach is so weakened, that it cannot make a due Separation of Meats and
Drinks received, which causes from thence to arise abundance of bad Juices or
Phlegm; so that no good Nourishment can be bred, let the Food be never so Rich*
nor the Drink Cordial, which all People afflicted find by Experience. But these
Distempers proceed likewise from various Causes. As,

1. From over-charging Nature with too great Quantities of Rich Food: or in
Others, by drinking much Brandy, Wine, and strong Drinks, which weakens the
natural Heat, and destroys the Action of the Stomach. In Others, and idle,
sedentary Course of Life, or want of proper Exercises; lying in bed too long,
too warm Clothing, and too soft Feather or Down Beds, which proves always
prejudicial to to the Health of all Persons. It is caused sometimes by too much
frequenting the School of Venus, provoking Nature beyond her Ability, and
oft-times corrupts her, in her very Radix. Young married People, as well as the
most lewd, are often caught in this Snare, and let this be a Caution. Others by
excessive Heats or Colds, Surfeits and the like Accidents: Some by Fevers and
long Fits of sickness; to some through Melancholy, Grief, or Trouble of Mind,
or Despair and Envy. Some have Consumptions Hereditary, which is the hardest of
all to cure.

Now when thou find thy self indisposed, and thy Stomach to grow weak, and a
general Disorder to run through thy whole Body, and that thy Strength decays;
consider what it was that caused it, whether Temperance, or Intemperance in
Meats or Drinks, in respect of the Quantity or Quality, as also their
Exercises, and all other Extremes thou have inured thy self to: Consider
further, what Air thou have lived in, where the Disease was bred, and by this
means thou may guess at the Cause of thy Distemper. And when this is done,
thou ought gradually to alter for the better, the whole Course of thy Life;
not in the nature and quality of the Meats and Drinks only, but in their
quantity; as also thy Exercises and the Air, as far as the Condition of thy
Life will admit thereof: for change of Food, Exercises, and Airs, work wonders.
If withal, you betake your selves to mere simple Meats and Drinks that are
easier of Concoction, and generate a freer and firmer Substance.

I shall now set down what Food, Drink and Preparations are agreeable to the
Stomachs of sick and languishing Persons: And first of

Milk.
Which is an incomparable Food, and the best way for weak consumptive People to
eat it, is Raw*

Take what quantity of Milk you please, let it stand open to the Air one Hour
or two, then skimm off the Top of it, and eat it with well baked Bread; neither
toast your Bread, nor warm your Milk; except the weather be cold, and then you
may make it blood warm, but then do not toast your Bread: You may if you
please, eat Biscuit with your Milk, but do not eat too great a quantity at once:
sometimes you may mix a little Water with the Milk, and sweeten it with good
white Sugar: you may eat this three times aday, if you make it your sole Food.
Continue this six or eight Months at least* and you will find great Benefit by
it: for Distempers that have been many years generating, cannot be cured in a
moment,

To prepare Milk with Wheat Flour, an Excellent Way.
Take a quart of New Milk, after it has stood five or six Hours from the time
it was milk'd, put to it a third part of River or Spring Water, set it on a
clear fire; then take some Wheat Flour, and temper it with either Water or
Milk into a Batter, and when the Milk is ready to boil, put in your Thickning,
and stir it a while; and when it is ready to boil again, take it off; then put
as much Salt and Bread to it as you please, then let it cool without stirring
it, and it will eat much sweeter: Two spoonfuls of Flower is enough for a quart
of Milk and Water, make it about the thickness of ordinary Milk-pottage. This
keeps your Body in excellent Temper, neither binds nor loosens too much, and it
never tires nor clogs the Stomach.

Another way.
Take a Quart of Milk and a Pint of Water, add to it as much Oatmeal as you
please to have (...) Thickness, Thin is best. Set it on a (...) fire, and when
it begins to boil, take it off, and brew it in two Porringers eleven or twelve
times, then set it on the fire again, and when it begins to boil take it off,
and let stand a little, and the large Oatmeal will settle to the Bottom; then
add Bread and Salt to it, and eat it when it is blood warm: this is an
Excellent Food, agrees well with weak Natures, and affords firm Nourishment.
And if you add at any time to this a new-laid Egg or two, beaten with your
Thickening, and put it in as aforesaid, it will make a rich Dish.

If you would add Eggs to Milk-pottage, first put your Milk and Water into your
S^wce-Pan, take a spoonful of ground Oatmeal, and beat it up with your Egg or
Eggs, with either a little milk or water, and when it is ready to boil, stir it
in, as in flowr'd milk, and then you need not brew it; put a little Bread and
Salt to all your milk meats, but no Sugar be sure: This is a Substantial and
Friendly Food. Observe that Milk is best the first half year after the Cow has
Calv'd, but not so good after taking Bull, or Conception. Milk boiled by it. it
self* is not so good, as when mixed with Oatmeal, Flower, or Water as aforesaid,
being not of so cleansing a quality ^ the best time to begin Milk-Diet I think
is about March or April.

Of Furmety, viz.
Wheat and Milk are in themselves two good things; but ordered with Sugar,
Spice, etc. is not at a^l to be commended, nor near so good as Milk, Flower and
Water; the same is to be understood of Wheat buttered and spiced.

Of Boniclabber.
Bonic^^^^^^ is made by letting your Milk stand till it sowers, which will be
in Twenty-fours hours, if the weather be very hot. It has a pleasant sowerish
Taste, and must be eaten only with Bread, especially by Consumptive People. It
is Excellent against Stoppages, and it is easy of Concoction. and ^igests all
hard or sweet Food; it cools and cleaneth the whole Body, and quenches Thrist
to a ^onder, it is the best Spoon-meat for Consumptive People that I know. And
though it may not be so agreeable to the Pallat at first, yet a little Custom
will make it familiar and pleasant.

Of Water-Grewel.
This is good for Consumptive People, and is made as follows. Take a quart of
Spring or River Water, put to it two Spoonfuls of Oatmeal, then stir it well
together, set it on the fire, and when it is ready to boil, take it off, and
brew it out of one thing into another; then let it stand, and the greatest
Oatmeal will sink to the Bottom: then pour it off, and add Bread and Salt to
it, and Butter if you please, then eat it when it has stood till it is blood
warm. This is an Excellent sort of Food.

Observe that Milk boiled, is nothing so good as either Raw or Scalded.

An Excellent Food for all sorts of People, ^ut more-especially* for Children
and sick People.
Take a quart of Water, two Spoonfuls of Wheat Flour, and two or three Eggs,
beat the Flower and Eggs together with a little water, and when the water
begins to boil, stir in your Thickning, and keep it stirring till it is ready
to boil; then take it off, and put Bread and Salt to it, when it has stood till
it is blood warm, eat it; you may put some Butter to it, or an Egg if you like
it best: This is an incomparable Food for all sorts of people, it breeds good
Blood, opens the Passages, sweetens the Blood, prevents windy Distempers and
griping Pains; it is next to Breast-milk for Children, and it is excellent for
Consumptive People, if they keep to it four or five months or more, and eat
nothing else, and drinking three our four Glasses of good Ale; let them use
gentle Exercise, and moderate Clothing, and good sweet hard Beds. This, and
all other Spoon-meats made thin, are best.

Flummery*
Is thus made. Take three Spoonfuls of Oatmeal more or less, and put to it a
convenient quantity of water, then let it stand till it begins to be sowerish,
then take this Water and Oatmeal, and put it into a Vessel, stirring it, and
making it boiling hot with a quick fire and when it does begin to rise, brew it
to and fro with your Ladle to keep it from boiling; this do about four or five
minutes, then take it off the fire, and it is prepared. Some eat it with Ale,
others with Cream, Milk, and the like, but I think it most beneficial to be
eaten with Bread only. It removes Obstructions, strengthens the Stomach, cools
the Body, opens the Passages, and is excellent good for Breakfast in all hot
Climates: This is good more-especially for weak Stomach'd People, and those
whose Breast, and Passages are obstructed by though phlegmy matter.

Another way to make Flummery.
Take two or three Spoonfuls of Oatmeal, more or less, and put to it a
convenient quantity of Water, and let it stand a day more or less; then pour
off that water, and put on fresh four, five, six, seven, eight, nine or ten
times; letting each water remain on your Oatmeal a certain time, then they take
it off, boil it up, some mix it with Cream, and what they please. But this way
is not near so good as the former.

Of Bread.
The best sort for sick People, is that which is made of Wheat Flour, but not
too fine dressed; for then it will be dry and husky; and your Leavened Bread is
much better than that made with Yiest; you may make it after this manner. Take
what Flower you please, make a hole in the middle of it, break then your Leaven
in; take as much blood-warm Water, as will wet about half your Flower, mix the
Flower and Leaven well together, cover it with the remaining Flower close; this
do in the Evening, and by Morning the whole will be well Leavened: then add
some more blood-warm water as is sufficient, and knead it up very stiff and
firm, the more pains you take, the better: when you have so done, let it lie
warm by some fire, near two hours, till the Oven is ready, then bake it, but
let not the Oven-mouth be close stopped, that the Air may have more or less
Egress or Regress. But the best way is to make it into thin Cakes, and bake
them on a Stone, with a Wood-fire under. Of Rye, Barley, Oats, you may make
Cakes after the same manner; put no Salt into your Bread.

Of Butter
Butter affords good Nourishment; the best that is for the Stomach, is made
from May to August: It Is very wholesome, if eaten moderately with Bread, or
with Herbs, Roots or the like. Take good Butter and melt it thick, and put it
to your Herbs, as you do Oil, and it eats as well and pleasant, and can scarce
be distinguished from Oil: this I believe a great many may have cause to thank
me for: all Butter ought to be well seasoned with Salt.

Cheese
Affords good Nourishment, for healthy, working People, if eaten with good
store of Bread, and a Cup of good Drink be not wanting* It is altogether as
nourishing as Flesh; it is clean, and of a stronger, firmer Substance, and
digests a Cup of Drink better: and he that lives on Bread and Cheese,
intermixed now and then with flowered Milk, Water-Grewel, Milk-pottage, and Raw
Sallads, seasoned with Vinegar, Salt and Oil; and drinks good sound Ale and
Beer not over strong, shall exceed in Health and Strength him that lives on
Bread and Flesh, and drinks the same Liquor.

Of Puddings.
The best way of making them is thus. Take Milk and Water, Wheat Flour, and
Eggs, of each a convenient quantity, and put a little Salt in; beat them well
together, put this Batter into your Bag, boil it in good store of Water, your
Potlid off, and over a quick clear fire; when boiled sufficient, take it off,
butter it, and eat it. Baked Puddings are not so good.

Of Eggs, and their best way of Dressing.
They are an Excellent Food, friendly and innocent in Operation. Dress them as
follows.

Let your Eggs be boiled soft, then break the Shell and put them into a Dish,
and let them stand till they are Blood-warm; then with Bread and Salt only eat
them: A strong Stomach may eat them with Bread and Butter spread upon it, not
melted. Or you may boil them hard, then pill off the Shell, and eat them with
Salt, Bread and Vinegar. Poaching is a very good way. Take an Egg, a spoonful
of Wheat Flour, and beat it well together, then put it into a Pint of Water
boiling hot. stir it together; then take it off, and eat it with a little
Bread, Salt and Butter, and it will make an excellent Meal. Eggs in a Morning
supped off raw, and Bread eaten after them, is very wholesome.

Of Pyes.
Pear and Apple-pyes are wholesome and healthy Food, if the Fruit be thorough
ripe, and made as they ought to be: The best way is thus.

Take good Wheat Flour, make it into a Paste with a little Leaven or Yeast,
with Milk and Water, or blood warm Water only, then put it in your Apples or
Pears, and if you please add some Carraway or Fennel-seeds. In baking, let the
Oven stand almost open, that some Air may come in. When baked, draw them, and
cut holes in the top, that the sulphurous Atoms, and fiery Vapors may pass
away, eat them not hot, for they are much better cold. Apples raw and ripe, eat
with Bread, sometimes are wholesome; and so are Peaches Plumbs, Gooseberries,
Currants, Apricocks and the like, very good Food eaten with Bread* sometimes.
And observe by the way, that hot Bread ought not to be eaten, for it is very
injurious to the health; and your Bread ought to stand two days before you eat
it.

Of Raisins.
Raisins is a good sort of Food, if rightly used; but I think we might well be
without them, though they have their uses: For being eaten with Bread, they will
make a wholesome Breakfast or Supper. As for Currants, they are of little worth
to any person besides the Seller; nor any other sort or Outlandish-Spices,
unless they be used physically. The same may be said of Brandy and other
Spirits, which often proves profitable, taken in a physical way: But is of
fatal consequence, when drunk at every turn.

Of Oil.
It is a brave nourishing clean nature, and friendly to most Constitutions: It
is very proper to be eaten with Herbs and Fruits. Bread and Oil make a delicate
Breakfast or Supper; for it cleanses the passages, breeds good Blood, and is
easy of concoction. With Fish it is very good, more especially with Salt-fish;
for it allays the fierce keen property of the salt, and sweetens the lean body
of the Fish; for these purposes it is better then Butter. Observe that toasted
Bread is not so good as cold Bread, Olives are not so good as Oil, nor ought to
be freequently eat, for then they obstruct the Stomach, and Passages. The best
way of eating them is with Bread only; but we might as well be without them.

Of Sugars.
Sugars is an excellent rich Fruit, but in my opinion fit only to be taken
physically, and not at every turn to be mixed with our common Food and Drinks,
the use whereof, makes it of e^il consequence, particularly all sweetened Drinks
and Food, forward the Generation of the Gout, and other Diseases of the Body,
which simple innocent Food would prevent, if Temperance be but observed: But if
Sugar be used in Milk-meats for Old people, it may prove beneficial, but I
thing to none else.

Of Sugar Candy.
It is made thus: First they boil it as high as other Sugars, then out of the
Pans they take this Syrup, and put it in an Earthen Pot; then they set it in a
hot Stowe, there to stand 9 or 10 days; in that time the fierceness of the
sulphurous heat coagulates it into an hard tough substance, then you take it
out from the Syrup, and put the Candy or hard Lumps into the Stowe again, but
made about 2 or 3 degrees hotter, where it must remain 9 or 10 days longer, and
then it is done.

There is two sorts of it, one White, the other Brown, but they are both of one
nature and operation; they are much made use of for Coughs, Colds and
Stoppages, which in my opinion there is nothing more contrary and burdensome
to Nature in such cases than this very thing, and therefore ought to be
abandoned; for in truth the best Food for those that are invaded with these
Colds, etc. are thin brisk Grewels and Pottages, made as I have taught before;
also good raw Sallads with Bread and Oil, but eat Oil sparingly: likewise Bread
and Butter, and all sorts of lean Food, light of digestion; and for Drinks,
Water and Rhenish-wine, Toast and Water, or Water and White Wind, two-parts
Water, and one Wine, or good small Ale with moderate exercise and clothing,
walking in the open Air sometimes, which will gradually cleanse the passages,
and open all Obstructions, and soon remove these Distempers.

Of the Occasion of Colds and Coughs; and of their Cure.
Coughs and Colds are produced by intemperance in Meats, Drinks, Exercises and
Habits, or by eating or drinking too much in quantity, and things of a contrary
quality, or improperly prepared, and not from thin clothing, as many imagine:
for if the inside be sound and clean, there is little danger of outward
Inconveniences. The best way to prevent outward Colds, and the Evils that
happen through thick and thin Clothing, and by heats, sweatings, and the like,
is to change your Clothes often. As for Example: Put on when you stay at home
in a morning one sort of Clothes, and when you go out, put off your Clothes to
your Shirt, and put on fresh and cold Clothes, and again at night pull off them
to the Shirt, and put on the others. And for those that sweat much by their
labor, let them pull off all their Clothes, Shirt and all, and put on fresh
Shirts, and cold Clothing; and for those that overtravel themselves, let them
do the like; but observe that both sit still a while, before they either eat or
drink.

Observe farther by the bye, the Pruens, Figs, and Nuts, and Almonds, and many
other such like things, ought not be eaten at all, except only with common
Bread, or in Physical way, in opening Drinks. Also Candied-Gingers, all sorts
of Conserves, and Preserves, and all Confections, Hodge-Podge, Cakes, Buns, are
very prejudicial for, and obstruct the Passages, generate Crudities, spoil the
Stomach, and prepare Matter for a multitude of Diseases.

Of Canary.
Canary is an excellent cordial Liquor, eat a good piece of Bread, and drink a
Glass of Canary after it, and it will make a rich meal. It is in my opinion the
best Cordial an Apothecary has in his Shop; for any man in time of Disorder and
Sickness.

Of Sherry.
It is a fine cordial Wine, as good for common Drinks as Canary, being mixed
with Water, it begets Appetite, cleanses the Passages, and helps Concoction;
it purges by Urine more than Canary: But this, as all other Liquors, must be
drank with discretion and temperance, and not too frequent.

Of White Wind.
White Wind is an excellent cleansing Liquor, it begets Appetite, and purges by
Urine; but let it not be too frequently drunk, left it indispose the body, by
putting it into an unnatural Flame.

Of Rhenish-wine.
Rhenish-Wine is an excellent cleanser of the Stomach, somewhat akin to
White Wind, it begets Appetite, and helps Concoction.

As for Old-Hock, esteemed by some, it is the most prejudicial of any Liquor,
and therefore ought to be forborne.

Of Claret.
Claret is a good Stomach-Wine, moderately drunk; it helps concoction, and
begets appetite, it is the best of Wines for those that eat abundance of
Fat-flesh, and succulent Foods: But it purges not by Urine so much as White.
Take notice that this as all other Liquors, are not to be frequently used, for
then they are prejudicial; but a Glass of Claret, or a Dram of Brandy* or the
like, are good Cordials when you have eat too much in quantity of any Foods,
too foul or gross in quality.

Of Cider.
Cider if well made and fermented, is a fine brisk Liquor, and altogether as
good as Claret or White Wind, and perhaps better for English Bodies, if drunk
temperately. Note, that no Cider ought to be Kept above one year, if you regard
your health.

Of Mum.
Mum if temperately drunk, is very wholesome for melancholy Flegmatical
people, and for those whose Food is coarse Bread and Cheese, Flowered Milk,
Herbs, and Lean Pottages; but I think it not near so wholesome as well brewed
Ale.

Of Coffee.
Coffee ought to be used only in a Physical way by them that are troubled with
Fumes and dulling Vapors that fly into their heads: it is likewise good after
hard Drinking, Weariness, Labor and Fasting: but for others, I think it best
to forbear it: Yet a Dish will do no man harm.

Tea
Is an innocent harmless Liquor, that purges by Urine, and is of an opening
Quality; but it is not comparable to an Herb called Dandelion; which being
infused in boiling hot water about half an hour, and then pour the Liquor from
the Herbs, and sweetened with white Sugar, is a much better Drink. It purges by
Urine, and cleanses the Stomach. Sage, Penyroyal, Thyme or Mint, dried in
their proper season, and kept in Bags, make as good Liquor as Tea.

Of Sallads.
Take Sorrel, Parsley and Spinnage, Lettice, and some few Onions; then add salt,
Vinegar and Oil, a good quantity; if you cannot get Oil, good Butter melted may
serve as well, for it is scarce dicernable from Oil; but let the Salt
predominate. Eat Bread only with the Sallad, which is better than if you eat
Bread and Meat, or Bread and Butter, or Cheese.

Another.
Take Sorrel, Lettice, Pepper, Grass, Spinnage, Tops of Mints, and Onions,
seasoned as before.

Another.
Take Sorrel, Lettice, Cellery, Spinnage, Onions, and Endive seasoned as before.

Another.
Sage, Mint, Penyroyal, Balm and some Lettice and Sorrel; eat them as before:
This is brave Sallad.

Another.
Young green Buds of Coleworts with Onions, is a good Sallad, seasoned as
before.

Another.
Taragan, Nettle-tops, Penyroyal, Mint, Parsley, Sorrel, Lettice, and Leaves of
Coleworts eat as before, is an excellent Sallad, if seasoned to the highest
degree.

A Sallad for Winter.
Parsley, old Onions, Endive, Cellery, Lettice, Sorrel and Colewort* plants,
Seasoned with Salt, Oil and vinegar, is an excellent warming and cherishing
Sallad.

Another.
Take Cellery, Endive, Spinnage and Lettice, and half a head of Garlic in it,
seasoned with Salt, Vinegar and Oil, this is a brave Sallad. Sallads are good
at all times, but most proper from end of January to the 1st of July: Then
again from September till December; and indeed all Winter, if the Weather be
open.

In Spring.
Spinnage, Corn-sallad, Nettle-tops, and the Buds of young Cabbage, and others
the like nature, being boiled* is an excellent corrective to them that eat
Flesh-meat; they loosen the Belly, and open Obstructions. In April, May and
June eat Spinnage, Parsley, Lettice, Mint-tops, Borage, Scurvy, Dandilyon,
Comfory, and the like, boiled in plenty of Water over a brisk Fire; add to them
Butter melted, and some Salt; then eat with Bread, or Bread and Flesh is good
Food.

The best way to make Herb-Pottage.
Smallage, Clivers, Watercresses, Elder-buds and Nettle-tops; put water to them
proportionable to your Herbs; then add Oatmeal as much as you think fit to
leave it in thickness: when the Water is ready to boil, put your Herbs in, cut,
or uncut; then when it is again ready to boil, take a Spoon or Ladle and lade
it, so that you keep it from boiling; do this eight or nine minutes, then take
it off and eat it blood-warm, with the Herbs in it, or strained; adding a
little Butter, Salt and Bread, This is an admirable cleansing Sallad.

Another.
Spinnage, Corn-sallad, Tops of Pennyroyal and Mint, ordered and eat as before.

To make the best Herb Diet-drink.
Supposing your Herbs well gathered, and dry and kept in Bags; take what Herb
you think fit, put it in a Linen Bag and steep it 7 or 8 hours in Beer, Ale,
or Wine, or other Liquor, and then take it out, and it is done: Let not your
Wormwood be steeped above three or four hours; observe that one sort of Herb by
it self is much better than Compounds.

To prevent the Scurvy.
Eat not Meat and Drinks too strong for Nature, for Nature ought to be stronger
than the Food. Meat and Drink ought not to be eat that are of a contrary
Quality to the Constitution. Have a care of eating to Fullness, or to Excess.

Take care that your Victuals be in all respects properly prepared, for some
will but half do it, others over do it.

Let all sorts of Flesh and gross food be boiled in plenty of Water, and over a
brisk fire. Forbear eating too much flesh. It is most unwholesome in July,
August, September, October. Forbear eating too much Fish. Remember you eat not
before the former Food be digested. Drink moderately; let your ordinary Drink
not be hard, stale, nor sour, nor too new. Let your Clothing be moderate. Let
your Houses be airy, your Beds hard, clean and sweet; use proper Exercise and
Labor in open airy places; take Walks often by River-sides, or on Plains and
Downs; observe the Rules of Chastity, avoid all compounded Foods; avoid Carking
Cares, Hates, Revenge, Envy, Violence, Oppression; keep a good Conscience, for
that is a continual Feast: Hearken to the Voice of Wisdom, and the Dictates of
Reason and Nature, and that will bring thee to endless Felicity.

An Excellent Poultice,
Which cures scalded Limbs, Burns, Boils, Fellons, Tumors* proceeding from
choler, phlegm or melancholy. It also cures all Contusions, Inflammations or
Bruises, either with* or without a Wound; old Wounds, Ulcers, or running Sores:
Excellent also against the Gout, and Inflammation of the Eyes; admirable
against sore Breasts, and Bites of Dogs, or any other hurt of what kind or
nature soever: which is thus.

Take two Pints of Water, River, Rain, or Spring* their take as much ground
Oatmeal as will make it thick, fit for a Poultice; add to it two ounces of good
Sugar, a handful of Dandelion cut small, then place it over the fire in an open
and convenient Vessel, keep it stirring till it is boiling-hot, and then it is
made.

Another.
Take about a Quart of Water, then take as much Houshold-bread as will make it
thick, and three Ounces of beaten Raisins of the Sun, and one Ounce of Sugar,
and about half a Pint of new Ale; stir all together, and make them boiling-hot
over a clear fire, and it is done,

Another.
One quart of Water, as much Bread as will make it Thick, Five Ounces of
Raisins of the Sun, and one Ounce of Coriander Seeds, beaten with a Glass of
Ale, made boiling-hot, and then it is prepared.

Another.
One quart of Water and Bread, to make it as thick as a Poultice; of Sugar two
Ounces, a Glass of Sack, or for want of that, other Wine, make it boiling-hot.
Apply these Medicines to the Part afflicted, by spreading the Poultice pretty
thick on a Linen Cloth, that will cover the whole part, somewhat warmer than
milk from the Cow; but let it not be so hot as is usual, for Extremes prove
generally prejudicial. Apply these Poultices every two hours at least in the
day, and three or four times in the night, if the Wound be dangerous; otherwise
ten times in a day and a night will do: when you take the Poultice off, put
that away, and put a fresh on every time, and keep a constant Repetition for 4,
5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, or 11 days, if occasion be; but it will cure most Distempers
in less time, if you observe this method: But be sure wash your sores 'twixt
whiles, with Water and Sugar, and sometimes with Water and fresh Butter beaten
together, which will keep it clean and pliant.

How a Man may Live for Two Pence or Three Pence a Day very well.
A Man in the Country may Live Plentifully for Two Pence a Day; for in many
Countries you may have Two quarts of milk for a Penny, to which add a Pint of
Water, and not half a pennyworth of Flower, and make it into Flower'd-milk,
according to our Directions, and you will have a Noble Dish, sufficient for
Four People, and this stands but in Three-half-pence; eat some Bread with it,
and there is no Victuals affords better Nourishment, and that to all Ages, but
especially young people. The like is to be understood of other Foods, where
every one observes his time of eating, and his weight and measure of Food, and
a great Trouble and Waste will thereby be avoided. As to Quantity of other
Foods, we suppose that Sixteen Ounces, solid Food, to wit, Bread, Cheese,
Butter, and Eggs, may be sufficient Twenty-four hours for a laboring man, and
the best time for eating, we suppose to be about Eight in the Morning, and Four
in the Afternoon.

If the Food be Flower'd-milk, then a Pint of it, and four Ounces of Bread and
Butter or Cheese, is sufficient: If Water-Grewel or Pottage, a Pint and four
Ounces of Bread and Cheese: If Raw milk, the same; but if Flower'd-milk with an
Egg in it, Three Ounces of Bread and Butter or of Cheese, will be sufficient.

If you eat Raw Sallad, weigh only your Bread, and about Five Ounces will be
sufficient, with an Ounce of Cheese or Butter to eat after your Herbs* As for
Puddings, Apple-Pies, and the like, I leave ^o every ones Discretion, but you
must be sparing and temperate.

As for Drink, Water has the first place; and a quart of Water mixed with two
Spoonfuls of ground Oatmeal, and well brewed together, Ten or Twelve times out
of one Porringer into another, make an Excellent Drink, and in Summertime it is
very pleasant. In Wintertime if you make it blood warm, it will drink well;
milk and water is an Excellent Drink. Thus you see a Small Matter suffices a
Moderate Man.

How the Poor may Subsist well these Hard Times for Two Pence a Day, and Less.
Take a Peck of good Wheat Flour, make half of it into a Loaf, the other half
keep for to use as follows. Put to a quart of water a spoonful or two of
Flower, and make it as we before d^^rected you to make Milk-pottage; eat the
Brea^ in quantity, so much as that it may last till your Pottage is spent. This
is an Excellent Food, and ^ffords good Nourishment; and by this, the Poor ^ay
Subsist well these Hard Times for less than ^wo Pence a Day.

If you put a Quart of Milk, and a Pint of Wa^er, a Spoonful of Flower, and
order it as before ^^rected; it will be Excellent and Pleasant Food.

Another Cheap way for the Poor.
Take a Pint of Pease, and put to them Three Quarts or a Gallon of Water, let
them stand on a slow Fire two Hours, but let them not boil: then ^ake an Onion
and a little Sage shred well, and ^ut into the Pease, and stir them a little;
then ^ake a Spoonful of Flow^^ or Oat-meal ground, and beat it well together
with a little Water, and put to it, and then let your Pottage boil up a little,
then put a little Salt to it. Eat with this a little Bread, and you will find
it an excellent* nourishing and pleasant Food.

To take Ink out of Paper.
Take Aquafortis, and dip a little of it upon the Blot, or Writing you would
take out, and immediately it will disappear; then take a little Water steeped
in Allom, and wash it over with it, and when(...) dry, it will make it look as
clear and white as a(...) first; otherwise, the Aquafortis alone will make
(...) yellow Stain.

How to Bottle Cider.
In March Bottle your Cider, and if you put in a^^ut half a Spoonful of Spirit
of Clary, it will make ^^e Liqu^^ so perfectly resemble the best Canary, that
few good and exercised Pallats, will be able to distinguish it.

How to make Copper-look* as well as the Best Silver.
Take Crema Tartar, two Drams, the best Leaf-Silver one Dram, and Aquafortis
four or five Drops: make it into a Paste, and rub it on your Copper, and
immediately it will look well.

FINIS.
*** Lithgow's Nineteen Years Travels through the most Eminent Places of the
Habitable World. Containing an Exact Description of the Customs, Laws,
Religions, Policies, and Government of Emperors, Kings, and Princes; also of
the Countries and Cities, Trades, Rivers, and Commerce in all Places where he
Traveled, etc. Printed for George Conyers at the Golden-Ring in Little-Britain.


