A DISCOURSE Concerning the Worship of Images. Preached before the UNIVERSITY
OF OXFORD, On the 24th of May, 1686. By GEORGE TVLLIE Sub-Dean of York, etc.
For which he was Suspended.

IMPRIMATUR,

Apr. 7. 1689. Z. Isham R. P. D. Henrico Episc. Land. a Sacris.



LONDON: Printed for Ric. Chiswell at the Rose and Crown in St. Paul's Church
Yard. MDCLXXXIX.

To the Right Honorable, and Right Reverend Father in God, HENRY Lord Bishop
of London, one of his Majesty's most Honorable Privy Council.
My LORD,
SInce the true Reasons of Punishments inflicted upon such private and obscure
Persons, as my self, are many times not rightly understood by some, and
misrepresented by others, and thereby leave a Stain behind them, and that this
I found was my Case, at the time of my Suspension; I thought I should be
wanting to my self, if at this Juncture, (when, God be thanked, an honest Zeal
against Popery is no longer Criminal) I did not publish that Sermon, which
brought the Rage of the Papists, and a Suspension upon me. My Lord, it is not
from any Opinion I have of the Performance it self, that I now make it public;
for I am too well acquainted with the excellent Tracts which the Divines of our
Church have published, as upon others, so likewise upon this Argument, since
the time of my preaching this Sermon, to entertain any such foolish conceit of
it; Nor shall I here take occasion to reflect upon that venerable Body, the
Dean and Chapter of York, who were pleased, immediately upon the receipt of a
Letter from the King, to Suspend me there for this Discourse preached before
the University of Oxford; and that without as much as the least Summons,
Citation, or ordinary Civility of a private Letter to acquaint me with their
Summary proceedings against me, tho 'twas visible enough, that as the
management of their Censure was unpresidented, and then a leading Case; so had
it not been without fatal Effects upon the Clergy, had not your Lordship, in a
most generous and heroic Manner, put a stop to it here in the very same Case
of the Reverend the Dean of Norwich. My Lord, as I had the Honor (for such
even then I esteemed it) to be the first Clergyman in England who suffered in
those days in the Defense of our Religion against Popish Superstition and
Idolatry; So I humbly beg, that your Lordship's being shortly after made the
greatest and most eminent Instance of Suffering in the same excellent Cause,
may excuse the Presumption of this Dedication, in

My LORD, Your Lordships most Obedient and Devoted Servant GEO. TULLIE.

EXODUS XX. ver. 4, and part of ver. 5. Thou shall not make to thy self any
graven Image, nor the likeness of any thing that is in heaven above, or in the
earth beneath, or in the water under the earth.

Thou shall not how down to them, nor worship them.


THese Words being an express Law or Command, of a Moral, and therefore
perpetual, Obligation, enforced upon us, above any of the other, not only with
the particular Reason of it, The Jealousy of that Great God in Relation to his
Honor, who himself promulg'd it; but likewise, with a most severe and terrible
Sanction, of visiting this great Iniquity, as the Breach of it seems peculiarly
to be styled, unto the third and fourth Generation; and lastly, with the most
ample Reward, of showing Mercy unto thousands of them that keep it; (who seem
here to be said by way of Eminency, to Love God, as they, who violate the
Command, to Hate him;) It concerns, doubtless, the Christian as highly as ever
it did the Jewish Church, to enquire into the true Sense and import of that
Law, which God himself has bound so fast upon us; lest some of us Christians
also, whilst we trifle and distinguish to palliate an unwarrantable Practice in
the Church, become Idolaters, as were some of them. My present business
therefore shall be,

I. To assert and explain the genuine Sense and Meaning of this Commandment.
II. To enquire into the Doctrine and Practice of the Church of Rome, in
relation to this way of Worship. III. To consider, how they justify themselves
from the Imputation consequent upon it.
And this with what brevity the Copiousness of the Argument, and with what
plainness the Nature of it will admit.

And first, I am to assert and explain the genuine Sense and Meaning of this
Commandment.

In order to the distinct understanding whereof, I find it absolutely
requisite; First, To remove those false Glosses and Constructions which the
Sophistry of some Men have put upon it, which, if left untouched, would darken
and perplex the otherwise most evident Proofs of its true Sense and Import.

Now that Exposition which restrains the Images and Similitudes, mentioned in
this Command, to the Representations of false and fictitious Gods; and the
worship prohibited, to the worshipping them for Gods, being the most usual
amongst our Adversaries, and the likest to stand in our Light; we had best, I
think, for brevity's sake, confine our selves to the consideration of that, and
show,

1st, That they have no reasonable Color for restraining the Images here
spoken of, to the Representations of false Gods. And that

2dly, Neither Gentile nor Jewish Idolaters did ever worship such
Representations for Gods; and consequently, such worship could never be
intended in this Prohibition before us.

First, That our Adversaries have no reasonable Color for restraining the
Images here mentioned, to the Representations of false Gods only.

And here one would have expected some shrewd Authority, and convincing Reason
for so straitlac'd a Construction of a most plain, full, and comprehensive Law;
and yet, after all, the burden of the Argument miserably ends in the pretended
Signification of the Greek Word, (...), by which it seems the Seventy had the
good luck to Translate the Hebrew word Pesel, in their version of this Law. And
thus behold a pure Logomachy or Strife of words made the chief Foundation of an
awkward Sense of so express, so important a Commandment; a jejune and insipid
sort of Contest This, I confess; but the misery is, a Defendant is obliged to
follow a litigious Plaintiff into what Court soever he thinks fit to remove his
Cause. And here, tho one would think 'twere every whit as reasonable to have
recourse to the import of an original Word for the Sense of a Law, as to a
Version of it; a word most properly significative of any thing carved or
engraven; a word rendered by the same Seventy almost constantly in that large
Sense, by the Chaldee and Syriac Interpreters of the place Image; by Jerome,
and other Latin Translators, Idolum, Sculptile, and Imago indifferently; by
their own dear Vulgar Latin, Sculptile, in this very place; yet, to throw them
all this in for quietness sake, how comes Clemens of Alexandria, a great
Critic, as well as a Divine, reciting this Law, to use the words, (...), and
(...), instead of this so highly significant word (...)? Nay, what is more
strange, How comes not only he, in his Protreptick; but Origin in his fourth
Book against Celsus, and Justin Martyr in his Dialogue with Trypho the Jew,
utterly to omit the word in their Citations of this Law, using only (...) and
(...)? Of so little peculiar importance, did they think it; and yet am I apt to
believe, they understood the Sense of the Command, and the Signification of
Words in their own Language, as well as the nicest Critic now a days, without
any offense to them. Nay, so far is this word from only denoting the
Representation of a false God, that, on the contrary, there is nothing more
certain, than that any Image or Figure, designed to worship the true God by,
actually does, and properly may, come under the same Denomination. Thus St.
Stephen calls the Golden Calf, an Idol, (Acts 7. 41.) and yet it was only a
Symbolical Representation of the Great God, Jehovah, as we shall see hereafter.
Thus, again, their own celebrated vulgar Version, unluckily styles the Image
that Micah's Mother made, Idolum; and yet this was wholly dedicated unto the
Lord, says the Text, (Judges 17. 3.) And what in fine, is more evident, than
that the Fathers, who branded the Carpocratian Heretics with the Imputation of
Idolatry, for worshipping the Images of Christ; and the Arrians likewise, for
worshipping Christ himself, whilst they thought him but a Creature; (stiling
even our blessed Lord an Idol to them, who Worshipped him under that Notion.)
What, I say, is more evident, than that they looked on every thing as an Idol
that was worshipped, besides the only true God; and such Worshippers,
Idolaters: and consequently, must have understood the word Idol, to have
imported a great deal more than the Representation of a false or fictitious
God. But should we let all this go for nothing, (as perhaps it would be thought
hard to differ for a Word) yet cannot any reasonable Man imagine why the other
word Temunah, mentioned in the Law; a word most amply expressive of any manner
of Similitude whatsoever, and by which the Divine Wisdom seems most
industriously to have provided against all possible Evasions; Why this, I say,
should be either supinely flur'd over, or most boldly and unwarrantably
consined to the narrow, and that falsely supposed, Signification of the former
word (...). For, to say no more, is it not more faitable to the received
Notions of Mankind in this particular, to interpret a precedent by a subsequent
word, rather than a subsequent word by a precedent; a subsequent word,
especially, of a most comprehensive Signification, by a precedent of a very
narrow and confined one? As I would only desire to know of these Persons, that
if the Head of their Church should publish a Bull, prohibiting Papal Honors,
such as being placed upon the Altar after Election, to be given to false Popes
(as we know there have been several Pretenders to the infallible Chair at the
same time) and not only to them, but to any Person else whatsoever: I would
only know, I say, whether or no, he who should explain the subsequent Terms of
any Person whatsoever, by the precedent, the Pseudo-Pretenders to the Popedom,
and say, that the one meant no more than the other, would not be thought guilty
of a very saucy and wilful Misconstruction of his Holiness's pleasure in the
matter; and if he would, I desire them to make the Application.

And thus I have shown, That they have no reasonable Color for restraining the
Images and Similitudes mentioned in this Commandment, to the Representations of
false Gods.

I proceed in the second Place, to show, That neither did the old Idolaters
ever worship such Representations for Gods; and that consequently, the
Prohibition of such Worship could never be the Intention of this Commandment.
This indeed is an Interpretation one might possibly have expected from the Pen
of a Jesuit, or other private everlasting Caviller of that Church; but it is a
shame, methinks, to find such wretched Stuff in so authentic a Record, as the
Catechism ad Paroch.

For first, all false Objects of Worship, (and such must be all Images
worshipped for Gods) are manifestly prohibited in the first Commandment, [or,
if they will have it so, in the first Part, or Clause of it,] Thou shall have
no other Gods but me, i. e. thou shall worship nothing but me; and therefore
cannot be supposed to be again prohibited under that Notion in the second
Commandment, or but Appendix to the first; unless they will suppose the
infinite Wisdom guilty of Impertinence, rather than themselves. And indeed,
would not any indifferent Man be apt to think them hard put to it for a Salvo to
their own Practice, when they are forced to suppose the All-wise Lawgiver to
have spent so many Words, in a short Comprehension of Laws, upon the
Prohibition of that which it is next to Impossible, in the very nature of the
thing, any Man in his Wits should ever be guilty of? For is it indeed, as much
as fairly supposeable, that any thing in the shape of a reasonable Creature
should take the Image, i. e. the Likeness or Representation of a thing, for the
thing it self; take it for a Representation, and not for a Representation at
the same time? I know not, I confess, what they may think credible, who can
roundly take a Sign for the thing signified; but other People, who are not so
much used to Contradictions, will not perhaps so easily digest the belief of
it. If then they cannot reasonably be presumed to have taken the Likeness of a
God, for the very God himself whose it was, they could not worship it for such;
and consequently, God could not here prohibit the worship of Images for Gods;
which was the Point to be proved. And of which incidentally, more hereafter.

Having thus cleared the way, by a short removal of the chief part of that Dirt
and Rubbish, which obstructed our Passage; we may now go a little more cleanly
and directly on, to the true Sense and Import of this Commandment, which we
assert to be this, That we are hereby forbid to worship the true God by all
corporeal Figures and Representations.

For, as in the first Commandment God has determined himself to be the only
proper Object of Worship in Opposition to all false Objects of it, which the
grosser Heathens might Figure to themselves; so, here in the Law before us, he
prohibits that corrupt way or manner, whereby the more intelligent Heathens, at
least, and amongst the rest, the Egyptians, (whose Rites and Customs his own
People might now be apt to retain) did actually worship him, declaring it
altogether not only repugnant to his Will, the sole Rule and Standard, but
likewise incongruous to his Nature, the Ground and Reason of his Worship; of
both which they being to have more ample Discoveries than the Nations had from
amongst whom he had brought them, would consequently lay under stricter
Obligations of not offending in this particular; which they perhaps would do
well to consider, who living under infinitely clearer Revelations of the Divine
Will and Nature, than ever the Jews themselves could pretend to, retain yet the
worship here forbid, so manifestly repugnant to the express Declaration of his
Will, and the Majesty of his Nature.

But to be a little more distinct, I shall endeavor to make out this Sense of
the Commandment.

1. From the Notion of Image Worship, as practiced by the Heathens. And 2. From
those Reasons, by which the Prohibition in the Text is further enforced; and
some particular Instances of the contrary Practice related in Scripture. And 3.
From the Sense of Antiquity in the matter.
1st, From the Notion of Image Worship, as practiced by the Heathens. And that
the more ingenious amongst them, (from whose Sentiments we are to form our
Notions of their Worship, not from the Rabble) looked upon their Images and
Statues, as no other than Symbols, and Analogical Representations of that
Being, to which they paid Divine Worship, is so evident from those accounts
which Christian Writers, no less than themselves, give of their Images, and
their Opinions concerning them, that no doubt but a Julian, Celsus, or a
Porphyry, were they to write now, would publish their Complaints of
Misrepresentation, as well as other People, and justify their Practice upon the
very same Grounds their Misrepresenters do theirs. Nec simulacrum, nec
Daemonium colo, says the Heathen in St. Austin, [in Psalm. 113.] sed per
Effigiem corporalem ejus rei signum intueor, quam colere debeo. And it appears
from the Discourse of John of Thessalonica, recorded in the fifth Action of
that Synod, which first established this hopeful way of Worship in Christendom,
that the Heathens at that time denied they worshipped Images, but only the
Spiritual Powers through them. Nay, farther, that the more Learned thinking
parts of the Gentile-World, as the Schools of Socrates and Plato amongst the
Greeks, did worship one true Supreme God, by some of their Images; as likewise
did the wiser Egyptians, a rational and contemplative People, by theirs, is so
largely, so learnedly evinced by an unanswerable Writer of our own Church; that
it is but manners his Labor should supersede any others upon this Argument, too
copious to admit of any more than a bare mention here. I only therefore briefly
Remark, without descending to Particulars, That if we will allow the wiser
Heathens to have had any Notions of one Supreme God, (and he must be a great
Stranger, not only to theirs, but to Christian Writers concerning them, who
will not allow them to have had very noble and great ones) we must likewise
grant that they worshipped him in a measure proportionable to those Notices and
Conceptions they had of him. Agreeable hereunto the great Apostle, in the first
Chapter of his Epistle to the Romans, speaking of the Heathen Philosophers, as
Chrysostom observes, grants them not only to have known God, even the Eternal
Power and Godhead, by Deductions from the Creatures; but likewise, to have
glorified him in their Devotions, only indeed they did not glorify him as God,
but in a way unsuitable to the infinite Perfections of his Nature, that is, as
the Apostle explains himself in v. 23. by corporeal Images and Representations.

Thus again, The same Apostle in his Encounter with the Wits of Athens, Acts
17. taking it for granted they acknowledged one Supreme God, tho indeed they
had not such clear and distinct Conceptions of him, but that he was still in a
great measure unknown to them, as the Inscription upon the Altar styled him,
plainly tells us, that they worshipped him; for they worshipped him whom he
afterward declared unto them, according to the Text; (whom therefore ye
ignorantly worship, him declare I unto you) and he, I presume, will be easily
granted to have been the true God. Their only fault laid in the means or manner
of their Worship, the Images graven by Art and man's Device, things so highly
incongruous to the transcendent Perfections of his Nature, as the Apostle there
argues. And what he has affirmed of the Greek Philosophers, Plutarch and
others, who have writ concerning the Egyptian Worship, assert equally of them;
and indeed, it seems highly absurd, to imagine that they, who were so
profoundly versed in the Books of the Creation, should not in some measure
spell out the great Creator by them, as well as other People. So that from the
generality of this way of Worship by Images, and of the Supreme God by several
of them, amongst the Egyptians especially, (whose way and notions of Worship
must needs be supposed to have made a deep Impression upon the minds of those
People to whom this Law was first given) we have good reason to conclude, That
the Divine Wisdom, which in the first Commandment forbad all false Objects of
Worship, had in this second a more peculiar regard to this corrupt manner of it.

But, 2dly, this Sense of the Law will farther appear from those Reasons by
which it is farther enforced, and some particular Instances of the contrary
Practice related in Scripture. The reason urged by Moses, in the Repetition of
this Law, in the 4th of Deuterenomy, is, that they saw no manner of Similitude
on the day that the Lord spoke unto them in Horeb, out of the midst of the
Fire: Where I would only desire to know, whether the force of that Reason be
levelled against making the Representations of false Gods, or the true; unless
indeed they will have him a false God who spoke to the People out of the midst
of the Fire. The Argument offered against this Practice by the Evangelical
Prophet, seems to go a little farther than that urged by Moses, proceeding not
upon the want of Countenance from God's nonappearance to them in any
Similitude, but upon the intrinsic Absurdity and Incongruity of the thing. All
Nations, says he, before him are as nothing, and they are counted to him as
less than nothing, and vanity. To whom then will ye liken God? or what likeness
will ye compare unto him? [Isa. 4. 17, etc.] Where I hope our Adversaries will
not be so absurd, as to make an Argument against Worshipping the true God by
Representations derived from the incomprehensible Majesty of his Nature, a
disswasive only from the worship of Heathen Idols.

If from the Reasons by which the Law is enforced, we descend to particular
Instances of the Violation of it; they are so impregnable an evidence of the
truth of what we assert, that it is next to an affront to an intelligent
Audience to insist upon them. For what Men in their Wits, but they who pretend
to the faculty of making Gods themselves, can imagine the Jewish High Priest so
absurd, as to have designed the Golden Calf for the true God of Israel, or the
People to have worshipped it as such? Was Aaron indeed so Blasphemously fond of
the Work of his Hands, as to give that, and not rather the great Object
designed to be worshipped by it, the incommunicable Name of Jehovah, as he does
in the Proclamation of the Feast upon this occasion? Or, did they take the Man
Moses for their God? For, for ought I see, they only desired one in his
Capacity, upon the occasion of his Absence, Up, make us gods; or as Nehemiah
has it, a God, which shall go before us; for, as for this Moses, who went
before us out of the land of Egypt, we wot not what is become of him. So that
they either before took Moses that living Symbol of the Divine Presence amongst
them, for a God, or did not now take the Calf for one, but only for a
Symbolical Representation and Presence of him, agreeable to the Worship of
Egypt. Or, must we, lastly, to show that these Jews were worse than other
People, suppose them indeed so completely Sottish, as to have really taken the
Calf for the God that brought them out of the Land of Egypt, even before it was
made, whilst the divine stupid thing lay yet scattered in the Earrings of its
future Votaries? If from this Calf in the Wilderness, we pass on to those at
Dan and Bethel, we find them likewise designed for no other end, than visible
Symbols of the true God of Israel. Jeroboam, who set them up, never pretending
an alteration in the Object, but only in the place of the Peoples worship; as
is evident from hence, that the Sin of Ahab (who actually introduced the
worship of a false God) is loaded with much greater Aggravations than this of
Jeroboam; that the Worshippers of Ahab's God, Baal, are mentioned in
Contradistinction to those who worshipped the Lord, [1 Kings 18. 21.] The
generality whereof did at that time worship him by Jeroboam's Calves; That Jehu
styles his Zeal against the Worshippers of Baal, a zeal for the Lord, i. e. the
established Worship of the Kingdom at Dan and Bethel by the two Calves to which
he adhered, [2 Kings 10. 16.] And indeed, Jeroboam must have been as much out
of his Policticks, of which he was perfectly Master, as some Men are out of
their Divinity, had he gone about to have secured the Revolt made to him, (the
only end he designed in the Change made of their Worship) by the Introduction
of strange Gods into it; that being the very cause for which, as Ahijah had but
just lately told him, the Divine Vengeance rent the Kingdom from Solomon, and
gave it to him, his Servant, [1 Kings 11. 11, 31, 33.] and yet for all
Jeroboam's good Intentions of directing his Worship to a right ultimate Object,
the God of Israel, by the Calves; we know what that God thought of him for it.
Thus, lastly, were the Graven and the Molten Images of Micha, in the 17th of
Judges, dedicated unto the Lord, says the Text, to the worship of the only true
God. As is farther evident from the Opinion he had, that the Lord would do him
good for what he had done; especially, since he had got a Levite to Officiate
in his little private Oratory; which he had little reason to expect, if he
worshipped them either beside, or in Opposition to that Lord from whom he
expected the Blessing.

I should now come to make out the same Sense of this Commandment, from the
third Medium I proposed; The Sentiments of the Church in its purest Ages;
showing that the Fathers utterly condemned all manner of Images set up for
Religious Worship, such as respected God particularly, and not merely those of
the Heathen World, on considerations peculiar to them; and this upon the
strength of the Prohibition in the Text, or other Places of the same import
with it. But what I have said, being sufficient to give light to the true
meaning of the Law, and the evincing of this Truth consequent upon it, That in
the Scripture-notion, a man may be guilty of Idolatry, who Worships a right
ultimate Object by an Image; I must be content to dismiss this last Argument,
because it would require so just a Discourse of it self, that it cannot
possibly be comprised within the limits allotted to this.

I proceed to the second thing I proposed, The consideration of the Doctrine
and Practice of the Church of Rome, in relation to the Worship here prohibited;
and because an Image being made a Medium of Worship, becomes likewise an
intermediate Object of it, the Original being worshipped in and by that
Worship, which is relatively given to the Images; and because this will appear
in the Sequel of this Discourse, to be the true intent and meaning of the
Church; I shall consider their Doctrine and Practice under the term of
Image Worship.

But cannot but justly complain, before I go any further, of the great
insincerity, that has of late been used in representing their Doctrines to the
World. If we will believe the modern Palliators and Expositors, we have been upon
a false Scent all this while; our Forefathers, poor Men, either fondly or
wilfully pursued the mistaken Ideas of their own Imagination, instead of
attending to the Intention of the Church; and there needs now no more than an
innocent turn to the State of any Controversy betwixt us, finally to decide it.
So that in truth, we have more ado now, to know what their Doctrines are, than
to refute them; as if they too, as well as their secret Disciples, were for a
time to go in disguise amongst us. Now, of all the Points in dispute betwixt us
and them, there has certainly none been more artificially dressed up, than this
concerning the Worship of Babies; as if Paint and Varnish were as requisite to
the Doctrine, as the Subject of it. Our Eyes every day inform us, (if indeed we
may trust the Testimony of our Eyes) that they solemnly consecrate them, carry
them in Pomp and Procession, set them up in their Churches, over their very
Altars, places most proper for Religious Worship, kiss them, prostrate
themselves to 'em, burn Lights and Incense to their Honor; and yet they
worship them! no, not they, honest Men, God forbid! They are only Incentives to
their Devotion, Remembrancers of their great Prototypes, and serve to fix their
otherwise distracted Thoughts upon their right Objects. So that to speak
precisely, and according to the Ecclesiastical Style, when they honor the
Image of an Apostle or Martyr, their intention is not so much to honor the
Image, as to honor the Apostle or Martyr in presence of, or before the Image,
says the Bishop of Meaux, in his Palliation of the Doctrine of Image Worship;
and from him, the Representer.

To wipe of which Fucus, I shall prove in the first place, That that which is
given before, or in the presence of Images, call it here what you will, has
relation, or is given to Images, not only before them.

And secondly, because the same Learned Prelate, and his unhappy Imitator, the
Representer, would again qualify the matter by the softer terms of Honor,
Reverence, Respect, such a decent Regard as is paid to holy things, and the
like;

I shall show in the second Place, That, what is thus given to Images, is
Religious Worship, properly so called.

1. Then, that what is given before Images, has relation, or is given to Images.

In order to the Proof whereof, I observe in the first place, that in the
Scripture-stile, which we Heretics think as good Argument as the
Ecclesiastic, to fall down before Images, is as much as to fall down to them;
and either of them, as much as to worship them. Thus Amaziah, in 2 Chronicles. 25.
14. is said to have bowed down himself, not to, but before the Gods of the
Children of Seir, which the Angel of the Lord interpreted worshipping of them;
for his anger was kindled against him for so doing, v. 15. In 1 Chronicles. 17. 25.
compared with 2 Samuel 7. 27. to Pray before God, and to God, are equivalent
Expressions. And in the New Testament, the worship which the Devil required our
Savior to give him, is expressed in St. Luke, by worshipping before him;
(...), Chap. 4. ver. 7. And as the Scripture interprets such Actions to be
giving of worship to the thing before which they are done; so likewise, it is
certain their Chucrh intended no less. All their Divines unanimously, except
two or three, who are censured grievously for it, are full to this purpose, and
expressly confute this Opinion as Heterodox, and almost Heretical. And why have
they perplexed the Christian World so long, with the studied Jargon of their
Shifts and Distinctions, telling us, that the Honor, Worship, or whatever else
you will call it here, that they give them, is either Subordinate, Transient,
Relative, or the like. For, in short, it is none at all, under what Denomination
soever, if Images are only a bare external Occasion or Circumstance of such
Honor or Worship, as this Palliation pretends. What need all the Scholastic
Pudder and Noise about that sort of Latria, as they are pleased to call it,
which is given to Christ by Images, if the whole Mystery amount to no more than
giving it in their Presence? For what should hinder, why the most absolute
Divine Worship should not be given him before them, only as they call him to
mind, to whom all imaginable Latria is due? Accordingly Bellarmin and Suarez,
discerning the necessary consequences of this Opinion, as any Man might do, one
would think, without the help of a Prospective; declare, like honest Men, that
it utterly vacates the whole State of the Controversy; and that if this Notion
takes place, the question about the Worship of Images is at an end without
farther dispute, and ought absolutely to be denied.

But because all the Worthies of that Church hitherto, were only private, and
the Bishop of Meaux, perhaps a public Doctor; I appeal in the second Place, to
that Council of Nice, which the Trent Divines confirm as Authentic; and there
we find them styled in one place, little better than mad; in another, half
wicked, who affirm that Images are only to be retained for helps to Memory, and
not for Worship or Salutation; and not to multiply Instances in a Case so
notorious, they are roundly Anathematized in the seventh Action of that Synod,
who come not up to the business of their Worship; and for the sake of common
Sense, why is the Notion of a relative Worship so frequently repeated and
inculcated by the great Spokesmen of that Senate, and insisted chiefly upon, as
an healing Consideration, in the very decree of the Trent Council upon the same
Subject, if there had then been no more in the wind, than only worshipping in
the Presence of an Image, as an occasion of, and an incitement to that Duty?
For as any Man's reason will inform him, this Notion of Relative Worship makes
the Image an intermediate Object of Worship, tho the reason of such Worship
consist not in the Image it self, but in its Relation to the thing represented;
and therefore I cannot but wonder what that Learned Prelate meant in his Appeal
to the Decree of the Council of Trent, for the Confirmation of his Exposition,
unless he supposed that Heretics had no Eyes in their Heads, which is all
that is requisite to refute him in this particular. For, besides what I have
just now said, it is as palpable as words can make it that the Decree expressly
defines that Images are to be worshipped, unless indeed, debitum cultum and
venerationem impertiri imaginibus, be in a new Catholic Version to worship
something else before them.

Secondly, One would think it had been every whit as obvious for the Reverend
Fathers of the Council, to have expressed themselves by honos qui coram
imaginibus exhibetur, as qui eis exhibetur, and to have framed the tenor of the
whole Decree accordingly, if that had been their intention. And in the third
and last place, I would only desire to know, Whether or no it be the same thing
to worship before Images, and by them, the one the Language of the Bishop, the
other of the Council; it a ut per imagines, say they; not coram imaginibus,
quas osculamus, and so forth. But any thing, it seems, rather than fail of
making Conversions; and perhaps the more gilt the toys, the properer they are
to wheedle the Children into the bosom of their Pretended Mother; and I
heartily wish that Learned man joy of the honor of being the first who ever
yet could make a Doctrine pass for Catholic, against the almost entirely
universal vote of the Writers of his own Communion, and the express words of
two of their Ecumenical Councils: An happy man he, indeed, who can stamp that
Character upon a Doctrine, for the vending whereof two or three dissenting
Brethren amongst them, whose Obsolete Opinion he has revived, could hardly
escape the Censure of Heresy.

And thus much for the Proof of the First Proposition, That what is given
before Images, has relation, or is given to them. I now come to prove in the
Second Place, in opposition to a farther Palliation, respecting the Acts
themselves, stiling them only Honor, Reverence, Respect, or the like, That
what is given to Images, is Religious Worship, properly and strictly so called.

And the most natural way to do that, will be,

1. To explain what we mean by Religious Worship. And then,

2. To examine their allowed Doctrine and Practice, in relation to what they
give to Images. Whereby it will distinctly appear, Whether or no the latter
fall within the Notion of the former, which is the question.

First then, I mean by Religious Worship, an awful acknowledgment of the
Supreme Excellency, Power and Dominion of the Divinity over us, his
transcendent Excellencies raising in us the most profound Honor for him, to
which his Absolute Power and Dominion super-add the more formal Reason of
Worship. Now man being a compound of Soul and Body, this acknowledgment must
accordingly be twofold, interior of the one, and exterior of the other; the
latter being not only a sign and indication of, but naturally consequent upon
the former, and as absolutely requisite, as is the public external exercise of
Religion, the greater advancement of God's Glory, and the acknowledgment of his
superiority over one part of us as well as another; it being necessary, if for
no other reason, to glorify God in our Bodies as well as Spirits, because they
are both God's; and an unanswerable argument, that external actions must bear a
part in the due performance of Religious Worship, is this, That otherwise we
could never be certain of any false Worship in the World, since the internal
actions of the mind do not fall of themselves within human cognizance: As to
the former part of this Worship, the internal veneration and submission of our
Souls, there is no doubt at all, but that he who gives that to Creatures, or
any Images of them, gives them Religious Worship with a witness; the only
difficulty lies in the external actions of the Body, as Bowing of the Head,
Genuflexion, etc. which being capable of different Constructions, Civil as well
as Religious, the main point of our present enquiry, must be how to know when
such actions become of a Religious signification; for when they do so, they
become acts of external Adoration, which the common notions of mankind, ever
since the world began, have determined to be parts of Religious Worship: And
whence, I pray, should such actions take the particular denomination of
Religious, but from what Physical Actions receive any other appellations; and
that is either positive appropriation to such an use, or from the Circumstances
of Time, Place, Occasion, Object, and the like, as well as intention of him
that does them? Thus, for instance, acts of Sacrifice and Incense, become acts
of Religious Worship, because God appropriated them to his Service. Thus the
Prostration which the Devil required of our Savior, was by him interpreted
Religious Worship, because the occasion was argument enough that he could
demand no other. Thus tho a man may kneel, bow his head, or incline his body to
his Friend, his Father, or his King, and still keep within the bounds of Civil
Decency and Decorum; yet if he should use the Solemn Rites appointed for a
Religious Performance, consecrate his friend, place him not only in the Church,
but upon the Altar; and at the set times of Prayer, there pay the same external
acts of respect to him, no man would stick to pronounce them religious, from
the natural notions we have of such actions, so circumstantiated; accordingly
we find St. Austin in one place insisting upon the particular circumstance of
placing their Statues over the Altar, to prove that the Heathens,
constructively, took them for Gods, i. e. gave them Divine Worship. Quod numen
habeant, and pro numine accipiant, illam statuam ara testatur, etc. Nemo mihi
dieat, non e Deus, non e numen (for it seems they stood upon the goodness of
their Intentions too) utinam ipsi sic norint, says he, quomodo nos novimus, sed
quid habeant, pro qua re habeant ara testatur. Thus again when S. John in an
Extacy fell down at the Feet of the Angel, that action likewise came under the
notion of Religious Worship (which he bid him therefore give to God) because
the Angel, the Object to which it was done, was of a nature Superior in Power
and Perfection to his own. For such respects, proceeding not from any civil
Relations to such beings, of which they are not capable, but from a strange
awful Apprehension of some secret Power and Superiority they have over us; they
partake of the formal Reason of the Worship of God himself, and must therefore
be looked upon as Religious. Upon the same ground, doubtless, did St. Peter
interpret the Worship Cornelius gave him to be Religious, from the
extraordinary Sentiments which he saw he had of his Person, as of one above the
Power and Perfection of humane Nature; as sufficiently appears from the
Apostles bidding him stand up, for that he also was a man, [Acts 10.] And thus
all mankind naturally judge of such Actions without the least Hesitancy or
Demur, tho perhaps they never state the Point, unless upon occasion, nor attend
to the reasons why they do so. And what has been said of such Actions in
relation to animate Beings, will for the very same reasons hold good of them,
when performed with regard to the Images of such Beings; besides, that the
Worship of the Images being referred to the thing represented, it must of
necessity be the same, and not a different kind of Worship.

Thus much then for the Explication of the term of Religious Worship. The next
and most natural advance now is, to examine whether or no, by the Authentic
Doctrine, and the best authorized Practice of the Church of Rome, any such
Worship given to Images.

And first, I shall examine them in relation to the first and principal part of
it, the internal Veneration and Submission of the mind. This, I presume, being
the most considerable Part of that worship they are pleased to call Latria; for
that, as the second Council of Nice describes it, is done, (...) and (...), in
the Spirit or Mind.

That St. Thomas, as the Phrase is, and his numerous Adherents determined the
worship of Latria, and consequently the most interior Devotion of the mind, to
be given to the Images of Christ, is notoriously known; and yet St. Thomas may
vye with any Bishop in Europe, in Approbations from Rome; witness the Elogies
and noble Testimonies concerning him and his Doctrine, by John the 22 d who
Canonized him; by Paul the 5th, Innocent the 6th, Clement the 8th, Urban the
5th, Pius 5th, in their several Bulls, or other Discourses relating to this
Saint. But because Testimonials signify nothing, perhaps, when urged the wrong
way, and that reason is altogether as satisfactory to those they call
Heretics, as a naked Authority; I shall show, That this Opinion of Aquinas is
undeniably consequent, both upon the Doctrine and Practice of their Church.

First, Upon the Doctrine. The reason assigned for the Worship of Images in the
Council of Trent, is, Because the Honor which is exhibited to them, is
referred, or, as the second Council of Nice more clearly expresses it, does
(...), pass on, or go through, to the Prototypes which they represent. Now,
says Aquinas, who quotes this Reason from Damasus, the Worship that is given to
the Prototype, Christ himself, is certainly latria, and consequently so must
that be too which is given to his Image; for otherwise how can the Worship be
said to be referred to, or pass on, from the One to the Other, if it be not the
same, but a different sort of Worship?

A Reasoning this, as old as the second Council of Nice it self, where it is
urged, without the least Contradiction, by John the Vicar of the Oriental
Bishops; and they may refute it at their leisure, unless, by a modern sort of
Logic, it be Answer sufficient to disavow a Consequence evidently deduced from
Principles allowed, i. e. to hold fast the Premises, and yet deny the
Conclusion.

But, secondly, this Doctrine of Aquinas is most undeniably consequent upon the
Practice of the Church, the best Comment upon her Doctrine; and that in
relation, particularly, to the Images of the Cross; where I shall need only
barely to relate the Prayers addressed to them, and then leave any man to judge
whether or no the great Doctor of the Schools, and his Followers, who expressly
found their Opinion thereupon, concerning the latria that is to be given them,
did not argue like Men of both that Sincerity and Logic which were to be
desired in later Writers of that Communion. In their Breviary then, of as good
Authority as the Council of Trent could make it, by whose Order it was
restored, we find this Hymn to the Cross: Arbor decora and fulgida (for I Will
repeat the words in their own Language, for fear of a Misrepresentation) ornata
Regis purpura, electa digno stipite, tam sancta Membra tangere. O Crux ave
spe^^^ita, in hoc Paschali gaudio, ange piis justitiam reisque doua veniam. To
which the Antiphona subjoyns: O Crux splendidior cunctis astris, mundo
celebris, hominibus multum amabilio, sanctior universis, quae sola fuisti digna
portare talentum mundi, dulce lignum, dulces clavos, dulcia ferens pondera,
salva presentem catervam, in tuis hodie laudibus congregatam. Where the Crux,
the Arbor decora, electa digno stipite, and the dulce lignum, to which these
notable Petitions are addressed, are so expressly distinguished from the sancta
membra, the talentum mundi, and dulcia pondera, which they bore upon them, that
it is not in the power of all the Figures in Rhetoric to construe them as put
up to Christ himself, unless Christ may be styled the Cross, the Tree, the
Wood, chosen of a worthy Trunk, as well as the Person that hung upon it. And,
but to add one word more; The Rubric in the Pontifical, determining the manner
of Procession at the Reception of the Emperor, orders the Cross of the Legate
to have the Right Hand, quia debetur ei latria, without any distinction, or
farther explication of the term.

If to what I have proved from Authorities very little inferior to a positive
Decree of Council, be opposed the silence of the Trent-Fathers in the matter,
(and I see nothing else at present that can be objected:) I answer;

First, That their silence in a Point which they ought to have condemned, had
they disliked, ought certainly to pass for a tacit Approbation. Secondly, That
I have already made it appear from the Reason of Image Worship assigned in the
very Decree of the Council, that the Images of Christ are to be worshipped with
latria, the most proper Divine Worship imaginable. Thirdly, That they still
retained those Prayers and Hymns to the Cross, which the best Heads of that
Communion grounded their Opinions upon, as is evident from the Breviary
restored by their Order, published and revised since by several of their Popes.
And fourthly and lastly, That the Council plainly enough countenances this
Doctrine, as well as any other; for, defining only in general, That due Worship
and Veneration is to be given them, any man certainly may give the Images of
Christ, and the Cross, the Worship of latria, who thinks it their due;
especially when backed with the Practice of the Church, the best Expositor of
what the Council meant by their due Worship.

And thus much in proof, That the internal Veneration of the Mind is paid to
Images. After which, it will be no hard matter to prove, that the acts of
external Adoration are performed to them likewise, tho upon the account of
their relation to their Originals, which alters not the Object, but only the
Reason of such Worship. And for this I might appeal, not only to the Epistle of
Tarasius, Patriarch of Constantinople at the time of the second Nicene Council,
to Constantine and Irene, besides infinite other places, but to the very
Definition of that Council in the seventh Action, where they are anathematized
who deny it. I only observe, that the word by which the Council expresses such
Worship, is, (...), the same whereby the Holy Ghost styled that which the Devil
required of our Savior; which Tarasius, in the forementioned Epistle, explains
by the exterior actions of Kissing, Bowing, Prostration, etc. the internal
signification of which Actions he there affirms to be improved and augmented by
the addition of the Preposition (...), to the obsolete Greek word (...); to all
which that Council adds, in its very Definition, the burning of Lights and
Incense. As for the Synod of Trent, which confirms it, the Fathers there
expressly decree the exterior acts of Adoration to be done to Images.

The Trent-Catechism tells us they are placed in the Church ut colantur, that
they may be worshipped. The Pontifical informs us, That in the Benediction of a
new Cross, the Priest, flexis ante crucem genibus, ipsam devote adorat and
osculatur. The Choir sings, upon a Good Friday, upon uncovering the Cross to
the People, Venite adoremus; which they accordingly perform, by Prostration,
and suchlike Actions. The Head of the Church himself, good Man, on that day
goes between two Cardinals, ad adorandum, to adore the Cross, says the
Ceremonial, bowing himself in great humility to it. Now all these exterior
actions being performed with all the Formalities, Occasions, Circumstances and
Solemnities, which the common sense of Mankind pronounces sufficient to
denominate them Religious; as, at set Times of Religious Worship, fixed Places
of it, in Temples and before Altars, with burning of Lights, oblation of
Incense, and with Intention of worshipping the Image thereby, (for otherwise
it is all but Mockery and Grimace, as several of their own Authors irrefragably
argue, and a Man only plays the fool with an Image, for the sake of its
Original;) such Actions, I say, must therefore inevitably fall under the Notion
of Religious Adoration, a necessary part of Religious Worship; and consequently
Religious Worship, as it relates to the actions of both Body and Mind, is given
to Images themselves in the Church of Rome.

But because these Men have sought out many Inventions to vacate rather the
force of this Law, than totally to recede from a Doctrine and Practice
repugnant to it, when once decreed by Infallible Church: let us, in the last
place, briefly examine how they qualify the matter, and palliate the Cure
which they resolve not to perfect.

And first, as to the Images of the Trinity, which he must be a very bold man
who affirms it unlawful either to make or to worship in the Church of Rome;
they tell us, That they are not intended for Representations of the Divine
Nature as it is in it self, but only of the Appearances of the Divine Persons;
as of our Savior in an Humane Form, of the Holy Ghost in the Shape of a Dove,
etc.

To which it is answered briefly, first, That unless they can show how any thing
can be represented otherwise than according to its Appearances, or that an
Heathen Phidias, Apelles, or others, ever set up for carving or painting
Natures and Souls, Invisibilities, Abstractions, and Essences, this distinction
must be vain and insignificant; and just as if a Prince, having made it Treason
by an express Law to draw his Picture, a Criminal should think to come off by
alleging that he drew indeed his Face and his Body, but not his Soul, or his
reasonable Nature Secondly, I say, That God having prohibited all
Representations of himself whatsoever, whether they be likenesses of things in
Heaven above, or in the Earth beneath, or in the Water under the Earth; he has
consequently forbid all Representations of his Appearances; for they must be in
the Likeness of some of the things before mentioned. And thirdly, I ask upon
what grounds the Representations of such Appearances, as that of an Old Man for
God the Father, and of a Dove for God the Holy Ghost, which are mere
Representations of Creatures not personally united to the Godhead, not even
during such Appearances, much less in their Representations, come to be the
Object of Religious Worship.

Others therefore among them, upon these, or the like Considerations, being
infinitely scandalized, as well they may, at this horrible Practice, yet think
themselves without the reach of the Prohibition of this Law, in worshipping
Christ by an Image, since the actual hypostatical Union of the Humane to the
Divine Nature in him, here upon Earth.

But that this is by no means sufficient to justify the Worship of Christ by a
Representation of an Humane Form, will appear from this single Consideration,
That he being the proper Object of our Worship, upon the account of his Godhead
only, that Law which forbids Men to worship God by any Images or Figures of
him, must likewise forbid them to worship Christ so too, who is God. Had indeed
the assuming of our Nature contributed any thing toward the Glory of the
Divine, thereby founding, as it were, a farther Reason of Worship, there might
then have been some specious Color for worshipping him still by Representations
of it: But since this form of a Servant was so far from being a fresh accession
to, that it was the very emptying himself of his Glory, it must needs be very
prepostrous and absurd to think of honoring him by that, much more by the dead
senseless Figure of the very exterior Lineaments of that, not capable of any
Union with him, which he thought so infinitely debasing of his Nature, whilst,
for our sakes, he bore it about him.

A third Color by which they would render this Practice plausible, are those
words in the Trent Decree, which forbid us to believe any Divinity or Virtue in
Images for which they ought to be worshipped, to demand any favor of them, or
put any trust in them, as the Gentiles did. Which words, says the Bishop of
Meaux, are so many Characters to distinguish them from Idolaters.

To which I return, first, That the Prohibition in the Law extending to all
manner of Images without exception, or distinction of such as are believed to
have Virtue and Divinity in them, and such as are not; we expect better Reason
than any yet offered for restraining the Prohibition to any particular kind of
them. Secondly, I absolutely deny that the Heathens, unless the very Beasts of
the People, (and those may find Parallels enough in our opposite Communion) had
such gross and sottish Conceptions of their Images, as the Council and their
Writers would fix upon them; as has been touched upon before, and is so clearly
made out by several good hands already, that I might safely omit it, had I time
to insist upon it here. All the Virtue and Divinity that they thought lodged in
them, if we will believe their own Testimony in Arnobius, was only such as they
conceived did derive from their Consecration to such an Use. Wherein, I say,
thirdly, the Romanists seem equally guilty. Witness the many notable Miracles,
reported of their Images, by no less Authority than that of the wise Fathers of
the second Nicene Council. Witness the known Practice of Pilgrimages to some of
them, rather than to others. Witness several of their own Authors, who assure
us, That Christ himself is most truly believed to be present in them after a
particular manner. Witness, lastly, what is unquestionable Authority, the
Prayers extant in the Pontifical and Ceremonial, used to this day in the
Benediction of the Images of the Cross, and the Consecration of Agnus Dei's: As
that, particularly, to omit several others, wherein the Priest prays, That the
very Lignum Crucis, the Wood of the Cross which he dedicates, on purpose as it
were to bar all Figures in the Construction, may be a wholesome Remedy to
Mankind, a strengthening of Faith, a Comfort, Protection, and Safeguard against
the cruel Darts of the Enemy, etc.

In the Consecration of those Divine Baubles, Agnus Dei's, the Head of the
Church himself, to make sure of the business, prays, That they may receive
Virtue, ut virtutem accipiant, against all the Wiles of the Devil, Tempests,
Pestilences, Adversities, Falling sickness, Fires, Miscarriages in Women,
Iniquities, and what not? and that they who carry them about them, and worship
them, adds another Prayer, may partake of the Benefits of those great and
transcendent Virtues they are endowed with. After which I desire only to know,
first, Whether or no we may not very rationally presume, that such Virtues as
these come in for a share of the Reason of that Worship which is given to such
Images of the Cross and Agnus Dei's, after Consecration? And secondly, Whether
or no the Bishop of Meaux has represented their Doctrine with that Sincerity
and good Faith which might become a Person of his Character and Undertaking,
when he tells us, that they attribute no other Virtue to Images, but that of
exciting in them the remembrance of those they represent.

The fourth and last Asylum they fly to, is the distinction of Worship into
inferior and relative, given to Images; and Sovereign and Absolute, terminated
upon their Originals.

Now that these terms, how plausible soever, can have no place in the present
business of Divine Worship, will appear from the consideration of the reason
why they came to be used, and that was their congruity indeed to the nature of
Civil Honors and Respects, from whence they came, but very illogically, to be
applied to the acts of Religious Worship, different in the whole Species from
them. The reason of Civil Honors are Civil Excellencies; and the reason of the
different degrees of them, the different Excellencies, orders, Stations, and
Capacities of Men who are their Object, which may therefore be given to them in
different measures, and by different methods.

But now the proper Reason of Religious Worship being the Supreme Sovereignty
and Power of Almighty God, and that being utterly incommunicable to a Creature,
which is infinitely distant in its whole nature and kind, how excellent soever
it be, neither can any part or parcel of Divine Worship which is founded
thereupon, in any respect whatsoever be given to any thing besides himself; and
therefore tho I may, for instance, give inferior degrees of civil respect to a
Subject, without intrenching upon the Honor due to a King, because they are
both of the same kind of Beings, to which civil respects belong, differing not
specifically in their Natures, but politic Capacities only; yet cannot I
therefore give an inferior degree of Religious Worship to a Creature, much less
to its Image, or any Image of God, which is a Creature still, because it is
different in the whole kind from him, as different only as Finite is from
Infinite, and does not in the least partake of the reason of such worship. And
therefore, again, tho I may Honor my Prince, as the Representer argues, by
relatively honoring his Image for his sake, because my Prince has not forbid
it, and is a Being of such a Nature as to admit of a Representation, and of
Honor by it; yet cannot I therefore worship God by an Image, not only by
reason of the natural incapacity of the object, as before; but because he has
expressly prohibited such Worship: and as a Reason thereof, has been pleased to
acquaint us, that He Is a Being of such a Glorious and Infinite Nature, as
neither can be represented, nor receive any honor by Graven Images.

Agreeable to what has been said, we may observe that the Law now before us
prohibits the lowest sort of worship that we can possibly bestow on them, the
external acts of bowing down to them, and the like, as the Text words it; and
that in a relative sense too, it being the scope and intent of the Commandment
to prohibit the Worship of God by them, as we have before evinced: Thus
likewise the worship which the Devil required of our blessed Lord, was no more
than the bare exterior act of falling down, not only to, but before Him, as we
have before already observed out of St. Luke, which yet our Savior denied him;
and that not upon considerations peculiar to that infernal Spirit, but for such
a Reason as will hold against any other Creature, and much more its Image:
because God, the Great God, was the only true and adequate Object of what he
required. Accordingly we find the Fathers frequently insisting upon these two
places now alleged, as utterly irreconcilable with all use of Images in the
business of Divine Worship; and indeed had they once broke in upon these
comprehensive Precepts, as comprehensive as words can make them, by Salvo's and
Distinctions, the trash and refuse of School Divinity, it cannot well be
imagined how they could have oppugn'd the Heathen Philosophers in this
particular, who generally acknowledging one supreme God, gave only a relative
and inferior worship to all created Beings, and images of them, as they
themselves abundantly testify; or how they could have escaped the same
condemnation with the Heathen world in general, who owning several inferior
Deities, could, consequently give them, and their images, or rather them by
their images, no more than an inferior worship. How could they, if the business
of relative Worship had then been thought sufficient to excuse from Idolatry,
even where the ultimate Object is right, have condemned the Gnostics of it, who
terminated the worship they gave to Images of Christ upon Christ himself, as is
on all hands confessed? How could they, again, admitting this distinction, so
unanimously have pronounced the Arrians Idolaters, for worshipping Christ under
the notion of a Creature, notwithstanding those Heretics alleged they
worshipped Him only as the Image of God the Father, upon whom they ultimately
terminated the the worship which they relatively gave to him? So repugnant are
their distinctions with the comprehensive Precepts of God, in relation to his
Worship, and the sense of the purest Antiquity, the best Rules we have to walk
by.

I might farther, in the last place, evidently display the utter inconsistency
of one distinction, and of one Doctor's Opinion, with another in this matter,
but that the time will not give me leave; and therefore I shall content my
self, to shut up this Argument with this brief Reflection, That the
repugnancies amongst them, and the almost unintelligible subtilties they are
driven to in desence of their respective Doctrines upon this subject are, upon
the whole, to any unprejudiced person, a strong indication of a desperate cause.

And now is it not an amazing consideration, to find the worship of those
things grown up into an Article of our Christian Faith, and a condition of
Salvation it self, which some of the ablest Writers of the purest Ages of the
Church, such as Clemens of Alexandria, Origin and Tertullian thought it
unlawful for a Christian even to make, which the Fathers of those and
aftertimes general thought improper, at least, for the Churches of God; which
were afterward introduced into those sacred places, upon the unhappy
supposition they would prove proper motives to draw the Gentile world, who had
been used to them, to their Assemblies, and the Christian Profession; and were
of no other than ornamental and historical use there; which, when began first
to be worshipped, had no other Votaries than the ignorant and superstitious; and
which no part of the whole Christian Church ever made any object of Religious
adoration for Seven hundred eighty seven years together; a Doctrine, nourished
in its growth, by notorious Treason and Rebellion, advanced and confirmed by
trifling Reasonings, frivolous or false Quotations, fabulous Stories, lying
Miracles, and all that idle trash extant, God be thanked, at this day in that
glorious Council of Nice, which first established Baby-worship by a Law; a
Doctrine and Practice that originally derived from Gentile superstition;
remains an everlasting obstruction to the Conversion of the Jew; is without the
least countenance from the written Word of God, in the confession of our
Adversaries themselves; the very Council of Nice, the great Aquinas, Suarez,
and others, founding it only upon that hopeful Basis of I know not what
Tradition: A Practice, lastly, not only besides the Rule of our Religion, but
particularly repugnant to the Nature and Genius of the worship if requires, a
worship in Spirit and Truth, that would be performed with as deep an
abstraction from sense, as the complex'd condition of humanity will admit; a
worship that ought to ascend to its great object above, in steady and direct
rays of fervor and devotion, without the least refraction from sensible
intermediate Objects, which clog, retard, and frequently cut short its flight
in any ones experience, who attends to the Actions of his own mind in this
particular. And therefore, are Images so far from being any assistance to us in
our Devotions, as is pretended,

That first, as to the Vulgar, the far greatest Part every where, and who carry
no distinctions to Church with them, they inevitably plunge them into the
Commission of the most crass and profound Idolatry; as has been frequently and
sadly complained of by several sober Writers of that Communion; and is, at this
day, a most deplorable Spectacle in those Countries, where these dumb
Instructors of the Ignorant, as they would have them thought, abound in
greatest numbers. No nor

Secondly, Can the Devotion of the most intelligent abstracting Persons escape
considerable Corruption and Alloy by this way of Worship; which I think
demonstrable from hence, That the wisest Men being made up of Soul and Body, as
well as the rest, and the Operations of one part being in every ones experience
limited and depressed by the weight and contrary tendency of the other visible
Objects do in spite of our selves, most sensibly affect us; and consequently, a
visible Representation of an invisible Object, supposed too to bear some
Analogy to its Original, actually courting our Senses in the Duties of
Devotion, which of all our Actions ought to be the most purely spiritual and
refined, will, by insensible advances, work its self into an internal Respect
and Veneration in the minds of its Votaries, will tie down the best of their
Devotions to the Object of their Eyes, and gradually engross a greater share in
them, than the thing represented. For a further Confirmation whereof, I desire
only, with St. Austin, to appeal to the Observation and Conscience of any, who
ever repeats the Experiment. Quis adorat, vel orat intuens simulacrum, qui non
sic afficitur, ut ab eo se exaudiri putet, ac ab eo sibi praestari quod
desiderat speret, [in Ps. 113.] And therefore, Men may talk of their Intentions
in the performance of such Actions as long as they please; God, who knows what
is in Man, better than he himself is acquainted with the utmost stretch and
extent of his Faculties, Judges thus of them, and so indeed, will any Man too
who attentively reflects upon them himself. Thus, for instance, does the Divine
Wisdom tell us, That he who commits any known Sin, casts his Laws behind him,
says in his heart, God sees it not, or that the God of Israel does not regard
it, and the like, tho no Man perhaps ever actually intended, or thought of any
such thing at the time of the Commission of his Sin, and would be ready to deny
the Justice of the Imputation; which yet, upon Examination, appears undeniably
true, every such Sin implying a proportionable degree of Atheism, as the Divine
Wisdom interprets it. Let us therefore make his declared Will, not our foolish
Intentions, the Rule and Standard of his Worship; and why should it not be the
measure of that, as well as of our Obedience to any other of his Commands? Let
us in a word, heartily bless God for the Reformation of our Church, from the
Fopperies and Idolatrous Practices of the Romish Communion; and never through
Fear, Cowardice, Levity of Mind, Temporizing Goldness and Indifferency,
Interest, or any other Motive, unworthy of a Man, Christian, or Protestant,
desert our excellent and established Profession, till we find another more
Orthodox in her Doctrine, or more pure and decent in her Worship; and then who
knows how soon God may arise, and have Mercy upon our Sion; for it is time, O
Lord, that thou have Mercy upon Her, yea, the time is come.

FINIS.
Books lately Printed for Richard Chiswell.
DR Patricks Parable of the Pilgrim. The 6th Edition Corrected.

-- Exposition of the Ten Commandments. 8 vo.

-- Private Prayer to be used in difficult times.

-- Sermon before the Prince of Orange at St. James's, 20th January, 1688.

-- Sermon before the Queen at Whitehall, March 1. 1688.

Dr. Burnets Collection of Tracts and Discourses, written after the Discovery
of the Popish Plot, from the years 1678, to 1685. To which is added, A Letter
written to Dr Burnet, giving an Account of Cardinal Pools Secret Powers. The
History of the Powder Treason, with a Vindication of the Proceedings thereupon.
An Impartial Consideration of the Five Jesuits Dying Speeches, who were
executed for the Popish Plot, 1679.

-- His Vindication of the Ordinations of the Church of England: In which is
demonstrated, that all the Essentials of Ordination, according to the Practice
of the Primitive and Greek Churches, are still retained in our Church.

-- Reflections on the Relation of the English Reformation, lately Printed at
Oxford. In two Parts 4 to

-- Animadversions on the Reflections upon Dr. BVRNETs Travels. 8 o.

-- Reflections on a Paper, entitled his Majesty's Reasons for withdrawing
himself from Rochester.

-- An Enquiry into the Present State of Affairs, and in particular, whether we
owe Allegiance to the King in these Circumstances? And whether we are bound to
Treat with Him, and call him back or no?

-- A Sermon Preached in St James's Chapel before the Prince of Orange 23 d.
December, 1688.

-- A Sermon Preached before the House of Commons, 31. January, 1688. being the
Thanksgiving day for the Deliverance of this Kingdom from Popery and Arbitrary
Power.

-- His Eighteen Papers relating to the Affairs of Church and State, during the
Reign of King James the Second Seventeen whereof were written in Holland, and
first Printed there; the other at Exeter, soon after the Prince of Orange's
Landing in England.

-- A Letter to Mr. Thevenot, Containing a Censure of Mr. Le Grand's History of
King Henry the Eighth's Divorce. To which is added, a Censure of Mr. de Meaux's
History of the Variations of the Protestant Churches. Together with some
further Reflections on Mr. Le Grand. 1689.

Scriptorum Ecclesiasticorum Historia Lateraria a Christ nat^ usque ad Saculum
XIV. Fac^l^ Methodo ^^gesta. Qua de Vita illorum ac Rebus gestis, de Secta,
Dogmatibus, Elogio, Stylo; de Script^ genuin^s, dub^^^, suppositit^^^,
ineditis, deperditis, Fragmentis; deque variis Operum Editionibus perspicue
agitur. Accedunt Scriptores Gentiles, Christiana Religionis Oppugnatores; and
c^y^sves Saculi Breviarium. Inseruntur suis locis Veterunt aliquot Opuj^ula and
Fragmenta, tum Graeca, tum Latina, hactenus inedita. Praemissa denique
Pro^^gomena, quibus p^er^ma ad Antiquitatis Ecclesiastica studium sp^ctan^a
tra^untur Opus Indicibus necessariis instructum. Autore GULIELMO CAVE, SS.
Theol. Profes. Canonico Windesoriensi. Accedit ab Alia Manu Appendix ab (...)
Saeculo XIV. ad Annum usque MDXVII. Fol. 1689.


