WARD Mayor,
Martis XXVto die Januarii, 1680. Annoque Regni Regis CAROLI Secundi, Angl',
etc. xxxiido.
UPon the motion of Sir John Lawrence, Knight. and Alderman, This Court does desire
Mr. Turner to print his Sermon, sometime since Preached at the
Guildhall-Chappel before the Lord Mayor and Aldermen.

Wagstaffe.

TESTIMONIVM JESV; Or, THE Demonstration of the Spirit, FOR The Confirmation of
Christian Faith, and Conviction of all Infidelity. A SERMON Preached before the
Right Honorable THE LORD MAYOR and ALDERMEN OF THE City of LONDON, AT THE
GUILDHALL-CHAPPEL. By BRYAN TVRNER, B. D. Rector of Solderne, Oxon, and
Chaplain to the Right Honorable, CHARLES, Earl of Carlisle.

LONDON, Printed by S. Roycroft for Walter Kettleby at the Bishops-Head in St.
Paul's Churchyard, 1681.

REVEL. XIX. 10. And I fell at his feet to worship him, and he said unto me,
See thou do it not: I am thy fellow Servant, and of thy Brethren, that have the
Testimony of Jesus: Worship God,

For the Testimony of Jesus is the Spirit of Prophecy.


WHether St. John here was through Joy transported into too submiss a
Reverence; or, he mistook the Person for Christ, (as the Angels telling him who
he was, seems rather to insinuate,) is not needful to determine.

If transported into too submiss a Reverence, such as was usually appropriate
to Divine Worship; then it reads us this Lecture, That on the one hand, Bodily
Adoration is within the list of Divine Worship, and necessarily due by the
Commandment, Worship God: and on the other hand, to transfer it to Saints or
Angels is Sacrilegious and Idolatrous, See thou do it not. Now what bodily
gestures are appropriate to Divine Worship, must not be measured from the
gestures themselves, (for one may fall at the feet of their Superior without a
crime, as Abigail did to David,) but from the circumstances of Customary 1 Samuel
25. 24.
time, place, and matter in hand; as when they are tendered upon an Holy Day, in
a Temple or Oratory, and when Religion, Prayer, and Devotion, is the matter
pretended.

But if the Crime the Apostle was here incurring, was through mistake of the
person, thinking him to be Christ; Then it us reads this Lecture, That bodily
adoration intended Right, but mistaken in the object is yet peccant against the
Commandment of Worship. And both these would affright a considerative mind at
the peril of Idolatry in the Church of Rome, where, if the Host be not
mistaken, the Sense of Mankind must; and if all the Canonized Saints be truly
what they are esteemed, yet doubtless no better than the Angel in the Text.
Neither will the distinction of (...) and (...) salve the Crime objected in
this latter case, seeing there was no room for it in this of the Apostle and
the Angel here.

For why could not this Angel have applied the distinction to salve the breach
of the Commandment, as well as the Angelical Doctor can? But that when the
Circumstances speak Religion, there is indeed no distinction at all. But it is
the importance of the last words I design to consider, For the Testimony of
Jesus is the Spirit of Prophecy. Which words are a reason, why the Angel was
the Apostles fellow Servant, etc. For whosoever by the Spirit of Prophecy
revealed the Divine will, was concerned in the common Testimony of Jesus;
because all Prophecy (truly so called) had Jesus and his Interests for its
grand Subject; therefore whosoever was employed therein, whether Angel to Man,
or one Man to another; whether before or after the exhibition of Jesus, were
(as to that employment) fellow Servants, and had the Testimony of Jesus: though
subpaena'd to it, as Balaam was, by that Power that could give the man the
Spirit of Prophecy, as well as his Ass the Gift of Speaking. And so Numb. 24.
2. etc.
much may serve to account for the words, as they are a reason why the Angel
was the Apostle's fellow Servant, and of Brethren. I shall now consider them as
a distinct proposition; The Testimony of Jesus is the Spirit of Prophecy; which
in logical order is to be placed thus, The Spirit of Prophecy is the Testimony
of Jesus.

Not discussing the variety either the word Prophecy After Christ's Exhibition,
the Prophetical light shone clearer, even to discover the obscurity of its own
former shades: so that in this illustration of the former ancient Prophets, did
the latter Spirit of Prophecy very much consist; and hence in Apostolical days
to Prophecy, is to explain the intended or Evangelical meaning of the Old
Testament. 1 Cor. 14. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5 13, 19, etc. hence the phrase, Liberty of
Prophesying, etc.
or Testimony may admit in their significations elsewhere, I shall take them
here (as I judge they ought to be) in their most obvious and primary sense.

A Testimony is a declarative proof to make good his cause for whom it is
produced.

Prophecy most properly implies two things; First, Revelation of the Divine
will or mind; and, Secondly, Prediction; which latter is annexed to the former,
as a sign or rational evidence of the Truth and Divinity of the Revelation: For
God offers no Revelation to Mankind, but upon grounds of rational satisfaction
that it is from himself, i. e. under some convictive Characters of Divinity and
Truth.

Now Prediction is this Character annexed to the Revelation as a Seal for
humane Satisfaction, that it is Divine, or from God himself. This being a
presumptive Rule with Humane Nature, That what Gody says is indubitably true,
and what he commands ought instantly to be obeyed: (And it is upon these grounds
of Natures allowance that all divine Revelation is founded;) But that which
convictively proves the Word or Revelation to be Divine, is the determinate
prediction of things future not necessary in their causes.

Thus, that Pharaoh should let Israel go, was the Revelation; Exodus 7. 16, 17,
18, etc.
and that Moses would at such a time work such a Wonder, was the Prediction, i.
e. the Sign given to prove the Revelation from God. Therefore his Wonders 1
Kin. 22. 25, 28. 1 Samuel 10. 2, 3, 4, 5, 7.
are called Signs; not only because Wonders or Miracles (for all Prophetical
Signs were not so,) but because presignified; and therein, when fulfilled,
Significators of Divinity in the Revelation.

Seeing then, that the Revelation (which I conceive is always a Precept or
Prohibition, with Promises or Threatenings annexed) in its acceptance with men
depends upon Prediction, as the Commission does upon the Seal. The Spirit of
Prophecy, is most properly the Spirit of Prediction; or that Spirit which can
confirm the Revelation by foretelling Futurities of a contingent nature, i. e.
things only within the sphere of Omniscience. For I judge the weight of this
Text lies here, and not in the abstract notion of Revelation, as the late Tract
upon it seems to apprehend.

And this being premised for the sense I take the words in, every word in the
Proposition seems pregnant with a peculiar Observation, which I shall offer you
in these Three Particulars.

First, The Spirit of Prophecy is the Testimony of Jesus, i. e. his, and none
beside.

Secondly, It Is not the Person employed, Man or Angel, upon whom the validity
of this Testimony depends; but it is, The Spirit of Prophecy.

Thirdly, That primarily and above all others, the Spirit of Prophecy is, The
Testimony.

This last, because little considered by any, that I have seen, or not so much
as the Argument in my apprehension deserves, is that I mainly intend; and
therefore without occurring to all the Objections I foresee in the two former,
I shall dispatch them briefly.

First, The Spirit of Prophecy is the Testimony of Jesus: so peculiarly his,
that it never was produced to abet any cause or interest, but his, and what
related to it.

The first time the Spirit of Prophecy appeared in the World, was in the
concerns of Jesus; to foretell his coming, and his undertakings. The Seed of the
Woman shall break the Serpents head, Genesis 3. 15.

It Is true, the Divine Spirit before reduced the Creation into order, when it
moved, or brooded upon the Genesis 1. 2.
face of the Waters, and as that word imports, hatched the World into a lively
form; but this it did as a Spirit of Power, not as a Spirit of Prophecy.

When it exerted it self as a Spirit of Prophecy, from first to last it treated
solely of Jesus and his Interests, such as were either antecedently,
concomitantly, or consequently relating to his exhibition and undertakings: as
all things relating to his Church in all Ages, or its Enemies, were; as in
Egypts case, the Nations, the four Monarchies.

Whether this Spirit stepped abroad into the Heathen World; as in the
Baalamitick, and Sybilline; or it confined it self, as generally, to the
Patriarchal and Israelitish part, as in the Prophetical Oracles; its chief
Errand was, to give Testimony to Jesus, and mentioned other matters (as Cyrus,
the Nations, the four Monarchies) for the connexions sake of him and his Church?

The grand Objection that I here foresee, is that of the Heathen Divinations,
in matters where Jesus or his Interests were unconcerned; but sure, would the
limits of this Discourse permit, they might all be showed to fall much short of
the Spirit of Prophecy. For,

First, Premonitions by Dreams, either in the first Ages or our own, (which I
will not absolutely reject,) I esteem no other, than the Preventive acts of a
gracious Providence; the like to which may by wise men be observed in other
various Instances of common life, which naturally awaken the Mind to caution
and reflection; but will not amount to the Spirit of Prophecy: or else, if ever
they arose to the dignity of that title, it will be found they were in order to
the Testimony of Jesus; as Abimelechs might be showed to be: for I can never
Genesis 20.
think that any other causes, besides what related to him, (as Sarahs did)
should be vouchsafed the honor of so divine a Testimony. Isai. 41. 21, etc.
Chap. 43. 9. and Chap. 44. 7. 24, etc.

Secondly, Humane prudence may conjecture, and sometimes hit it; it cannot
certainly foretell future Contingencies without this Spirit.

Thirdly, Angelical Sagacity may with great probability foresee Contingencies
near at hand; when once conceived, and animated in the womb of Second causes;
(as the issue of a Battle, or a cause depending;) but this presaging faculty of
Angels, whether good or bad, is ever defective in two properties requisite to
the Spirit of Prophecy. First, In the certainty of their foresight. Secondly,
In the distance of the things foreseen. For defect in Certainty, the most
renowned Heathen Oracles were generally ambiguous, thereby to salve their
Reputation, be the event what it would. And for defect in Distance they were
seldom I think, or never consulted, but about the success of a Actions already
on the Wheel, or prepared for: And I suppose these two Considerations may help
us to account for all the arts of Heathen Divination; for why might not a
prudent man, that understood the temper and interest of both Armies have
satisfied young Pompey the night before the Pharsalian field, as well as the
Witch of Thessaly by her familiar Demon? Lucan. lib. 6.
especially if acquainted with Daniel's Prophecy (as no doubt the Devils were)
concerning the Fourth Monarchy, which now called for its proper head in Caesar,
and was inconsistent longer under Pompey's Cause, i. e. the Senates.

Fourthly, How far soever into the future the Contrivances of Men or Angels may
succeed without this Spirit of Prophecy, yet in all such matters two things are
observable: First, That the last results of such plots and contrivances, proved
ever something beside, if not contrary, to the grand intendment of the
Projector: of which instances in all politic Gests recorded, are innumerable.
Secondly, The most projecting Politician, abstracting from this Spirit, ever
found some link in the Chain of his Contrivances broken; which he was forced to
piece up anew, as the circumstances of his affairs would permit.

And to let all men see, that only the All-seeing Councels of God shall stand,
all other Consults even at their height have fallen, as in the Four Monarchies;
whereof the best account that can be given is, that the utmost created
Foresight is short and defectible, and therefore the best laid Projects subject
to defeat.

Whereas the unerring Spirit of Prophecy, is both certain, and extended to the
most distant futurity: so that it has determinately foretold (ex. gr.) the rise
and fall of the Four Monarchies, that so it might make For the Communication
the World enjoyed by being under one Monarchy, did extremely facilitate the
Gospels propagation; and being foretold to be in the Fourth Monarchy, did in
all reason oblige it to (...) submission, as to the Ordinance of Heaven.
way for Jesus and his everlasting Kingdom.

Lastly, (what looks with the face of the most difficult Objection,) the
Oracles and Divinations of the Heathen; (for I shall say nothing of our
Astrological vanity,) were apparently acted by the Sophistry of evil, Men or
Angels, and were as far below the Spirit of Prophecy, as Liegerdu-main is of
working of Miracles.

And that the Prince of Devils, though so ambitious to be like God, could never
reach the Spirit of Prophecy, this to me is a demonstration, viz. That in the
days of his celebrated Oracles (when it was properest,) he has not foretold
the coming of some successful Antichristian Power (as The boldest attempt in a
determinate Prediction that I remember amongst the Heathens, is that mentioned
by St. Austin, de Civit. lib 18. cap. 53. Excogitaverunt nescio quos versus
Graecos, tanquam consulenti, cuidam divino Oraculo effusos, ut Coleretur
Christi nomen per 365 annos; deinde completo memorato numero annorum, sine mora
sumeret finem. This, as he in the next Chapter computes, should have been
fulfilled in the Consulship of Honorius and Eutychianus. Whether it was
Oraculum daemonum aut figmentum hominum, he assures us not. To me it seems
grounded on some Opinions of the Primitive Christians, concerning Antichrist's
appearance; but how miserably it failed, St. Austin observes, that in the very
year Gaudentius and Jovius overthrew the Temples of the Heathen gods in
Cartage; Et plurimi Christiani facti qui tanquam vera illa Divinatione
revocabantur a fide, postquam eam completo eodem annorum numero inanem
irridendamque viderunt. De Civit. lib. 18. cap. 54.
the Papal or Mohammedan) under the Character of a divine Institution. For
certainly this he would have done, had not the ability of his own Spirit failed
him, both as to the certainty and distance of such a contingency; because
nothing imaginable could have bruised the heel of the Woman's Seed so
dangerously, confirmed Gentile Idolatry, and staggar'd the Faith of Mankind so
effectually as this; by confronting a testimony for Antichrist out of the
Heathen Oracles, as good as that for Christ out of the Old Testament
Prophecies. And therefore all that the Serpent can do in this matter is, to
play the after-game as subtly as may be, and inspire Mahomet when he finds
him Enthusiastic and amongst a People fit for delusion, and so to club to
perfect the Imposture: or else, to transform himself into an Angel of Light;
(the only way to mischief the Christian Church) as the Bishop of Rome does
himself into the Catholic, or a Jesuit himself, into a Christian; or a Quaker
himself into a man of Perfection.

And because I may not scan every objected Instance in Heathen Divination, I
shall in general only say, that who so affirms any other than the Divine, can
be the Spirit of Prophecy, seems to suffrage with them that blasphemed against
him; in leaving no distinctive Character to discern the Holy Spirit by, and so
may ascribe to Beelzebub what is the Divine Spirit's prerogative: And I call
this of Prediction the Divine Spirit's prerogative, because God in the Prophet
puts all other Diviners upon this Test. Isa. 41. 21, etc. Produce your cause,
says the Lord, Bring forth your strong reasons, says the King of Jacob. Let
them bring them forth, and show us See Isa. 47. 3, 4, 5, 6, 7.
what shall happen; let them show the former things what they be, that we may
consider 'em, and know the latter end of them, or declare us things for to
come. Show the things that are to come hereafter, that we may know that ye are
gods.

Allowing then, that the sphere of Jesus's Interests, is as large as the
concerns of his Churches in all Ages; the Prophecies of Enoch, Noah, Jacob, and
Others, before his Incarnation; or of Agabus, St. John, and Others after it,
make no Objection against this Truth, That the Spirit of Prophecy is the
Testimony of Jesus, and nones else: so that no cause distinct or opposite to
his can produce it; all divine Revelation centring in him; to which give all
the Act. 10. 43.
Prophets witness: it is theresore called the Spirit of Christ in the Prophets,
1 Pet. 1. 11. and it is observable, when this Divine Spirit was to convince the
World of Sin for not believing; it silenced all the Oracles in the World both
true and false, I mean both Jewish and Heathen, Act, 16. 16, 17. 19. 16, 19.
which might be made use of in opposition to the Gospel. And that is my first
Observation, It Is the Testimony of Jesus, i. e. peculiarly, and nones else.

Secondly, It Is not the Person employed, Man or Angel, on whom the validity of
this Testimony depends: but it is The Spirit of Prophecy: not only as revealing
God's mind; but as predicting to confirm the Revelation; i. e. it is the
Testimony of Omniscient Veracity, or of the prime Verity; for nothing can
furnish out the Spirit of Prophecy, but a Science, and Truth that is
indefectible and infinite. (For the account of certainty in the Divine
Prescience, as to Contingencies, and the products of Liberty, must not be
resolved into the Decree, as if God certainly foreknew this would be the
product of Liberty therefore, because he decreed it, for the Decree makes all
Contingencies equally possible, unless we introduce Fatality. But the certainty
of Prescience must be resolved solely into the Infinity of Science. There is no
searching of his understanding. Isa. 40. 28.)

So then, whether it be Man or Angel that is acted by the Spirit of Prophecy;
whether Moses or Balaam, Simeon or Caiphas, it matters not! (contrary to
Maimonides's Rules about Qualifications,) the Testimony is the Spirits of
Prophecy, the attestation to the Revelation is made by the Prime Verity, and
the force lies in the presumptive truth of Nature's concession. What God says
is true, or as St. John expresses it, If we receive the witness of men, the
witness of God is greater. 1 John 5. 9.

For all things in the World are true, or false, as they have, or want the
Testimony of the Thus the Sun evidenceth it self by its own light; and all
other things visible, by that illustration of Light it lends them, either
transiently as to the Air, or permanently as to some Precious Stones, etc.
Prime Verity; whether that Verity record its Testimony in the settled Laws and
Volumes of Nature; upon which the study of Philosophy and all Secular knowledge
depends: or in the prescripts of Revelation, called for distinctions sake
Supernatural knowledge, i. e. therefore this or that Knowledge is true in the
nature of things, because their causes and effects are apprehended as the first
Cause, and the Divine Truth did constitute them. And so in Revelation: this or
that created Knowledge and Judgment is true, or false, which apprehends it
according to the word and meaning of the first Revealer, or otherwise.

We see this in Humane affairs, where the grand decision of Truth depends
entirely upon an Oath; and therefore upon an Oath, because an Oath is the
attestation, or appeal to the Prime Verity; which Testimony upon Oath being
ever esteemed most Sacred (till the Licentious and Atheistical profaneness of
our Swearing Age essayed to unhallow, and make it common,) Therefore it must
follow, That whatever is attested by the Prime Verity itself, is true without
any other, or against any other contrary Evidence, (and it is this that renders
the Faith of Christian Mysteries reasonable.) Now the Declarations or
Revelations of the Spirit of Prophecy, Selfevidently appear to proceed from the
Prime Verity, because no knowledge but the Divine and Infinite, can reach the
Spirit of Prophecy, i. e. can confirm Revelation, by certain Prediction.

And if I mistake not, this wounds the Leviathan, who has taken his pastime in
these waters of the Sanctuary, and may show him that Divine Faith may, and
ought to be resolved into Divine Truth, that so its certainty might be
steadfast, as any knowledge in the World; for whosoever may minister to this
Faith, its relyance must be upon Divinity itself: and happy were it, would men
consider the grounds of their Faith, that they might with the Apostle amidst
all the oppositions of the World stand firm, with a Nevertheless I am not
ashamed, for I 2 Timothy 1. 12.
know whom I have believed.

And that Mankind might have rational and satisfactory grounds for Faith in
Jesus. The Divine Spirit which ever gave Testimony to him, exerted it self both
as a Spirit of Omnipotency (in Miracles,) and of Omniscience (in Prophecy,) to
the end Men might believe the great concerns of Revelation, upon the
demonstrative grounds of Divine perfection.

This I take to be St. Paul's meaning, when he says, My preaching was not with
enticing words of man's 1 Cor 2. v. 4,
wisdom, but in Demonstration of the Spirit, and of power, i. e. of Miracles
wrought by the Spirit of Omnipotency, and of Demonstrative conviction out of
the Prophets, who appear to have been acted by the Spirit of Omniscience and
Truth itself, by the Events answering their Predictions: That your Faith (says
he) should Verse 5.
not stand in the wisdom of men, (either the Authority of the Civil State, with
the Leviathan; or strong Probability, with Others:) but in the Power of God, i.
e. in (...), v. 4.
the Divinity itself; which, when it gives Testimony, Natural light
unquestionably concludes it true.

And if it be demanded, which way the Apostle made his Demonstrations in the
Spirit, I suppose he tells us, v. 13. We speak not in the words which man's
wisdom teaches (i. e. according to the studied Rules of Arts now in Greece,)
but which the Holy Ghost teaches, Comparing spiritual things with spiritual,
(i. e. comparing the Doctrine and Transactions of the New Testament with the
Prophecies of the Old:) and hereby the Faith of Jesus is Demonstrated to be
Divine, because attested by the Spirit of Prophecy, for in the 9th verse he had
quoted the Prophet Isaiah; and so in all his preaching (as Acts 17. 2, 3. and
for studying this Demonstration, or comparing the New Testament with the Old,
the Bereans are so much commended, v. 11.) and nothing is plainer, than that
all the Evangelists, and Apostles, and even Christ himself did thus argue or
convince out of the Old Testament Prophets: The force therefore of the
Testimony depends solely upon the Spirit of Prophecy: or that it is the
Testimony of the Prime and Omniscient Verity.

I must not stay to clear my hand of the Tractatus Theologico-politicus, who
has resolved the Spirit of Prophecy, not as St. Peter did, into being Moved by
the Holy Ghost, 2 Pet, 1. 21. but into the Crasis of the Imaginative faculty;
that so you may know him the Firstborn of the Leviathan, and by their
Hypotheses, whose Scholars Tract. p. 7, etc.
both were, even his who resolved the Creation of the Universe into the
fortuitous concurs of Atoms.

Neither may I reflect upon that Moral Probability, which some seem to think a
sufficient foundation for Faith, further than to say, That matters revealed and
confirmed by the Spirit of Prophecy, are, and ought to be (so far as revealed)
as certain Truths, as any Demonstrations in the World besides. I fear not after
St. Paul to say, that matters of a Moral and Spiritual nature may be
demonstrated: taking Demonstration not in the confined signification which the
School of Heathen Philosophy affixt to it; but in the reality of the thing, and
with respect to the end for which Demonstration serves, viz. a Proof that
creates a knowledge certain and indubitable; and this the Spirit of Prophecy,
not as revealing, but as confirming Revelation by Prediction, does. Which
brings me to the Third and chief designed Particular.

Thirdly, That of all other Testimonies of Jesus, the Spirit of Prophecy is The
Testimony. My meaning is,

There is no such standing, satisfactory, and demonstrative proof of the
Divinity of JESVS's Transactions, Faith and Doctrine, as the Spirit of Prophecy
is.

There are indeed many other Testimonies of Jesus, better than most, or any
other cause beside his, can produce.

First, The Testimony of Angels, both good and bad! the good in obsequious
attendancies upon his Birth, his Luke 2. 13. 22. 43, etc.
Agonies, his Resurrection, and Ascension. The bad, in flying Fears,
concluding, at least strongly suspecting, by Luke 8. 28. Mark 1. 24.
the Predictions of the Old Prophets, who it was they now had to deal with in
Humane Nature; even the Holy One of God, or the Seed promised to break the
Serpent's head.

Secondly, The Testimony of Men, both his Friends, and Enemies. His Friends
extol, adore him, die for him: his Enemies of all sorts confess him an
extraordinary Person, though a deceiver: as Celsus, Jalian, Mahomed, the Jew,
the Philosopher, the Apostate, the Impostor, the Infidel: Mahomed is kindest of
all the rest, for he will allow him to be his Pew-fellow in Prophecy, upon
condition he may but sit above him. Nay,

Thirdly, There are more venerable Witnesses, than either Angels or Men, I mean
those Three in Heaven, 1 John 5. 7, 8.
and those Three on Earth; where, though the Divine Spirit make One in either
Three, yet (which I wonder is no more observed and insisted on) the Spirit as
it is in this sense explained, The Spirit of Prophecy, is (however to my
apprehension) The Testimony.

Not in preference to the Others considered in themselves, but considered with
reference to Mankind, who are to be Judges of their Evidence; and whose Judging
faculties are more susceptive of satisfaction from the Spirit, as a Spirit of
Prophecy, or infinite Science in truth; than from the same Spirit in any other
way of Evidence: the reason of which I conceive to be this, That the
convictions of the Spirit in the way of Prophecy, or in the display of
Omniscience, is more directly accommodate to humane Intellect, our faculty of
Science, than any other operation of the Spirit is. For the strongest
tendencies of Intellect are to the Science of Truth; and therefore acts of
Omniscient Truth, are more accommodate to Humane understanding, than acts of
Power, Wisdom being that it is more delighted in, than Strength.

If any Revelation be from God, by the foresaid Rule of Natural knowledge, it
ought to be accepted and submitted to. But whether that which pretends
Revelation, be from God, or no; is the only Question.

Now the Argument from Miracles is pressed by all, this of Prediction by few or
none; but without depreciating the former, I must confess ever since I
considered it, the latter is weightier and more convictive with me: for I am
more fully satisfied, That the whole Series of Scriptural Revelation is Divine,
because I find all along, the Spirit of Prediction interwoven; than because I
read such and such Miracles done. For I find the Alcharon pretending Miracles,
but not daring to pretend Prediction. So that of all the innate Characters of
Divinity pretended to in any written Law, this of Prediction is peculiar to the
Scriptures.

This therefore is the Proposition I shall insist upon;

That the Spirit of Prophecy, not as revealing God's mind only (for that is the
Question,) but as predicting to confirm what is revealed, is primarily The
Testimony.

The Reasons I shall at present offer are these Two.

First, Because this Spirit of Prophecy is that Tally cannot be counterfeited,
but may easily be discovered by certain Rules of trial.

Secondly, Because all Ages are equally under its conviction, which they are
not as to any other Testimony abstracting from this; nay, succeeding Ages have
the advantage in this, and may rely upon it as that which gives credit to all
the rest.

First, Because the Spirit of Prophecy is that Tally cannot be counterfeited,
but may easily be discovered; and therefore God gave it to the World to prevent
delusion in matters of Revelation.

The intentions of his Mercy to recover Mankind from the Fall, God held forth
the faith and hope of, to Adam and all his Posterity, in the Promise of a Seed
that should break the Serpent's head, i. e. in the Gospel style, should Genesis 3.
15. 1 John 3. 8.
destroy the works of the Devil.

But lest the subtle Serpent should set up one of his own party, under the
specious pretenses of redeeming Mankind, when the concealed intention was to
enslave them more, God did by the Spirit of Prophecy in several Ages so
individualize that Redeemer, so precisely foretell his Time, so notify all his
Transactions, that in common reason he might be known from all others; and this
want of reason is that our Savior wonders at in the Pharisees, who sought a
Sign of him! Ye can discern the Matt. 16. 1.
face of the sky, but can ye not discern the signs of the times? i. e. that
these are the Times of your expected Messiah, presignified by the Spirit of
Prophecy in the Old Testament? and that ye need no Sign from me to prove it,
but the correspondency of my time and actions to their Predictions.

That the Spirit of Prophecy had thus uncharacterized the Person, the Time, the
Actions, and Sufferings of the Messiah; that this Jesus of Nazareth must needs
be him of whom Moses and the Prophets did write, Joh. 1. 45. I shall not go
about to clear! In this I refer to the Evangelists, especially St. Matthew, who
still appeals, As Matt. 18. 17. and elsewhere.
even in Christ's Miracles, to what was written in the Prophets.

Taking then this for granted; I say, that this Spirit of Prophecy was that
Tally could not be counterfeited, given therefore by God to prevent delusion in
matters pretending to Revelation, and so it is emphatically, The Testimony.

Not that a lying Spirit could not pretend a Divination, as well as a
Revelation; but that it could not predict a future contingent Event, especially
remote, so as to adventure on the trial of Prophecy; and all Heathen Divination
boggled here.

For it is as infallible a Rule, That none but the Divine Spirit can be the
Spirit of Prophecy: as it is, That remote future contingencies can be clearly
foreseen, and certainly foretold by none, but Omniscient Veracity.

And therefore setting aside the Works of Creation, which found Natural
Religion; there is no effect that argues an immediate Divinity for its cause so
clearly, as the Prophetical Predictions do; because there are more easy and
certain Rules of Trial to discern which is the true Spirit of Prophecy, than
any Divine operation after the creation of things.

For wonderful Works may be said to be the products of that energy, which the
Creator at first enricht Nature with, and so a Quare absolute concludimus,
omnia quae in Scripturis Vere narrantur contigisse, ea secundum leges Naturae,
ut omnia necessario contigisse. Et si quid reperiatur legibus Naturae
repugnare, aut ex iis consequi non potuisse; plane credendum id a Sacrilegis
hominibus sacris Literis adjectum esse. Tract. Theo. pol. c. 6. p 71.
late Offspring of the Leviathan affirms. But Prediction is Self-evidently an
immediate issue from the Divinity, de novo; which if so, and pressed home upon
the Leviathan and his Firstborn now mentioned, will show them other grounds
for Christian Faith, and Scriptures, than only the Authority of God's Leviath.
cap. 36, 37.
Lieutenants.

Now the Rules to try the Spirit of Prophecy by, as I take it, are but these
Two.

First, That the thing pretended to be a Revelation from God, (which was
always an Injuction or Prohibition with their annexes) had no intrinsecal Evil
in it, or necessarily derivative from it, peccant against the Laws of Morality,
settled in the first Creation, (i. e. against Natural Religion, or a former Law
revealed, and on good grounds accepted as Divine;) for God's Laws never
contradict one another; neither is his Wisdom so shortsighted as to set up
contrary Institutions of life: and therefore the Christian Law destroys not the
Mosaical, but compleats its imperfections; I came not to destroy, but to
fulfill, i. e. to fill up. This is the primary and grand Rule of Trial: To which
men's non-attendance, has at last debaucht all Religion, made it a wild and
unaccountable thing, and let in that Spirit of Giddiness, that exposes men to
every wind of Doctrine.

The Second Rule of Trial is this, That the Revelation pretending from God, and
not peccant, as aforesaid, should be confirmed with a Sign, i. e. Prediction
fulfilled.

These two Rules brought the whole Spirit of Prophecy under trial; let the
Rabbis, and they that in this admire them, multiply never so many, I apprehend
not that the Scriptures have given us any more, or that reason requires them.

Only Two things are here to be observed: First, That in whatever matter it
consisted, whether Miracle, or not; yet being a contingency, the formality of a
Sign consisted in Prediction fulfilled. Secondly, That the Rule of Trial by
Signs, was but Secondary, and subordinate to that of trial by Natural Religion,
i. e. a former Law, whether that of Creation or Revelation after, confirmed and
accepted. And all this is plain from Deuteronomy. 18. and the 13th Chapters.

First, When a Prophet speaks in the Name of the Chap. 18. 22.
Lord, (i. e. pretends a Revelation,) if the thing follow not, nor come to
pass; that is the thing which the Lord has not spoken. The defect of
Prediction fulfilled overthrows the pretenses of Inspiration, or Revelation;
which necessarily argues whatever the materiality of a Sign be, its Jer. 28. 9.
Ezekiel. 33. 33.
formality consists in Prediction fulfilled: Though I allow 'twas often (but
not always) in a matter or work miraculous, that what Omniscience had said,
Omnipotence might back; and awaken the Understanding by the impressions on
sense.

Secondly, If a Sign or Prediction should be fulfilled, to promote Idolatry, or
any thing destructive to Natural Religion, or a former Divine Law revealed,
Thou shall not hearken to the voice of that Prophet, for the Lord Deuteronomy. 13. 3,
etc.
your God proves you. The meaning is, In matters of Immorality, the Case is
not to be tried by the Rule of Signs, but by the primary Rule, that of a former
Law, whether in Creation, which we call Natural Religion, or in some
well-grounded former Revelation, as this of Moses's was in respect of all
following Prophets; and so the Gospel in respect of all New light, etc.

For whatever has any intrinsecal Evil necessarily adherent, or repugnant to a
former Law surely believed to be Divine; whatever overthrows Humanity, the
natural Notions of Good and Evil, Truth and Falsehood; which is Natural
Religion, or the Law of Creation, (upon whose bottoms all Supernatural stands,)
let it pretend Catholicisme and Infallibility on the one hand, or Spiritual
giftedness and Inspiration on the other, it is certainly, not Divine, but
Diabolical, though strengthened with Signs and Wonders. And it is then men are
given up to strong delusions to believe Lies, when through pretenses of
Inspiration they have not received the love of this Truth, but let go this
grand and primary Rule of Trial; for doubtless, were the pretenses of new
Revelations and Inspirations examined closely by this Rule, and observed how
they overthrow Natural Religion, or the plain Maxims and Duties of Christians;
it would discover the Impostures of Popery, Fanaticism, Mahometism, as well as
Gentilism.

But what pretends to Prophetical Revelation, or to be God's Will; being not
peccant against this first Rule; and is confirmed with Signs, or Prediction
fulfilled; must be allowed to be Divine, as having the Seal of God annexed, and
no mark left to discern the counterfeit by; which is a case Omnipotent and
Omniscient Truth is concerned to Isai. 44. 25, etc.
look to.

It will perhaps be demanded, if this be so. How could the several Ages of the
World make Trial of the Spirit of Prophecy in its Testimony to Jesus, seeing
they lived not to see the predicted Signs fulfilled?

To which I Answer, They lived to see and know other Signs or Predictions
fulfilled, which the same Spirit of Prophecy, in connection to the Testimony of
Jesus, had foretold; and that was sufficient. Ex. gr.

The Deluge was sign sufficient to Noah and all his Posterity till Abraham's
days: Isaak's Birth was so to Abraham, the Egyptian Bondage and Delivery
precisely foretold to Abraham, was so to Jacob, and his Posterity, till Moses
and the Prophets arose, and then there wanted none till Christ's time, as might
be easily showed.

So that in every Age God submitted to Trial that Spirit of Prophecy that gave
Testimony to Jesus, by such Events or Predictions fulfilled, as peculiarly
concerned the sight or experienced knowledge of those Ages: Nam quae melior and
validior ratio de rebus talibus redditur, quam cum Omnipotens ea facere
perhibetur, and Facturu; dicitur; quae praenunciasse Ibi legitur, Ubi alia
multa praenuncia^it, quae Fecisse monstratu^? Aug de Civit. lib. 21. cap. 7.
and from hence 'twas reasonable they should conclude, That the same Spirit
would not miscarry in its Testimony to Jesus, or the Messiah promised, and so
particularly deciphered. And this was the foundation of Patriarchal Religion,
so far as 'twas Supernatural, i. e. of their 1 Pet. 1. 10, 11, 12. (...), v.
10. (...), etc. v. 11. (...), etc. v. 12. where Prediction and Revelation are
distinguished in the Spirit of Prophecy; for the Revelation was, v. 12 in the
things they ministered, (or the same Gospel to us and them, Heb. 4. 2.) the
prediction was, in testifying beforehand, v. 11. (...).
Faith, as St. Paul calls it, Heb. 11.

From all which I hope I may conclude, that the Spirit of Prophecy in this
sense, is THE Testimony of Jesus; as being that Tally could not be
counterfeited (like the Roman Ancile by Mamurrius) without discovery by the
easy Rules of Trial: whereas to me all the other Testimonies without this seem
liable to it.

And I am persuaded my freedom in saying so will not be esteemed impious by
him, that considers St. Peter has said as much before me, who recognizing the
Father's Voice, which he himself heard on the Holy Mountain, yet immediately
subjoyns, We have also a more sure word 2 Pet. 1. 18. 19.
of Prophecy; i. e. more sure than a Voice from Heaven.

For the question is not, which is surer in itself; the Father's Voice on Mount
Tabor, or the Spirits of Prophecy in the Scripture? but, which is surer unto us
in the way of our discerning? The one I conceive cannot be counterfeited
without discovery, but may not the other? for a Voice in the Air from a good
Angel has been heard, why then not from a bad one? We have no Rules of Trial,
that I know of, for the one; as I have showed we have for the other; therefore
that other is surer to us.

And to evidence this further, it is observable, That the Father witnessing
refers to the Son; hear him: and the Matt. 17. 5. Joh. 5. 39.
Son witnessing refers to the Spirit of Prophecy; Search the Scriptures, (...),
They are they that testify of me; which is as much as I affirm from the (...)
in the Text, the Spirit of Prophecy is eminently The Testimony.

So that of the Three that bear record in Heaven; to Us, the Spirit of Prophecy
is the Test of the others, as being that which cannot be counterfeited, but may
be discovered by the easy Rules of Trial.

And as for those Three on Earth, the Spirit, the Water, and the Blood, i. e.
as they are generally interpreted, Christ's Miracles wrought by the Spirit of
Power; his Holiness and Purity denoted by the Water; and his Constancy to death
implied by the Blood: It may well be scrupled, whether they may not all be so
far counterfeited, that without other Considerations, they may not always by
us be discerned, whether they attest a Divine Revelation, or Imposture.

For First, Holiness and Purity is a garb Hypocrites may put on so
artificially, that it may not be in our power to detect it.

Secondly, Constancy to death, is but what a strong delusion may animate a man
to; if it be but of the right Roman temper, and Jesuitical metal; which the
Instances of our Age surely have evinced.

Thirdly, The Spirit of Power, i. e. Miracles, though I grant a divine
Testimony in itself, yet may not always be so to us; because not subjected to
such easy Rules of Trial, as the Spirit of Prophecy is. For how far sensible
Nature may be under the power of Art, or the Agency of evil Spirits; who is so
skilful as to determine, the most that may be, and the least that is? So that a
Beholder may be at a loss, betwixt a true Miracle, and a lying Wonder, and not
know who to believe, Moses, or the Magicians, till one Party quits the field,
and confess the Finger of God.

I am sensible, the Common Opinion presses me most with this Objection, as if
my Doctrine evacuated the conviction of our Savior's Miracles, and patronized
the Jews Infidelity, in not believing for the Works sake.

But, as has been observed by a Judicious Man, this is a Dr. Jackson.
mistake, for the Jews had a certain Rule of Trial, whereby to discern that the
Works of Jesus were wrought in God, and not in Beelzebub; and that Rule was no
other than the Spirit of Prophecy, which (like the Light) as it Self-evidently
manifests its own Divinity; so by its Illustration it manifests other things:
which Spirit of Prophecy in the Old Testament (those Oracles committed to the
Jews) had foretold that the Messiah, so born, so Romans 3. 2.
qualified, so circumstantiated as Jesus, and none other ever was, should do
these particular Works of wonder. So that the Miracles of Christ were to them
truly Signs, and therefore convictive; not solely because Divine operations,
(for that was the question,) but because they were Contingencies determinately
foretold.

And this is plain from our Savior's Answer to the Pharisees, requiring a
Sign, Matt. 16. 3. Can ye not discern the signs of the times? or as St. Luke,
This time, Chap. 12. 56. where in St. Luke Christ adds, as awakening their
Common reason; Yea, why do you not of your selves judge what is right? which
argues that they had a Rule to judge by, i. e. why do ye not of your selves,
without my granting your request of a Sign; judge out of the Prophets that I am
the Messiah? The works that I do in my Father's Name-bear witness of John 5. 36.
me, i. e. who I am. Why, how? the Answer Christ made to John the Baptist
Disciples, Matt. 11. 4. resolves it, Go tell John what ye see and hear, the
blind see, the lame walk, etc. i. e. Go tell him that Isaiah's Prophecy you see
is ALL Christ's Miracles were Signs to the Jews, because presignified by the
Prophets whom the Jews believed; and in the Economy of Grace, the Messiah was
therefore sent to that People first, who had the Records of the Spirit of
Prophecy; I am not sent but to the lost sheep of the House of Israel: Why?
Mankind had as much interest in him as they; but the most satisfactory,
convictive way of propagating his Faith to Mankind, was from them; which is the
reason it was to be preached to all Nations, Beginning from Jerusalem, Luke 24.
46.
fulfilled by me, Isai. 35. 6. and 61. 1. and then let him and you consider,
who I am. Where Christ to that grand Question, which was the Pharisees as well
as John's, in answer produces the Testimony of the Spirit of Prophecy; and
hereby he proved his works to be Divine, or that he was sent by the Father, as
he himself speaks; and then I allow most unquestionable and demonstrative
Convictions. And why was not this that which aggrandiz'd their Sin into
blasphemy against the Holy Ghost, Matt. 12.? that they wilfully withstood the
Convictions, not only of the Spirit of Power, but of Prophecy too, of which
latter, they were such competent Judges, whatever they were of the former.

Nay, it is further observable in this matter, that after Jesus had pressed the
Jews with the two first Witnesses in Heaven, viz. the Father's Voice and the
Son's Miracles. Joh. 5. 36, 37. he finally lays the stress of his Convictions
on the Writings of the Prophets; Had ye believed Moses, ye would have believed
me, for he wrote of me, i. e. Joh. 5. 46,
the grand Witness I appeal to at the bar of men's Judgment, is the Spirit of
Prophecy in the written Records, Search the Scriptures: and all this to prove
what Christ v. 39,
had said, v. 30. that the Father sent him. Where, after all the other
Testimonies produced, he finally relies upon the Spirit of Prophecy; But if ye
believe not his writings, how shall ye believe my words: where Jesus himself v.
47.
plainly acknowledges, That in humane Judgment the test both of his Words and
Works, and all his Pretensions of Divine mission (mentioned v. 30, etc.) was
the Spirit of Prophecy as predicting.

So that I see not but we may conclude without any derogation, That Christ's
Miracles received the force of their conviction from the Spirit of Prophecy,
not of Power only: and so the Apostles Miracles did too; for as Christ's
Miracles were determinately foretold by Moses and the Prophets, so the Apostles
Miracles were by Christ. Both were Signs, i. e. foretold Christ's Works in all
the Old Testament; the Apostles, Mark 16. 17. These Signs shall follow them;
and elsewhere.

And this was the Gospels Confirmation, God bearing them witness both with
Signs and Wonders, and diverse Heb. 2. 3, 4.
Miracles, and gifts of the Holy Ghost: The first of Signs, convictive, as
being the Testimony of Omniscient Verity; the second of Miracles, awakening the
Senses (and thereby the Understanding) to consider that Conviction, as the
force of Omnipotence most effectually in this dull state can: the last, of
Gifts, as qualifying the Gospels Ministers to so difficult an employment.

Lastly, After all their Miracles, both Jesus, and his Apostles back their
Doctrine with this Testimony of the Spirit of Prophecy, and hang the weight of
their Convictions thereon; This is that which was spoken, or thus it is
written, throughout all the New Testament. And I think it is most remarkable,
That after all possible satisfaction given to their Senses, Christ proves the
truth of his Resurrection from this Testimony; and it is spoken signanter. Then
opened he their understandings, that Luke 24. 45, 46.
they might understand the Scriptures (i. e. he explained the Scriptures
intelligibly to them,) and said unto them, Thus it is written, etc.

From all which considered I may conclude this first Reason, why the Spirit of
Prophecy is The Testimony, because 'twas that Tally could not be counterfeited,
(given therefore to prevent delusions) for the Rules of Trial were easy and
certain: and no Divination could bear the test, but what had the Spirit of God
its Author, or else deserved not the name of Prophecy.

Secondly, It Is The Testimony, because all Ages are under its conviction
equally, more than they are of any others, abstracting from this. And my reason
is, because this Testimony is permanent, and the rest, without this, are
transient; though this adjoined makes even them permanent too. Ex. gr.

1. The Father's Voice (as I remember) was only heard at the Baptism, and
Transfiguration of Jesus.

2. The Word incarnate was personally present, only in the Days of Augustus
and Tiberius.

3. The Holy Ghost's Visible descent was but once at Jordan, and once at
Jerusalem, the Day of Pentecost. And these (as generally interpreted) are the
Three in Heaven. So likewise for the other Three on Earth.

1. Holiness or Moral goodness is the pretense of every Philosopher, a standing
and laudable Testimony I confess; and therefore the grand design of Jesus was
to restore it effectually, which he did by Supernatural helps, whereas others
essayed it by the strength of Nature alone, which after the Fall was
impossible: so that though Jesus in this surpast all Mankind, yet some Rivals
have been set up against him, as Apollonius by Hierocles.

2. To be a Martyr for a Lie, when a man believes it, (as the Apostle tells us,
some shall,) is neither unusual, nor 2 Thessalonians. 2. 11.
unreasonable.

3. The Age of Miracles (excepting the wisdom and conduct of Providence, which
is not regarded) is worn out, for all the Legendary Impostures of that Church
that still pretends them.

But that which strengthens all the rest by its connection with them, The
Testimony of the Spirit of Prophecy, stands like a fixed Star, to give light to
every hour of time; called therefore The more sure Word, and the 2 Pet. 1. 19.
1 Pet. 1. 25. Not (...), but (...).
Word of God which abides for ever, to which we do well, if we give heed. My
meaning is,

The Old and New Testaments are standing Witnesses to our Faith in Jesus, all
Ages may consult these Records, and find the Testimony of the Spirit of
Prophecy so interwoven in every part, that it certainly evidenceth their
Divinity and Truth.

Can any other Writing be produced, that durst attempt to foretell such things,
and at such a distance, to confirm any other pretended Revelation, or
Institution contradictory to this? or does not every Event in these answer its
prediction? Ex. gr.

Is not the dispersed condition of the Jewish Nation, a On those words, Psalm.
59. 11. Slay them not, lest my People forget. Scatter them by thy power. St.
Austin applying Them to the Jews, has this excellent remark, Ne obliti legem
Dei, ad hoc de quo agimus testimonium, nihil valerent, quoniam si cum
testimonio scripturarum in sua tantummodo terra, non ubique essent; profecto
Ecclesia quae ubique est, eos, Prophetiarum quae de Christo pramissae sunt,
testes in omnibus gentibus non haberet. De Civit. lib. 18. cap. 46. And then
concludes, Ideo nihil est firmius ad convincendos quoslibet alienos, si de hac
re contenderint: nostrosque fulciendos, si recte sapuerint, quam ut Divina
praedicla de Christo, ea proferantur, quae in Judaeorum scripta sunt Codicibus,
Quibus avulsis de sedibus proptils, and propter hoc Testimonium toto Orb
dispersis, Christi usquequaque crevit Ecclesia. Ibid. cap. 47.
standing Sign to all Ages of the World since the Gospels promulgation, and a
permanent Rule of Trial laid before all considerative men, that both Testaments
which foretold it, proceeded from the unerring Spirit of Omniscience? Or was
there ever any parallel Case to theirs? to continue so many hundred years
without any Ty of National Government, and yet not to be lost in the crowd of
the Nations where so many mutations have happened, nor at all (like the Ten
Tribes) swallowed up in their Dispersions as wide as the Universe.

I must not insist upon other permanent Signs confirming the Scriptural
Revelation, as the Case of the Four Monarchies, the Conversion of the Gentiles,
and many more foretold in the Old and New Testament, which our Age and others
may see fulfilled, and therefore are under the conviction of this Testimony
equally.

I mean, We of this, and every Age, are under the Convictions of that
Revelation which the Spirit of Prophecy has attested in the Scriptures, (and
therefore, because it has so attested;) as much as those who lived in the days
of the Prophets, or in the Age of Miracles; for else I see not how Abraham's
answer to Dives is good; nay certainly, Posterity is better enabled to judge of
Prophecy, than the Age in which it first appeared. And this, after the Canon of
Scripture shut up, and universally received, renders all New light, and
extraordinary Inspiration, not only suspected, but perfectly needless.

The design of my Discourse is chiefly this, to show, That the Spirit of
Prophecy thus explained, which so apparently runs parallel to the whole lines
of Scriptural Revelation, does most rationally convince us, and all Ages, of
the Divine Truth of that Revelation.

And if so, we gain two Points, not only of great advantage always, but most
needful at this day; when Christian Religion, is either looked out of
countenance by Atheism and Skepticism; or looks itself we know not whither, by
the distortions of Popery and Phanaticism.

The First Point we gain is, To confirm our Christian Faith in general upon
most rational and accountable grounds, that it may endure the concussions and
mutations of the World.

The Second is, To confirm the Divine Authority of the Scriptures in
particular, as our Sure Rule both of Faith and Duty, for if we confess (as
cannot be denied, till some other be produced as able) that the Divine Spirit
was Author of the Predictions in Scripture; what reason can we have against the
Institution of life Revealed? It being in all men's allowance unreasonably
unjust, To allow the Testimony of the Record in one part that it declares, and
not in another; unless we can, better than by bold affirming, prove it in that
part corrupted.

To draw these Points out to the greater advantages, let me reflect upon this
Discourse, and infer Three things.

First, That the great design of our Merciful Creator in giving this Testimony,
is men's conviction in order to the Faith, i. e. the Obedience of Jesus. For in
its most plentiful effusion, and powerful operation, this was its first grand
end, (...), It shall convince the World, John 16. 18. which, when it has done,
the Revelation itself becomes the undoubted Rule, as to Believers; but they who
disbelieve the whole Revelation, are principally to be convinced by this
Testimony; which I have asserted to be most demonstrative and satisfactory; and
such surely our Savior thought it himself. I have told you before, that when
its come to pass ye may believe. Joh. 13. 19. and 16. 4.

Whether then the Unbelievers, who pretend to a Primogeniture in Wit and
Reason, having this conviction offered them under all the advantages of
Predictions fulfilled, more than the Scribes and Pharisees had; as the Atheists
and Scepticks of our Age; may not by ascribing all to a cheat, sin against the
Holy Ghost, as well as they in Matt. 12. is a question I will not absolutely
determine in the affirmative; but ought not methinks to be carried in the
negative so dogmatically, as by the Authors of our Age it has; who (led, I
believe, Hales, etc.
by their own native tenderness and benignity) have concluded, there is no
Meridian for that Sin to appear in, now the Age of Miracles is past.

To confirm the Faith of Jesus, the Spirit both of Power and Prophecy was given
Believers, as the Prophets and Jesus foretold: and the manifest effects of this
remain unto this day as foretold, in the Conversion of the Gentiles; nay, all
Events by Jesus, the Prophetical Writings and Apostolical, foretold, answer
their Predictions, (to instance in the case of the Jewish Nation;) Therefore
not only Jesus and his Apostles had the Spirit of Prophecy, but the Revelation
or Doctrine by them preached is confirmed by it to be Divine, and that as
certainly as the Divine Spirit can demonstrate. St. Paul says, it did
demonstrate, and I think it can, as effectually as any Mathematician in the
Universe; whence I conclude, it is no defect in the Argument, but Brutality in
the recipient obstructs its force.

Secondly, I infer, That seeing the design of this Testimony was, and is, man's
Conviction in order to the Faith of Jesus, there is something in man capable of
Conviction, even before he can be said to be converted.

Thirdly, Nothing in Man being capable of Divine conviction, but the faculty of
Reason, I infer, That the Faith of Jesus is, and ought to be a Rational Faith.
For the declining this Proposition has encouraged men of Parts, and lovers of
Pleasures, to decline Christianity; or men of weak Reason and strong
Imagination, to convert it into an Enthusiastic and Fantastical thing.

And to give this account for the Mysteries of Faith, that the Prime Verity has
affirmed them, as it is all we can without vanity give in this state: so, if
considered, it is as good and rational as of any other knowledge we pretend to,
for it is demonstrable, that the last resolution of See Job 38. 4, 5, etc. and
24, 25, etc.
our Knowledge, of all other things, must upon a through scrutiny be into the
First Cause.

Many more than the Leviathan, think the want of Miracles mitigates the Crime
of Infidelity, which to me seems but Dives's vain opinion, for if men will not
believe the Testimony of the Spirit of Prophecy, neither will they believe
Miracles, as being a Conviction that is easier shifted, than this which
considered is more argumentative; because Reason may with some color seruple
the one, as the Jews did, than they can the other, for the proof of which I
refer to John 5. 49.

For I can never conceive that Miracles are of any signification, but as they
address to Reason to give it satisfaction, i. e. as they prove the attestation
of the Divinity, and argue the Commission to be from God, because his Seal is
to it. For, to think that Miracles are terminated in the senses, or designs any
further upon them, than only to Excite the Intellect to a Judicious conclusion,
is to think that something may be wrought upon a Beast by a Demonstration.

Neither is the proper Mathematical Demonstration, in Scheme of any
signification, as it is terminated in sight alone; for then the Elephant, that
was taught to draw Pliny, Not. hist. lib. 8. cap. 3.
the Greek Alphabet, might have been taught as well to demonstrate; but as
thereby it helps to present convictive Truth to Reason: so that whatever
convinces Reason satisfactorily, attains the end of Demonstration.

Now all Divine Revelation, though ushered in by sense, (for the stupidity's
sake of our dull Understanding, which otherways will hardly be awakened;) yet
ever made its application to Reason; therefore says the Prophet, Show your
selves men, with reference to this very Isal. 46. 8, 9, 10. Luke 12. 56. 2 Thessalonians. 3. 2.
Argument of Prediction. Why do ye not of your selves judge what is right,
says Jesus. Pray that we may be delivered from unreasonable men, for all men
have not Faith, says the Apostle.

Neither is this Pelagianizing at all; I acknowledge the necessity of God's
Supernatural Grace, and that Faith is his gift: it is possible it may be
rejected, but the Arguments that induce to it are most cogent; because of God's
making, not our own; what we do, is but to show our selves men, i. e. to exert
the Faculties with which he endu'd us in the first Institution of our Nature,
and with which he is ever ready to concur by his Grace.

So then whatever convinces Reason most, confirms Faith best, and Faith being
so confirmed, is the highest Reason in the World; for because its light and
discoveveries proceed (as my Reason tells me) from a more unerring Intellect
than mine own, it is most reasonable, that it should supersede all the opposite
acts of my own Mind, and leaves me no Inquiry, but whether the Spirit of God
has said so, or no; which sufficiently discountenances all Socinianism. For it
will not follow by any Rule of Reason, That things are therefore true, or
false, because I can, or cannot comprehend them, (this were for our Reason to
make it self God,) but because they are, or are not attested by the Prime
Verity; how far soever they may exceed the Idaeal comprehensions of our own
finite Faculties; as the discoveries of Infinity necessarily must do, and in
these all Christian Mysteries consist.

So that Faith without Reason is fancy, as Reason opposing Faith is phrenzy.
For all the Mysteries which Gospel Christianity has made necessary, this is
good and sufficient Reason, God has plainly revealed them, and other matters
beside Mysteries, are evidently true from their congruity with our own
reasonable minds; as the excellency and goodness of its Precepts, and the
nobleness of its End. And now, if upon these grounds we have that due honor
for our Christian Faith to assert it Reasonable as well as Holy; then 'twill
follow, That no man of Parts, that is willing to consider (and Demonstrations
signify nothing else) the Testimony of Jesus, is Irreligious; but he that is
Irrational.

For no Interest opposite to that of Jesus can produce this Testimony, unless it
be to its own overthrow. And therefore the grand Interests opposite or
destructive to those of Jesus, will always dissemble and pretend this
Testimony; Thou art Peter, upon this Rock will I build; To thee I give the
Keys, feed my sheep; so the Papal on one hand: or on the other hand (though in
truth they are coincident,) They shall be all taught of God, and that is
Infallible; so the Enthusiast.

My meaning is, That which endangers true Christianity, is some Evil within its
own Profession or Pale. And though there be a numerous brood of Offenders
herein; yet there are Three who mainly threaten that Religion amongst our
selves, which God's wonderful Providence has preserved so long; and we seem
solicitous that it might be longer; and they are, in my apprehension, these
Three, the Atheists, the Papists, and the vicious Protestant, i. e. the
Unbelievers, the Ill-believers, and the Ill-livers, allowing Vice its due
latitude.

And these Three serve the mutual designs of one another, though as it is very
subtle, Popery gets the last advantage; for Vice begets Atheism, and Atheism at
length devolves to Popery: for Ill-livers, it is their interest to be
Unbelievers, and they that through the vice of Opinions and Sects have been
always unstable, are very near the brink of this Precipice; so Vice begets
Atheism. But because to outstrip the Devil and not believe at all, is
impossible long to continue, and Religion in general is so planted in Nature,
that it will recur and keep the field; therefore the most corrupt Religion in
special, is fittest at last to be chosen; and so Atheism devolves to Popery,
and sends so many Newgate-Converts to Tyburne, as that party boasts of.

But Conviction without bitterness is all the Application I shall tender from
this discourse, and that particularly to the Three abovesaid.

First, To Atheism thus. If the Scriptural Revelation, which is the Christian
Institution be not to be believed, nothing in the World is; for he that
considers it as becomes a reasonable man, and yet disbelieves it, rejects the
Testimony of the Prime Verity, as I proved before: And set this aside, let the
Atheist prove his Senses, or any thing in the World true if he can.

Secondly, To Popery (which is that part of pretended Christianity which is
peculiar to them of the present Roman Communion and none else.)

I apply the Conviction of this discourse thus.

That if any Religion so called, overthrow the foundations of Natural Religion;
as by introducing Idolatry, and subverting the common Notions of Good and Evil;
then by the grand Rule of trying Spirits, it is most infallibly an Imposture. To
make good which Charge against Popery in each particular Doctrine or Practice
by that Church espoused, as I may not now essay: So I think it is sufficient to
consider the many bloody Plots it has hatched to promote it self, and to weigh
the whole Doctrine of the Jesuits Casuistical Divinity; for never did any
pretended Religion so boldly and palpably refix the common and natural
sentiments of Good and Evil, as that has done. And God grant that no Profession
amongst our selves by thirsting after New light and Inspiration, pretending to
differ from them, may yet symbolize with them in this particular.

Lastly, To the vicious Protestant, or Member (as he calls himself) of the
Church Reformed the Conviction applies itself; for such an one stands
self-condemned; a good Believer (as he thinks himself) and a bad Liver, being
one of the greatest absurdities in the World; and may not this be feared as
much as Popery? for that makes but Men, this makes God our Enemy.

We talk much at this day of uniting different Parties jointly disclaiming
Popery, and God grant it may succeed to good effect; but if it be an Union in
matters of Faith or Religion, I hope they will let us of the Church of England by
Law established, know what Faith they are of, as they know ours: For methinks
all, or most Differences in the World might be reconciled but one, and that is
the difference between Good and Evil; and this indeed is eternally
irreconcilable.

The best method then of Uniting us who pretend to the Reformed Religion, is to
carry on that part of it which is most needful: not to Reform the Church, but
the Members of it, i. e. the Evils we are guilty of against the Rules of it:
and this is more in Our power than our Governors, else I would not mention it;
but then, as I said before, Evil and Vice must have its due latitude, which
takes in giddy and Enthusiastic Opinions, as well as sensual and sinful
practices: for there is a Filthiness 2 Cor. 7. 1.
of the Spirit as well as of the Flesh; I mean, ungovernable Spiritual Pride
and Intellectual Debaucheries, as well as Sensual.

And would all sorts of People jointly disclaiming Popery, set themselves
sincerely and humbly about this great work of Reformation; it would certainly
dispose their hearts to the Union of Charity and good Affection; though it
might not in every particular mould their heads into an Unity of Notion: And
without this Unity in good Affection, it is strange, if a Church or Kingdom so
divided should stand.

In a word, That our Faith in Jesus might be Rational and lasting, I have pressed
the best Argument of Satisfaction and Conviction I know. That it may work by
Love, and the Unity of Christian Affection, shall be my Prayer, and ought to be
all our Endeavors, Till we all Ephesians. 4. 13.
come in the unity of the Faith, and of the knowledge of the Son of God unto a
perfect man, unto the measure of the stature of the fullness of Christ.

Which God of his infinite mercy grant, by directing and succeeding these and
all the Ministeries of his Appointment, through the continual Blessings of his
Holy Spirit, for the sake of Jesus our Lord; To whom, with the Father and the
Divine Spirit, be Praise, and Honor, and Glory eternal. Amen.
FINIS.

