A DISCOURSE ON FORNICATION: SHOWING THE Greatness of that SIN; AND Examining
the Excuses pleaded for it, from the Examples of Ancient Times.

To which is added an Appendix concerning Concubinage; As also A Remark on Mr.
Butler's Explication of Hebr. xiii. 4. in his Late Book on that Subject.

By J. Turner, M. A. Lecturer of Christ-Church, London.

Printed at the Request of some Gentlemen of that Parish.

O Proceres, Censore opus est, an Aruspice, nobis? Juv. Sat.2. LONDON: Printed
for John Wyat, at the Rose in St. Paul's Churchyard. MDCXCVIII.

THE CONTENTS.
THE Introduction, page. 1. I. Fornication contrary to God's Original
Institution of Marriage, p. 3. In what Sense that Institution is a Positive
Law, p. 4. Several such Laws given to Man from the beginning, p. 5. The
Original Institution of Marriage explained, p. 8. How Fornication a Violation
of it, p. 11. Objections considered, p. 13. David's Adultery with Bathsheba
impertinently alleged, p. 14. Abraham's Concubines were Married to him, p. 15.
The Laws of former Times, no good objection against this Law, p. 16. The
Heathens corrupt in their Manners, p. 17. The Jewish-Law imperfect, p. 18.
Divorce then allowed but not approved, p. 19. Polygamy was always unlawful, p.
20. Abraham's Example not Universally to be imitated, p. 22. Things tolerated
not always approved, the difference between Licita, and Honesta, p. 23. The
Heathens did detest this Vice, p. 24. The Jews absolutely forbid it, p. 25. The
Patriarchs before the Law abhorred it, p. 26. Whatever prevailed in former
Times, we are now brought to the Original Institution, p. 27. II. Fornication
expressly forbidden by the Gospel, p. 29. Reasons urged by St. Paul to dissuade
Men from it, p. 34. It Is inconsistent with Christian Purity and Holiness, p.
38. III. Fornication a Brutish Vice, and dishonorable to Humane Nature, p. 41.
Mischievous to the Children born of such Parents, p. 42. To the Offenders
themselves, both in Credit, Fortune and Health, p. 45. It debauches Men's
Spirits, and makes them Enemies to Religion, p. 47. The Commonness of this Sin,
one great occasion of Infidelity, Blasphemy and Profaneness, p. 49. Appendix
concerning Concubinage, p. 55. A Remark on Heb. xiii. 4. against Mr. Butler, p.
56. All Concubinage of unmarried Persons is Fornication, p. 57.
ERRATA.
PAge 1. line 7. r. has, p. 2. l. 3. r. that, p. 3. l 5. r. up to, p. 4. l. 2.
dele had, p. 11. l. 5. r. this Law, p. 13. l. 21. r. Title, p. 16. l. 31. r.
then, p. 17. l. 17. r. Precedent, p. 21. l. 20. r. alone, l. 32. r. they, p.
22. l. 15. r. him, p. 37. l. 17. r. and destroy, p. 40. l. 31. r. defects, p.
45. l. 33. dele the, p. 48. l. 15. r. Bodily, p. 52. l. 1. r. their, p. 53. l.
18. r. Men, p. 56. l. 28. r. Contract or Marriage State, p. 59. l. 22. r.
their, p. 60. l. 14. r. the, l. 33. r. what is Scandalous and Offensive.

A DISCOURSE ON FORNICATION.
Showing the Greatness of that Sin, and examining the Excuses pleaded for it
from the Examples of Ancient Times.
WHile all good Men lament the Wickedness and Debauchery of this Age and
Nation, and justly dread the heavy Judgments of God for the notorious
Iniquities every Day committed; among other Circumstances that increase their
Grief, and enhanse their Fears, They have this Discomfort; that the Looseness
of Men's Manners had corrupted their Judgments, and defaced their Sense of Good
and Evil. So that instead of Humiliation before God, some Men justify
themselves, and are so far from abandoning their Vices that they plead
Innocence, and upon the Perpetration of the vilest Crimes, cry out with
Solomon's Harlot, that they have done nothing amiss.

This is in no Sin more practiced than in those of Adultery and Fornication.
Adultery may possibly be allowed to have somewhat of Ill in it; especially on
the Woman's Side, where there is a manifest Injury to a whole Family; and yet it
is an Argument that this makes no great Impression on some Peoples Consciences,
because it is so openly and publicly practiced. But Fornication, by the lewd
Persons of this Age, is avowed to be innocent and harmless. And yet there must
be a great share both of Confidence and Impiety, in that Christian who disputes
the Unlawfulness of a Vice, which in the whole New Testament is frequently and
expressly declared to shut Men out of the Kingdom of God. If the Authority of
the Gospel was but submitted to by these Men, and suffered to guide their
Consciences as it ought; no more would be needful to convince and restrain
them, than any one of these Texts, wherein it is said, that no Whoremonger, or
unclean Person, has any Inheritance in the Kingdom of Christ and of God.

But this alone will not now prevail; They appeal from the Gospel to the Law,
and tell you how, as they imagine, was the Practice of ancient Times. They
expostulate with you how it comes to pass, that what was anciently tolerated
and allowed, comes now to be reckoned such a dreadful and enormous Crime; so
that they make it a matter of Debate and Controversy, and must have their
Objections and Scruples answered, before the Gospel shall be heard, or they can
become sensible of their Wickedness, and give any Hope of their being
reclaimed. The Preachers may say what they will in their Pulpits about the
Justice and Severity of God, and the Vengeance which he threatens against
Sinners. This is never like to move Men, while they conceit their Actions
justifiable, and persuade themselves that they do not come within the Verge of
those Menaces.

At a time therefore when the Piety and Wisdom of our Governors seem resolved
to check and restrain the intolerable Growth of Impiety: It may not be
unseasonable to treat with these Men, and lay open the Heinousness and certain
Immorality of one of the most predominant Sins of this Age; and if I mistake
not, one of the great Occasions and Promoters of a Spirit of Atheism,
Profaneness, and Irreligion.

I hope, what I shall say on this Subject may be serviceable to those whose
Consciences are not feared, and who are not wholly given unto vile Affections
and a reprobate Mind. But they who resolve to do any thing that gratifies their
Lusts, though never so expressly forbidden, may believe any thing that favors
those Pleasures, though never so evidently false and absurd.

If I do not say all that might be said to the Advantage of so considerable a
Subject; I hope at least that it may either invite or provoke better Judges to
take so good a Cause in hand.

The certain Immorality of this Practice, and the Greatness of this Sin, I
shall endeavor to make appear by these Arguments.

I. That Fornication is a Violation of God's positive Law, in the original
Institution of Marriage.

II. That it is expressly forbidden in the Gospel, and absolutely inconsistent
with that pure and holy Life, which the Christian Religion requires from us.

III. Lastly, From the natural Turpitude of it, and the Evils and pernicious
Consequences that attend it.

I. The first Assertion is, that Fornication is a Violation of the positive Law
of God in the original Institution of Marriage; and this I shall endeavor to
prove from Genesis 2. 23, 24. where, in the Relation of Eve's being formed out of
Adam's Side, there are these Words: Adam said, This is now Bone of my Bones,
and Flesh of my Flesh, she shall be called Woman, because she was taken out of
Man: And therefore shall a Man leave his Father and Mother, and shall cleave
unto his Wife, and they shall be one Flesh. And for the better clearing of this
Argument, I shall proceed thus.

1. I shall show, that God, to provide against the Corruptions of Man's fallen
State, when he had lost the original Perfection of his Reason by Sin, did
assist him in some Cases by Divine Positive Laws.

2. That these Words mentioned Genesis 2. 24. have in them the Force and Authority
of a Divine Law.

3. I shall consider what the true Sense and Purpose of this Law is.

4. I shall show that Fornication is a certain Violation of it, and must
therefore be an heinous Sin, and highly offensive unto God.

5. Lastly, I shall consider the Objections that are commonly made against this
Argument, from the Practice of some particular Men in ancient times, that are
nevertheless recorded to have had a singular share in God's Favor.

1. I shall show that God, to provide against the Corruptions of Man's fallen
State, when he had lost the original Perfection of his Reason by Sin, did
assist him in some Cases by Divine Positive Laws. But here I would not be
mistaken in my Meaning of a Positive Law; By which Expression is commonly
understood such a Command or Precept as ties Man up to Obedience in things of
an indifferent Nature, and where he was left at Liberty by the Laws of Reason.
This is the common meaning of this Phrase, and things forbidden by Positive
Laws in this Sense, are therefore supposed to have no real Evil or Immorality
in them. And though it is certain, that God did very early give Mankind some
such positive Institutions, yet I do by no means intend the original
Institution of Marriage to be positive in such a Sense, as to suppose that it
has no Foundations in the Laws of Nature, or the Principles of Reason, for that
it most certainly has. But my Meaning is, that to prevent either Ignorance or
any Misconstruction of the Laws of Reason in favor of Man's Lusts: God was
pleased to confirm some of the Principles of Reason by Revelation, and
strengthen the Laws of Nature by Positive Institution.

For we must consider, that the Laws of Nature or Reason are either, 1. Such
general Precepts and obvious Inferences from them, as every considering Man may
see and be convinced of their Obligation* Or else, 2. Such Remoter Principles
of Virtue and Goodness, which though they have their Foundation in Reason, yet
they lie at a greater Distance from the first plain Notices, and consequently
must be found out by a more careful and difficult Deduction. And though I do not
at all doubt but that Man, in that Perfection of Reason in which he was
originally created, was then a sufficient Guide unto himself in all these
Cases: Yet, when humane Nature was corrupted and depraved, he did then require
some farther Help. Then, either Sloth, Inconsideration, Prejudice, the
Imperfection of his Reason now impaired by Sin, and the Influence of his
Passions and Affections to bribe and pervert his Judgment: Might easily make
him ignorant of such more distant Principles, although they had their
Foundation in the Laws of Nature. For which reason our wise and good God, of
his wonderful Compassion and Love to Mankind, was pleased to come in to our
Assistance, and to prevent the Influence of our Lusts, enlightened our Minds by
Revelation, and confirmed and established the Authority of some such natural
Laws, by making them also express and positive Institutions. And this is the
Sense in which I would be now understood to speak of Divine Positive Laws.

Now the Jews were of opinion that God gave Adam several such Laws to direct
him in things that were in themselves Good or Evil: Because that Good or Evil
of them, was not obvious enough to the common Observation of Men's depraved
Minds. Such they esteemed the Case of incestuous Marriages, which, they say,
God forbid by express Law to Adam, therein ordaining, that after Mankind was so
far multiplied, that the Marriage of Brother and Sister was no longer necessary
to the Propagation of Human Race; they should all from thenceforth become
unlawful.

And when it shall be considered, that the natural Immorality of them has been
a Subject of Debate in several Ages: It will be the more reasonable to conclude
that there was some very early Positive Law that prohibited all such. Because
this is one of the Sins charged upon the Canaanites, and their Example alleged
as a Caution and Warning to the Israelites, Lev. xviii. 24. Defile not your
selves in any of these things, for in all these the Nations are defiled which I
cast out before you. Now when it shall be considered how difficult it has been
thought in all Ages, to evince the certain Immorality of such by the clear
Evidence of any natural Law only, in the Transgression of which the Canaanites
were guilty: It is more probable that God added the Authority of some Positive
Law, restraining both them and all Mankind in this respect.

And tho Sacrifices were not so in their Nature Good, as to be of Perpetual Use
and Everlasting Obligation* Yet as they made up a considerable Part of the
divine Worship of almost all Nations, until the Incarnation of our Savior; so
I think they also are no improper Instances in our present purpose. What Law of
Nature only should dictate them is very hard to show. Reason indeed teaches to
worship God after the best manner that we can. But I cannot imagine that any
Principle of Reason only teaches that to burn the Fat of Beasts, or the Fruits
of the Earth, can be an acceptable way of honoring God, or of expressing our
Dependence and Thanks. Or that the Light of Nature only could ever guide and
determine Mankind so universally to such Sacrifices: Which our best Reason
teaches us are in themselves not acceptable, but only valued as Types and
Figures of a better Sacrifice to come.

Nor can I believe, but that the setting apart one Day in seven, for the
Worship of God our Creator, was what he Ordained and Commanded from the
beginning. For tho some would have those Words, Genesis 2. 2, 3. to be spoken by
way of Anticipation; yet that is precariously asserted, and without any Proof.
Whereas there are several good Reasons to be alleged for the more early
Original of that divine Institution.

1. Because the reason of keeping that Day holy is so expressly founded on the
Consideration of God's resting from his Work in the Creation. For it seems odd,
that God should complete the Creation of the Universe in six Days, and rest on
the seventh; only to give Authority to one particular temporary Ordinance, of
one Particular Little Nation, and that too, that was not to Commence till about
two thousand Years after.

2. Because it is not to be supposed, that God all that while took no care for
the establishing public Worship in memory of the Creation; to which the
appointing some set Time was in a great measure necessary.

And 3. Because it is mentioned again, Exodus xvi. 23. before ever God gave the
Law to the Jews from Mount Sinai: And which, for that reason, I conjecture not
to have been the original Institution, but only the Reviving an ancient divine
Ordinance, which by their long sojourning and Servitude in Egypt, they had
neglected and lost.

All this together, I hope, puts it out of doubt that God very early assisted
Man's Reason by some express Positive Laws.

The second thing is,

2. That these Words above mentioned, Genesis 2. 23, 24. have in them the Force
and Authority of a divine Institution or Law. For the Confirmation of which, I
shall add no more than this single Reflection; that our blessed Savior and his
Apostles, in all the Questions put to them about the Validity of Marriage, and
the Unlawfulness of Divorce: Always refer to this original Institution, and by
the soie Authority of that, determine the Controversies, and decide all Disputes
about them. Which shows without Contradiction, that Christ knew these Words to
have in them the obligatory Force of a divine Law; or otherwise, the
Determinations which he gave from the Authority of them, could not have had
that Force and Weight which he intended. Whatever is farther needful for the
Proof of this, will occur as we proceed,

3. To consider what the true Purpose, Design, and Meaning of this Law is. Now
the most obvious and first Sense of it without doubt is, to enjoin a Perpetual
and Inseparable Cohabitation of Man and Wife. They shall dwell together, and
leave both Father and Mother to that very end, if need so require. But this is
not all. The full Scope of the Place must be fetched from the near Relation and
close Union that is here pronounced to be between them. They two shall be one
Flesh, which the Generality of Interpreters expound by the Love and sincere
Affection which they ought always to have for each other. And tho this, no
doubt, is a very good and useful Construction of the Place, yet neither is this
all. St. Paul, Ephesians. v. 28, 29. lays down this as a just and necessary
Foundation of their mutual Love; so ought Men to love their Wives as their own
Bodies; he that loves his Wife loves himself. And no Man ever yet hated his
own Flesh. But that there is more in this than a bare Union of Affections, is
evident by what is here urged by Adam as the Ground of it. She is Bone of my
Bones, and Flesh of my Flesh, and therefore shall a Man leave his Father and
Mother, and shall cleave unto his Wife, and they shall be one Flesh. From
whence it is plain, that Adam and Eve were one Flesh in a more litteral Sense,
in that she was a Part of him, and by the Almighty Power of God made out of him.

And tho every Wife is not thus formed out of the Side of her Husband, yet
every Man and his Wife are esteemed of God, and ought to think themselves made
as much One Flesh by Marriage, as Adam and Eve themselves were. And the great
Purpose and Design of this Place is to proclaim and declare them to be so. And
whatever the Nature of their Union may be, which St. Paul, Ephesians. 5. 32.
intimates is a great Mystery: the Foundation of that Union seems to consist in
their Cohabitation, and the mutual Partnership of each others Bed. By which
they become so much one, that they ought never to separate from each other:
Till God who by this Ordinance and Law joins them together and makes them one,
shall by Death dissolve that Union, and part them asunder.

And that this is the true Meaning and Design of these Words I am able to make
appear from the Authority of Jesus Christ. Who upon this very Consideration,
and this Argument thus stated, proves to the Jews the inseparable Union between
a Man and his Wife, and the Unlawfulness of a Divorce or Separation upon any
account. The Place I refer to is Matt. xix. 3. etc. Where we are told that the
Pharisees came to him tempting him and saying, Is it lawful for a Man to put
away his Wife for every Cause?

In answer to whom, he takes no notice at all of the Common Pretenses usually
alleged, but refers them to the Original Institution of Marriage mentioned in
these Words, v. 4. Have ye not read, that he that made them in the beginning
made them Male and Female, and said, for this cause shall a Man leave his
Father and his Mother, and shall cleave unto his Wife, and they two shall be
one flesh? What therefore God has joined together let no Man put asunder. This
is Christ's Decision of the Question. The Force of which Answer turns all upon
these Points. 1. That the Union between Man and Wife is founded in their
Cohabitation, and the Partnership of each others Bed. 2. That God from the
beginning Ordained that this Union should be inseparable and inviolable. (i.
e.) that it should continue during the whole Life of both. And therefore it is
that Divorce becomes unlawful, and contrary to God's Original Institution. For
whom God has joined together, let no Man put asunder. 3. That this Union which
God has made thus inseparable, should be between Man and Wife only, exclusive
of all others. And therefore every Man or Woman by thus uniting to any Second
Person, during the Life of the First, does thereby break that Union with the
First which God commanded, when once made, that it should be perpetual. Upon
this it is, that Christ declares all such Marriages upon Divorce to be
Adultery. Matt. xix. 9. I say unto you whosoever shall put away his Wife,
except it be for Fornication, and shall marry another, commits Adultery. And
whosoever shall marry her that is put away commits Adultery. In which Words
there is a double Confirmation of what I now maintain.

1. That marrying upon Divorce, or marrying a Person divorced is Adultery.
Because he that marries upon Divorce, takes a Second Wife, while his Union and
Obligation to the First, by God's Original Institution is still in force. And
he that marries a Woman that is divorced marries another Man's Wife in the
Sense of God's Law, and in that commits Adultery. Both these Cases are a
Violation of that Union, which God decreed should not be violated.

2. The second thing is, the Exception which Christ makes to these Cases.
Except it be for Fornication. Where he seems to tolerate Divorce upon Adultery;
because the Adulterous Person has first violated that Union which God ordained
to have been perpetual. Upon these things turns the whole Stress of Christ's
Answer to the Jews. And from this Account which he has here given it manifestly
appears, that this Original Institution did not only ordain, that the Union of
Man and Wife should be perpetual, but moreover that this Union should be made
between them two only, exclusive of all others whatsoever. And this God
sufficiently signified by making but one Man and one Woman; which without all
question, was designed to Illustrate and give Authority to this, as the true
Purpose of the Law.

3. And if this be the true meaning of that Divine Institution and Law, as I
think I have shown that it is: from hence it will be easy to prove,

4. Lastly, That Fornication is a manifest Transgression of the Law, and by
consequence an Heinous Sin. For, that Union which is founded in the Partnership
of the Bed, and is thereupon declared to be Perpetual, and Inseparable, and
Exclusive of all others; is as inconsistent with the rambling Amors of
Fornicators as Light with Darkness. For at the same time that God ordains that
all Persons who are so made one, should preserve that Union Perpetually and
Inviolably: In so doing he to all sufficient Intents and Purposes decrees, that
no Persons should so come together, but upon a Sincere Purpose, and Solemn
Contract of Perpetual Union and Cohabitation between them two only, and
exclusive of all others. What then can be more directly contrary to such a Law,
than the Roving Loves of Fornicators? Who never intend, much less enter into a
Solemn Contract, and Covenant of that Perpetual Cohabitation which God
ordained. And who, instead of such mutual Constancy between them two only,
exclusive of all others, only contrive to satiate their Lusts, like Brutes,
without any Restraint, or any Regard to such an Ordinance. What is more
evident, than that all such Practices are absolutely forbidden by this Law of
God, and therefore offensive to him? The Purpose and Design of God in this Law
I say was, not only to decree, that the Union between Man and Wife should be
perpetual: But also to ordain that no Man or Woman whatsoever should so come
together, but upon a Solemn Contract of that Perpetual and Inseparable Union
first made.

And that I may not seem to assert any thing of this Nature without good
Authority: I must here observe to you, that St. Paul says the same thing, and
urges this same Consideration to this very purpose, and to dissuade Men from
this very Sin, 1 Cor. vi. 15, 16. Shall I take the Members of Christ and make
them the Members of an Harlot? God forbid. For know you not that he that is
joined to an Harlot is one Body? For two says he shall be one flesh. In which
Words it is evident and plain, that he alludes to this Original Institution of
Marriage mentioned Genesis 2. 24. And that he makes the Union to consist in the
Partnership of the Bed. He that is joined to an Harlot is one body. (i.e.) is
one flesh with her, as Man and Wife are one, and by that Union which God
ordained to be the Foundation of perpetual and inseparable Cohabitation. And by
this Consequence he declares, that they who thus come together without such a
solemn Contract of Perpetual Union and Cohabitation; are certainly guilty of a
Great Sin, and do what God has forbid, and what does not at all become
Christians, and Members of Christ's Mystical Body. Shall I take the Members of
Christ and make them the Members of an Harlot? God' forbid. This is unlawful;
this is contrary to God's Original Institution and Command. And if this be so,
I think this is as clear a Proof of the Sinfulness of Whoredom, as if it had
been expressly said in Genesis, thou shall not commit Fornication.

And now let us reflect, how this one Argument alone discovers both the
Sinfulness, and the Danger of this Practice. Suppose that we were in the dark
as to the Evidences of Reason against this Sin, yet why should not the Will and
Institution of God influence and determine Men's Consciences? What better Proof
can we have of any thing's being a Sin, than that it is a certain Violation of
God's Express Commands and Laws? Or what Shadow of Reason can any Man produce
why the Decree of God at our first Creation, confirmed by a new Sanction of
Christ; should not bind him to the Observance of it, as firmly as any the
clearest Law of mere Nature only? Or why should not the Danger of transgressing
it be as great? To imagine that God will not exact Obedience to his Laws, is to
charge him with Folly in enacting them. And if he will punish Transgressions
and Sin; how will Lewd Men deliver themselves out of his Hand? So that if
Fornication be such a Violation of God's Institution and Law, as I think it
already appears to be: This so plainly discovers the Sin and Danger of it; that
I cannot see what Rational Hope these Men can entertain, but upon Repentance,
of escaping his Vengeance for so vile a Transgression. But,

5. Lastly, I proposed to consider the Objections that are commonly made
against all this. The Sum of what they object against this Inviolable Union is,
that David, celebrated for a Man after God's own Heart, not only committed
Adultery with Bathsheba, and murdered her Husband; but also had many Wives at
once, and might divorce them at his Pleasure; and consequently did not Live up
to this Rule. That Solomon also, who is famed in the Old Testament for an
inspired Gift of Wisdom from God: And Abraham, the Father of the Faithful; and
in short, all or most of the Ancient Patriarchs, are recorded to have had many
Wives or Concubines. And why, say they, may not we think our selves innocent,
and safe in the nonobservance of such an Institution: If the same was done by
those very Persons, who are honored with the Titles of Patriarchs, and
celebrated for their extraordinary Share in God's Favor?

And as for keeping Constant to those Wives or Concubines they chose, it is
nothing so. Divorce was allowed, not only by the Heathens, but even by God's
Laws given to the Jews, and that upon Small Dislike. And why, say they, should
we imagine any Sinfulness in that which God himself allowed?

And as for Fornication, they plead it has been held Lawful both by Heathens,
Jews, and some Christians. The Heathens, say they, every where allow it, nor do
we find the Jewish Law directly to forbid it. Why then should we be frighted
from so dear a Pleasure, by the Cavils of a Tribe of Men, whose Trade and
Livelihood it is to preach against us? This is the Sum of what they plead, and
I think I have set down the Objections with all the Fairness and Advantage to
their Cause, which they themselves can in Justice claim. Now if it shall
appear, that there is nothing in all this, however plausible and promising it
may look; that will either prove Fornication Harmless and Innocent, or exempt
those who live in it, either from great Guilt or severe Punishment: This
Objection will do them no good at all. And that this is the Truth of the Case,
I doubt not will be very Evident.

The full Force of the Objection is drawn. 1. From the Practice of such Men as
the Scripture celebrates for Holy Men. 2. From the Laws of Jews and other
Nations, not strictly and severely forbidding this Vice, and binding Men up to
the Strictness of this Law. But,

1. As for that Part of the Objection which is built upon their Remarks on the
Actions of Good and Holy Men: I have often wondered that the Debauches of our
Age, should ever mention David's Miscarriage with Bathsheba, as they do, to
excuse and countenance them. For is it not as good an Instance to prove the
Lawfulness of Murder and Treachery as of Adultery? Or is there any thing in
that whole History that proves the Innocence of either? Is there not a plain
Declaration both of God's heavy Displeasure for this Sin of David's, and also
of his Signal Repentance? It Is true, David is called a Man after God's own
Heart: But not for any such Action as this. For it is said expressly, 2. Sam.
xi. 27. The thing that David had done displeased the Lord. And God's Anger is
at large declared against him in the xii. Chapter. All then that these Men can
infer from hence is, that the best of Men, by the common Frailty of Human
Nature, and for want of due Vigilance and Circumspection over themselves, may
sometimes fall into very great Transgressions. The Consideration of which
should never be alleged for our Justification; but should rather teach us to be
the more Watchful and the less Censorious, and whenever Men do fall, it should
engage them to return to God by Repentance as David did. Without this, he had
not been the Man after God's own Heart, but instead of that, had found the dire
Effects of God's Displeasure, and heavy Vengeance against this Sin. And I would
earnestly recommend it to all those who have been guilty of David's
Transgression, to follow his Example in his Repentance, and Contrition, and
Devout and Exemplary Humiliation.

As for the other Instances they mention of Abraham, and Jacob, and Solomon,
and Jephtha that had Concubines, and yet are Characterized in Scripture for
Good Men, and highly favored of God: I must observe one thing by the way, viz.
That what the Scripture calls Concubines, were not Women that prostituted
themselves, but such as they took upon a Solemn Contract and Covenant as Wives.
And sometimes they are expressly so called. As particularly, Genesis xvi. 1. Sarah
had an Handmaid, an Egyptian, whose Name was Hagar, and she gave her to her
Husband Abraham to be his Wife. And again, Genesis xxv. 1. Abraham took a Wife,
and her Name was Keturah. And yet in Verse the 6th. she is called a Concubine,
and also 1 Chronicles. 1. 32. To the better understanding of which it is remarkable,
what a Jewish Doctor has said upon this Place, as a Bishop Patrick on Gen xxvi.
Reverend Father of our own Church has cited him out of Mr. Seldom, She was his
Concubine because of her Servile Condition, but his Wife, because married with
Covenants to provide for her and her Children. So Grotius tells us, that they
were such Servants, or others of a low Rank, whom they married upon Contract
giving them a Dowry; and though their Children did not inherit, they had Portions
allotted them out of their Father's Inheritance, and were inferior to other
Wives, only in their Dignity, (i. e.) because they once were Servants.
Agreeably to this we read, Genesis xxv. 5. Abraham gave all that he had, (i. e.)
the Sum of his Inheritance, to Isaac; but unto the Sons of the Concubines he
had, he gave Gifts, and sent them away. All therefore that can from hence be
concluded is that Polygamy, or the having many Wives was then practiced and
allowed. But this will make nothing at all for Fornication, there being a vast
Difference between such a Married Concubine and a Common Prositute. The most
that can possibly from hence be drawn to their Advantage is, that these good
Men and highly favored of God, did not observe the Law we mention in any such
Sense as we now put upon it.

For a farther Answer therefore to this whole Objection, I would offer these
three things to be seriously considered.

1. That though it should be granted that Polygamy, Divorce, and even Fornication
it self was tolerated by the Laws of the Heathens, Jews, or by the Customs of
Ancient Times; it does by no means from hence follow that any of these were in
themselves Innocent and without Offense to Almighty God.

2. That Fornication especially was never so tolerated by any of them, as
thereby to be absolutely Approved; nor ever had so much Countenance, but that
we may find clear Evidence of its being accounted an Hateful and Detestable
Vice.

3. That whatever Connivance, Indulgence, or Exemption from Punishment God was
pleased to grant upon the Transgression of this Law in Ancient Times; he has
now absolutely Revoked, and made void all such, and brought us to this his
Original Institution. We are under a more Perfect Law, and a better
Dispensation; and therefore we are justly tied up to stricter Rules as the
indispensable Condition of Salvation.

If these things can be clearly made out, as I hope they may, no Just
Countenance, or Excuse for this Wicked Practice can there be drawn from such
Examples.

1. That though it should be granted that Polygamy, Divorce, and even Fornication
it self was tolerated by the Laws of Heathens, Jews, or by the Customs of
Ancient Times: It does by no means from hence follow that any of these were of
themselves innocent, and without Offense to Almighty God. And that because none
of these were perfect Rules for the Government of Life in all things exactly
according to God's Will.

1. As to the Heathens, if we speak of their General Manners, and exempt the
particular Virtues of some few Men: we know very well that they had deviated
from the Ways of Truth and Virtue, and were fallen into very great and
abominable Corruptions. They scarce retained any Knowledge of the True God, and
are therefore said to live as with out God in the World, Ephesians. 2. 12. They had
Gods many, but their Notions of them were so monstrously Vile and Gross: that
instead of Restraining, they rather. Tempted and Invited them to the most
Flagitious Immoralities. If therefore such Men as these tolerated Whoredom and
Adultery, and all Uncleanness: is their Conversation fit to be drawn into a
President? How could it be otherwise with them, unless their own Natural
Modesty restrained them? They had the Examples of their very Gods to
countenance them, and such Abominable Practices made up a chief Part of those
Religious Rites with which they worshipped their Deities. For these things they
were Abandoned of God, who in the Greatness of his Anger and Indignation
withdrew from them that ordinary Grace which he would always afford Mankind,
and left them to themselves and the Lusts of their own Carnal Hearts. Romans 1.
21. etc. Because that when they knew God, they yet glorified him not as God,
neither were thankful, but became vain in their Imaginations, and their Foolish
Hearts were darkened: therefore God also gave them up to Uncleanness, through
the Lusts of their own Hearts, to dishonor their own Bodies. And again, v. 26.
For this cause God gave them up to Vile Affections. And v. 28. As they did not
like to retain God in their Knowledge: God gave them over to a Reprobate Mind,
to do those things that are not seemly, being filled with all Unrighteousness,
Fornication, Wickedness. So that the Loose Practices, and Corrupt Conversation
of Men so far degenerated from the Principles of True Religion, are very unfit
to be mentioned either for the Vindication, or the Excuse of Evils committed in
a Christian State. But,

2. They perhaps may expect better Success in their Allegations from the
Mosaical Law; because that is God's own, given to his chosen People to be a
Rule to them. And if God himself tolerated any such Practices; is it not a Fair
Inference from hence to conclude, that all such Practices are not in their
Nature Sinful? I answer, no not at all; because the Law of Moses was Imperfect,
and no Certain Absolute Standard to determine the true nature of Good and Evil.
I do by no means grant that Fornication was allowed by that Law, but only
supposing that it had, I say it could not from hence follow by any necessary
Consequence that there was no Evil in it. And that because, though it was God's
own Law given to Moses by the Ministry of Angels, for the Use of that People
whom he had chosen out from the rest of the World: yet it was far from being a
Complete Rule for the good Government of Life, or from teaching Virtue in
Perfection.

That Part of it which concerns Divine Worship established a Gross and Pompous
Worship, which chiefly consisted in Show; and was very different from that
which is in it self most pleasing and best acceptable unto God. A Spiritual
Worship is most agreeable to his Nature; for God is a Spirit, Jo. iv. 24.
and must be worshipped in Spirit and in Truth. (i. e.) with Simplicity, and
Sincerity of Heart; with a Pure and Holy Conversation; both which are
inconsistent with Adultery, Fornication, and all manner of Leudnes and
Sensuality. Their Ceremonial Law, was either to be their Guide to bring unto
Christ, and by Figures and Representations to prepare them for the Gospel, or
else as a means by Condescension, and humouring their Gross and Moody Tempers:
to keep them from falling into Abominable Idolatry, and that more Horrid
Leudness with which the Gentile World did notoriously pollute themselves.

As for the ten Commandments, or any other Part that concerned their Life and
Manners; God it is true, forbid the most heinous, and highest Degrees of Impiety
and Fornication among the rest as I shall show by and by: but there were
several things truly Good and highly Commendable in Religion; and several
Evils, Hateful and Blameable before both God and Man, about which this Law was
in great measure silent. Of these Christ has furnished us with several
Instances. The Mosaical Law did expressly forbid only Murder, but our Savior
tells us that all Causeless and Immoderate Anger is offensive to God. That Law
chiefly prohibited Perjury; But God detests also all Profaneness, by vain
Swearing, and needless Imprecations, some Degrees of Revenge then were allowed;
though God approves that we should rather forgive Injuries and love our Enemies.
And, which more nearly concerns the Case before us, the Mosaical Law expressly
prohibits only Adultery, but God desires that we restrain both our Thoughts and
Desires, and be pure both in Heart and Mind. So that the Silence of the Mosaic
Law is no good Argument for any such Practice, that there is no certain Evil or
Immorality therein. So far from it, that God himself upon the account of these
Concessions and Permissions, which in a Prudential Regard to their Carnal
Tempers he had made, says expressly that he gave them Statutes that were not
good, Ezekiel. xx. 25.

That this is the Case of Divorce, Christ has assured us, Matt. xix. 8. For the
Hardness of your Hearts, God has suffered you to put away your Wives, but from
the beginning it was not so. God's Allowance of this then manifestly appears
not to have proceeded from either the Innocence or Indifference of this
Practice; for he declares plainly that it was contrary to the Original
Institution. From the beginning it was not so. But it was because he, who
searches the Hearts, knew them to be a Subborn and Inflexible People, and who
if they had not had this Permission, would perhaps have fallen into Murder or
Adultery. God suffered this for the Hardness of their Hearts; It was always
offensive to him, though of his Great Goodness and Compassion to Man's Weakness,
he did then connive at it, which indeed is what wise and good Lawgivers are
sometimes forced to do.

As to Polygamy, Grotius de jure B. and P. l 2. cap. v.. ix.
I find Grotius of Opinion, that that was not contrary to God's Original
Institution, which he understands to have ordained that the Union, or
Consociation of Married Persons should be inseparable and perpetual: but not to
enjoin the Marrying of one Person only. Either of these Opinions is absolutely
against Fornication, for those who Prostitute themselves, violate this Law in
both respects. But yet I must confess my self not satisfied with this Account,
nor with the Reason given for it, which is only this; because Polygamy was
anciently so much in use among very good Men, from whence he would conclude
that it was not contrary to the Will of God. He owns that it was always Deo
gratissimum, most agreeable to God's Will that one Man should have but one
Wife, but does not think that it was absolutely unlawful to have more, because
very good Men had more. But with all due respect to his great Character, this
does not satisfy me. And as I shall show anon that it is no good Consequence
on which he grounds this Opinion, so at present I have this Objection against
it. That Divorce was as much in use under the Law, as Polygamy before it, nay
more evidently permitted and allowed. And yet Divorce is as contrary to one
Part of the Institution, as Polygamy to the other. And by consequence, it
having been the Custom in some Ages for good Men, to marry more Wives than one,
is no more a Proof that God's Original Law did not forbid it, than the
Permission of Divorce will prove that this Law did not ordain an inseparable
Union and perpetual Cohabitation. God who allowed the one under the Law, might
for the same Reason connive at the other before the Law, and yet they might be
both by a Dispensation of the Primitive Institution and Ordinance.

And that this is in truth the case, I think will be very plain, if we consider
that it is from the words of Christ in this very same discourse, that Polygamy
is now made unlawful under the Gospel. The question indeed was put by the
Pharisees about Divorce: but our Savior's Answer, by clear and necessary
Consequence extends also to Polygamy. His words are these, Mat. xix 9.
I say unto you, whosoever shall put away his Wife, except it be for
Fornication, and shall Marry another, commits Adultery. And he that Marries
her who is put away, commits Adultery. Now the Reason of all this is plain,
if we suppose Polygamy, as well as Divorce, contrary to Gods first Institution:
For then he that Marries a Woman Divorced, Marries her who by the Law of God is
still esteemed the Wife of her Husband; and this is Adultery. He that only puts
away his Wife, is not said to commit Adultery; but he that puts her away, and
Marries another. Divorce only may be a Sin, but it is the Marrying again that
makes the Adultery. Of which the only good Reason to be given, is because it is
not lawful to have more than one Wife.

Now when it shall again be considered, that all this part of our Savior's
Discourse is an Explanation, and Confirmation of this Original Institution and
Law mentioned, v. 4, 5. Have ye not read, that he which made them in the
beginning, etc. we must conclude, that Polygamy as well as Divorce is a
Violation and Transgression of it.

This plainly shows, that whatever Permission of, or Connivance at these
Practices may be observed in the Jewish Law, there are so many Imperfections in
it, and Defects of that compleater Righteousness, which God now requires, and
would then, had that People been able to bear them.

3. And this will teach us last of all, what Answer is to be given to that part
of their Objection which is taken from the Example of Abraham, or any other of
the Patriarchs before the Law of Moses; who, contrary to the purpose of this
Institution, had many Wives or Concubines. The sum of whose case in short is
this, that though they were noble Patterns of Faith and Obedience in those
Trials, which God made of them, and blessed, and highly favored for their
singular Confidence in him; yet they were not Patterns of Universal
Righteousness, and of all Virtue and Goodness in Perfection.

Abraham had been brought up in an Idolatrous Country, God calls him out from
it, and engages him to worship him alone, promising him great Blessings if he
would do so. Abraham believes Gods Promises, and obeys them; and God thereupon,
Jo viii. 56. Heb. xi. 19.
for his Illustrious Faith, declares, that in him all the Nations of the Earth
should be blessed, by that Messiah which was to descend from him. Thus Abraham
believed in Christ, and approved his Faith in the Resurrection from the Dead,
by his readiness to sacrifice his Son in whom these Blessings were promised to
him. These were eminent Instances of Confidence and Obedience, with which God
was so well pleased, that he resolves to favor and bless him in an
extraordinary manner. It is no where said in Scripture, that Abraham was
perfect in his Righteousness, Gen xv. 6.
but that he believed God, and that was imputed to him for Righteousness. In
other things then he lived according to the Customs and Manners of that Age in
which he lived; among whom, it seems, that Polygamy and Divorce had now
prevailed. And though God was not at all pleased with these Practices, See
Bishop Patrick on Genesis xv. 6.
nor did approve them; yet he was graciously pleased for the sake of his other
Virtues, and particularly of this singular Faith, not to impute them to him,
nor to punish them. This is all that can be observed from the case of the
Patriarchs, which does by no means prove, that what they did was Innocent, or
without Offense. The most that can be drawn from hence is, that God in Regard
to the different Ages, and Dispensations under which Men live, has not always
discovered to them what is best in it self, or most agreeable to his Holy Will.
But no Practice, or Custom, or Manners of ancient times can be improved into a
just Vindication of the Innocence of either Polygamy, or Divorce, and much less
of Fornication; nor will any of these Examples prove that what has formerly
been done against the purpose and design of this Original Institution, was for
that reason free from guilt, or inoffensive to Almighty God. But,

Secondly, This Argument will yet have greater force, when we shall consider
that we have now supposed more than is indeed to be granted. For however the
case was as to Polygamy and Divorce, yet Fornication was never so tolerated as
to be approved; nor ever had so much countenance, but that we have clear
Evidence that it was always counted an hateful and detestable Vice.

And to make this out, it will be requisite to consider that there is a great
deal of difference between Licita, and Honesta, (i. e.) between things
tolerated in Governments to pass unpunished, and things in their Nature
Innocent and without Evil.

This is a rational distinction, and founded on one of the Maxims of Civil Law;
G^ot. de Jure B. and P. 342.
Licitum dicitur quod Legibus non punitur. In this sense every thing is Licitum
quod fit impune; which the Laws have not prohibited with a Punishment. And
whosoever shall consider the defects of all human Laws whatever, will soon see
that they can be no certain Standard to distinguish the Good or Evil of Human
Actions by. By the Law of the xii Tables the Creditors might divide the
Insolvent Debtor's Body among them: It was tolerated, but common Reason will
tell us how much against all Rules of Piety and Religion. Accordingly the
Romans had a wise Distinction, D^gest. Lib. 1. Tit. 17. 144.
Non omne quod Licitum est, honestum est. Every thing must not be esteemed Good
and perfectly innocent; for the restraint of which the Laws make no good
Provision by assigning Punishments. Governments may tolerate what Governors do
by no means Allow and Approve. That therefore is in this Sense Lawful, which
the Letter of the Law has not made Penal in the Offender, which may happen in
many Cases against the Approbation and Good Liking of the Lawgiver. Thus it was
in Divorce among the Romans, which was permitted by their Law, but we are told
that it was not put in Practice for five hundred and twenty Years; their own
Sense of the Turpitude of it proving to them an Effectual Restraint. Laws then
may Tolerate, but Honesty ties us up to act by Principles and Offices of
Humanity. I think therefore that it will be sufficient to my present Design to
show, that notwithstanding any Toleration of this wicked Practice among the
Heathens, yet they were not insensible of the Turpitude and certain immorality
of it. By the Laws of the Athenians then, Ter. Adelph. A. iv. Sc. 5.
though Strangers (i. e.) Women of Foreign Countries were tolerated in this
Practice, yet it was an Infamous and Flagitious Crime to corrupt one that was
freeborn, and the Offender who should so transgress, was by the Law compelled
to marry her. M D^cier in Ter.
For this reason Perigrina or a Strange Woman, was the usual and common Phrase
for one that did thus prostitute her self. And for the same reason the
Scripture seems to have used the same Language, Judges xi. 2. Thou shall not
inherit in our Father's House for thou art the Son of a strange Woman. Among
the Romans, though Cicero in his Defense of Caelius, Excuses this Iniquity and
says, Quando hoc non factum? Quando reprehensum? Quando non permissum? etc. Yet
this indeed is but laboring to make the best of a bad Cause, in behalf of his
Client; for in his Accusation of Cataline and his Morals, he makes it up a
considerable Part of their Charge, that He and his Companions were Aleatores,
Adulteri, Impuri, impudici; Gamesters, Adulterers, Unclean, Unchaste. And again,
ut comessationes, and scorta quaererent, they hunt after Revels and Unchaste
Women. And how come so many sharp Reflections upon all such Manners: if there
had not been some great Evil, some known certain Immorality therein? I will add
but one Passage more out of Heathen Authors, and that I shall transcribe for
its great Confirmation of the Difference between Lawful and Innocent things, on
which I ground my present Argument. It is out of Porphyry de Abstinentia, etc.
his Words are these. The Law does not forbid the Common People to have Harlots,
but lays a Tax upon such Women for their License and Permission, and yet it is
accounted (...) very reproachful and infamous for Men, (...) but moderately
Virtuous, to have any Conversation with such. Which plainly shows that whatever
prevailed among the Heathen to the Permission of such a Vice; was only Evil
Custom, and Corrupt Practice introduced contrary to the Dictates of their Mind
and their Natural Sense of Good and Evil.

As to the Jews, I am of Opinion that all Fornication was absolutely forbidden
by their Law. For Deuteronomy. xxiii. 17. it is commanded, There shall be no Whore of
the Daughters of Israel. Spencer de Legibus (...) and le Clerk.
And though I am not ignorant that some learned Interpreters understand this
Place to speak of, and forbid any Israelitish Woman to prostitute her self in
the Idolatrous Temples, as the Custom of some Gentiles was: yet as this Notion
is chiefly raised from the lxxii. Paraphrastic Translation of these Words, so
the Reason they allege for this Law comes up directly to our present Purpose,
viz. that God would have his own People to abstain from the Leudness and
Uncleanness of the Gentiles, as well as from their Idolatry.

And if they were not allowed to commit Leudness with their own Women, much
less with Strangers, because then the Danger was greater as well as the Sin, in
that by their Sensual Communication they might be seduced to Revolt, and by
their Leudness fall into Apostasy and Idolatry. Thus it happened in their Abode
in the Wilderness, Numb xxv. 1, 2. The People began to commit Whoredom with the
Daughters of Moab, and thereby they called the People unto the Sacrifices of
their Gods, and the People did eat and bowed down to their Gods. Which
Aggravation of their Crime so incensed God, that he sent a Plague among them.
And Phinehas, in a singular Fit of Zeal, slaying one of their own Princes and
the Midianatish Woman caught in that Fault, was applauded and approved of God,
whose Indignation was thereby appeased, and a Covenant of an Everlasting
Priesthood given to Phineas on that Account. And it is remarkable that St. Paul
alluding to this Passage, charges the Guilt upon their Fornication. 1 Cor. x.
8. Neither let us commit Fornication, as some of them committed, and fell in
one Day three and twenty thousand. And to make appear that I have now put no
stricter meaning upon the Jewish Laws than they themselves allowed and
professed: I shall give you one Passage which Grotius has transcribed out of
Philo in vita Josephi. In Matt. v. 31.
Other Nations, says he, are allowed after fourteen Years of age in Cells and
Stews to desile themselves with Women that are Prostitutes for Gain: but we are
not allowed any such. With us Death is the Punishment denounced against her
that shall prostitute her self. (...).
So that before Lawful Marriage we have no Communication with Women, but but
come pure and chaste to the Marriage of pure Virgins; not merely to please our
Lusts, but for the Increase of our Offspring.

And as to the Ages before the Law, I shall only mention the Action of Simeon
and Levi, who when Shechem had defiled Dinah their Sister: slew not only him,
but all his People, and plundered their City, and vindicated this extraordinary
Vengeance, by the Notorious Heinousness of the Crime committed; should he deal
with our Sister as with an Harlot? Gen xxxiv. 31.

So unfit then are the Licentious Practices of former Times to be drawn into a
President, or to be alleged for the Vindication, or Extenuation of this Vice:
that upon a little Observation we may easily discover what a Lively Sense all
Mankind both Jews and Gentiles, both before and after the Law, have had, of its
being an Hateful, Infamous, and Detestable Practice.

I have one Step farther yet to go, for

3. Lastly. It must be considered too, that whatever Dispensation or Connivance
God was pleased to grant in former Times to this his first Law, and Original
Institution: he has now Revoked and Repealed all such by the Gospel, and bound
us up to his Primitive Ordinance. Divorce it is confessed he did permit; not by
Choice, but for the Hardness of their Hearts to whom that Law was given.
Polygamy he did at most but Connive at, not directly Tolerate or Allow. And
from the beginning it was not so: Matt.
there is the manifest Evidence of his great Dislike of it. And now he says,
whom God has Joined together let no Man put Asunder: There Is the Revocation of
all former Indulgence and Connivance; and a Reestablishment of the first Law in
its ancient and primitive force. Thus God at first decreed that Man should
live. And however those in an Obscurer Light have gone astray; we Christians
are now once more brought back to God's first Rule, and must walk by it without
any such wilful Deviations: or we have no just Hope of the Mercy of God, and
the Salvation of our Souls by Jesus Christ. And whatever we may observe either
Practiced or Countenanced, either before or under, or after the Jewish Law: we
must say of it as St. Paul did of the Idolatry of the Gentiles, Act. xvii. 30.
The Times of that Ignorance God winked at, but now has commanded all Men every
where to repent: in that he has appointed a Day in which he will judge the
World by Jesus Christ, who has brought us out of that Darkness into his
Mavelous Light.

It is therefore Preposterous, and vain for us to shelter our selves under the
Examples and Customs of any Ages, or Persons that have been before us. We are
under a Better, and Nobler Dispensation of Grace, and therefore we are tied up
to Stricter Rules, and Nobler Degrees of Virtue. Our Religion teaches a more
Complete and Perfect Scheme of Universal Righteousness; and therefore it admits
none of these Exemptions, Defects, and Imperfections, which are found in other
Laws. Ours gives us a better Hope, and promises us a more exceeding great and
glorious Reward, than any other Religion ever did: And therefore it gives no
Toleration of any wilful Offense, but requires us to perfect Holiness, and
conform to the whole Will of God in every thing that is Commendable and Good.

Did not God, when he vouchsafed to Abraham those extraordinary Manifestations
of his Will, by the Ministry of Angels; instruct him in the full Sense of this
Law also? It was because he reserved this, with the other more perfect
Manifestation of our Duty, till the Revelation of his whole Will by Jesus
Christ; through whom also he intended a fuller Discovery of that future
Recompense, which might Encourage and Invite us to aspire toward that exalted
Degree of Purity and Goodness. And hence also it was, that in the Law of Moses
there were found so many Tolerations of things not at all Pleasing to, or
Approved by Almighty God. It was Agreeable to the Hardness of their Stubborn
Hearts, and the present Felicity of this Transient Life, which their Law
promised, and at which they chiefly aimed: but not to those Diviner Spirits
that live by Faith, and in a Prospect of Eternal Bliss, have their Conversation
now in Heaven. Did that God then indulge them, who has now restrained us? Their
Indulgence was after the Law of a Carnal Commandment: Heb. vii. 16.
And our Restraint is after the Power of an Endless Life. Let not then the
corrupt Practices, and loose Conversation of former Times, become a Snare and a
Temptation to you; and allure you to the Imitation of bad Examples, and an
Authority that will not justify you. I shall conclude this Head with St.
Paul's Words, Ephesians. iv. 17, 18, 19, 20. This I say then and testify in the
Lord, that ye walk not henceforth as other Gentiles walk in the Vanity of their
Mind, having their Understanding darkened, being Alienated from the Life of God
through the Ignorance that is in them, because of the Blindness of their Heart.
Who being past Feeling have given themselves over unto Lasciviousness to work
all Uncleanness with Greediness. But ye have not so learned Christ, if so be
that ye have heard him, and have been taught by him, as the Truth is in Jesus.
That Holy Profession requires from you a quite different Conversation. And this
brings me to what I proposed

II. Secondly; Which was to prove the Greatness of this Sin from Christian
Principles, by showing how contrary this Practice is to the Precepts and
Commands of God in the Gospel of Jesus Christ; and how absolutely inconsistent
with all sound Hope of Mercy and Salvation through him. And here I should have a
very easy Task, if Men had but a due Veneration and Esteem for that Faith into
which they have been baptized. But the Misery is, that there is so much
Coolness, Lukewarmness, and Indifference in Religion; that neither the Laws,
nor the Threatenings, nor the Promises of the Gospel, make a due Impression on
Men's Minds. So that they can hear the Vengeance of God denounced against their
Sins, and yet not tremble; and Death, and Hell, and Eternal Burnings threatened,
and yet not be afraid. They read God's Solemn Declarations of punishing all
impenitent Sinners, with Everlasting Destruction from the Presence of the Lord;
and yet, by I know not what Mysterious Arts, flatter themselves, that they
shall escape, and find Uncovenanted, Unpromised Grace and Mercy at the last.
And what shall we do when the Terrors of the Lord, with which St. Paul used to
persuade Men, have lost their Force; and the severest Threatenings of Divine
Vengeance come to be despised? Among Primitive Christians, Faith was strong,
their Love sincere and cordial, and their Zeal affectionate and warm. Then Men
did so believe the Gospel, as to receive it as the Guide of their Consciences,
and the Rule of their Lives, and the only Foundation of their Hope, and
Expectations of Salvation. Then they so desired that Celestial Recompense which
God has promised, as to be willing to come up to the most exalted Degrees of
Goodness, that they might attain to it; and so dreaded, and trembled at the
least Apprehensions of his Displeasure, as with a Scrupulous and Conscientious
Care to avoid and abhor every thing that is by him forbidden and
discountenanced.

Were such an Heart and such a Spirit in us, it would be easy from a very Texts
of the New Testament to baffle all the vain Apologies and Excuses for this
Hateful Sin. For,

1. It is expressly forbidden, and the Apostles do in a very earnest and
affectionate manner dehort and dissuade all Christians from it. Christ in his
Discourses with the Jews, declared what was God's Original Purpose and
Intention at the first Creation; and the Apostles in the very first of all
their Constitutions and Decrees, when assembled together in Council at
Jerusalem, peremptorily prohibit this Vice, Act. xv. 28, 29. It seemed Good to
the Holy Ghost, and to us to lay upon you no greater Burden than these
necessary things; That ye abstain from Meats offered unto Idols, and from
Blood, and from things strangled, and from Fornication. Where by the way we
have a clear Argument to prove that Fornication was esteemed contrary to the
Jewish Law.

For the Question in debate was, how far the Gentile Converts should comply
with the Customs and Manners of the Jews. And this is the Result of the Debate,
that they should abstain from the Pollutions of Idols, and from Fornication,
and from things strangled, and from Blood. Which is as much as though it had been
said, v. 20.
we require from you no greater Compliance to the Law of Moses than in these
particular things.

But some Scruples may possibly arise concerning the Pertinency of this
Sanction to our present Purpose; in that it is here joined with some things that
were not in themselves evil and sinful; but only prohibited to prevent Offense
and Scandal to the Jews. Such is their Abstinence from things strangled and
from Blood; the eating of which, is not in it self a Sin, though it were
forbidden by the Jewish Law.

To remove this seeming Difficulty, it will be necessary to look a little
closer into the true purpose and Design of this Apostolical Decree. To the
right understanding of which, we must observe, that when the Apostles thought
fit not to impose the Jewish Ordinances upon the Gentile Converts; they had yet
some evil and corrupt Opinions to provide against. The Gentiles had been taught
that though they were Vile and Flagitious Persons that did prostitute themselves
to others; yet that 'twas not a Sin to use such. And as Grotius observes, though
the Apostles found it easy to convince the Gentiles in Matters of Divine
Worship, and Common Honesty: yet the Prejudices of their former corrupt
Conversation stuck so fast upon them, that they were not easily brought up to
this Noble Degree of Christian Purity. To oppose which Prejudice they expressly
prohibit Fornication by this unanimous Command.

Another Opinion of theirs was, that seeing all Creatures of God are in
themselves good, and were created for the Benefit of Men, therefore they though
it was lawful for them to eat all Meat whatsoever, and wheresoever they found
it. And in their full Persuasion of the Innocence of this Liberty; they made no
Scruple to be present at the Heathen Idolatrous Feasts; and under that Pretense
communicated with them in Idolatry. This therefore the Apostles absolutely
forbid.

And though this which they alleged might possibly be a good Argument for
their not abstaining from things strangled, and from blood; yet the Jews having
a certain Tradition, that these things were forbidden before the Law of Moses,
and had been held unlawful ever since the days of Noah; they could not be
satisfied that they were innocent. And therefore in compliance to their
Persuasion and Opinion, the Apostles restrain the Gentiles in the use of that
liberty, in those two cases; to give no Offense unto the Jews. So that they had
a two-sold end in this their Sanction. And though some of these things were
forbidden, upon Prudential Considerations, and to prevent Offenses; Fornication
was one of the Real Evils and prohibited for its great and certain Immorality.

And to evidence the Truth of this, do but consider, after what an earnest and
affectionate manner, St. Paul disswades from this notorious Vice, 1 Cor. vi. 9,
10. he addresses himself with a great deal of Zeal, as to Men that were yet
unwilling to believe that there was any great evil, or danger in this Practice;
and he warns them to have a care of this Delusion. Be not deceived, neither
Fornicators, nor Idolaters, nor Adulterers, nor Effeminate, nor Abusers of
themselves with Mankind, nor Thieves, nor Covetous, nor Drunkards, nor
Revilers, nor Extortioners, shall inherit the Kingdom of God. And again, 13,
14, etc. Now the body is not for Fornication, but for the Lord, and the Lord
for the body. Know you not that your bodies are the Members of Christ? Shall I
then take the Members of Christ, and make them the Members of an Harlot? God
forbid. What, know you not, that he that is joined to an Harlot, is one body?
For two, says he, is one flesh; but he that is joined unto the Lord is one
Spirit. Therefore flee Fornication, every other Sin that a Man does is without
the body; but he that commits Fornication, sins against his own body.
Again, Gal. v. 19, 20, 21. Now the works of the flesh are manifest, which are
these, Adultery, Fornication, Uncleanness, Lasciviousness, Idolatry,
Witchcraft, and such like, of which I tell you before as I have told you also
in time past; that they which do such things shall not inherit the Kingdom of
God. And Ephesians. v. 3, 5, 6, 7. But Fornication, and all Uncleanness, or
Covetousness, let it not be once named among you, as becomes Saints. For this
you know, that no Whoremonger, nor unclean Person, nor covetous Man, who is an
Idolater, has any Inheritance in the Kingdom of Christ and of God. And then he
alludes to the delusive Notions, whereby they did excuse and extenuate this
Vice. Let no Man deceive you with vain Words, for because of these things
comes the Wrath of God upon the Children of Disobedience. Be ye not therefore
Partakers with them. And Col. iii. 5, 6. Mortify therefore your Members which
are on the Earth, Fornication, Uncleanness, Inordinate Affection, Evil
Concupiscence and Covetousness which is Idolatry. For which things sake the
Wrath of God comes upon the Children of Disobedience. Where the Apostle
declares, that whatever Pleas Men may allege, these are all hateful Sins, and
such which provoked the Indignation of God even against the Heathens
themselves; and therefore Christians are under greater Obligations to abstain
from them. 1 These. iv. 3, 4, 5, 7. This is the Will of God, even your
Sanctification that you should obstain from Fornication, That every one of you
should know how to possess his Vessel in Sanctification and Honor; not in the
Lusts of Concupiscence, as the Gentiles which know not God; for God has not
called us to Uncleanness, but to Holiness, and Heb. xiii. 4. Marriage is
honorable, and and the Bed undefiled, but Whoremongers, and Adulterers God
will Judge. It Is the Charge against the Church of Pergamos, that it was
Corrupt, and had them there that hold the Doctrine of Baalam, who taught Balac
to cast a Stumbling Block before the Children of Israel, to eat things
sacrificed unto Idols, and to commit Fornication, Rev. 2. 14. And against the
Church of Thyatria; that it suffered the Woman Jezabel, which calls her self
a Prophetess, to teach and seduce my Servants to commit Fornication: And I gave
her Space to repent of her Fornication, and she repented not: upon which follow
several severe Threatenings of God's heavy Judgments; in case they were not
seasonably prevented. And Rev. xxi. 8. The Fearful, and Unbelievers, and
Abominable, and Murderers, and Whoremongers, and Sorcerers, and Idolaters shall
have their Part in the Lake which burns with Fire and Brimstone, which is the
Second Death.

Now after such numerous Declarations, and so great a Cloud of Witnesses; with
what Countenance, and on what Grounds can Men conceit their roving Pleasures
innocent, or free from the extremest Danger of everlasting Condemnation? These
Texts are so positive, so plain, so intelligible, and so express; that I cannot
but wonder how those who retain any Reverence for the Gospel of Christ, can
pretend to any Hope of Salvation by it, while they continue in this Sin.

II. The Reasons which St. Paul here alleges do farther show that this Practice
must be both Offensive and Dangerous.

1. He answers the most plausible Suggestion that was pleaded by the
Corinthians for the Vindication of it. They pleaded that their Bodies were
their own; and that every Man was so far Lord of himself, that it was in his
Power and Right to use it as he pleased. To which St. Paul replies No; their
Bodies were not so absolutely their own, nor had they any such incontrolable
Authority, or Dominion over them. God that made them, and with Divine Wisdom
contrived their Frame, had a better, and more Natural Right than they; And by
Virtue of that, might lay upon them what Restraints he should think convenient.
Their Bodies too when by Sin become Mortal, and subject to Corruption, are
Redeemed by the Blood of Christ, and entitled to Immortality again. And Christ
by Virtue of the Price which he paid for them on the Cross, has a Title in, and
a just Authority over them. So that the Foundation of this Pretense is delusive
and vain. As Creatures of God we must be subject to his Dominion, and as the
Redeemed of Christ we must receive from him what Laws, Injunctions and Commands
he pleases. 1 Cor. vi. 19, 20. Ye are not your own, for ye are bought with a
Price; therefore glorify God both in your Body and in your Spirit, which are
God's Right and Property. And this is the very same thing that he urged, v. 13,
14. Now the Body is not for Fornication, but for the Lord, and the Lord for the
Body. i. e. Christ was raised from the Dead, that he might raise us also to
Immortality: and therefore we are bound not to live unto our selves, by giving
up our Bodies to Pleasure in the Lusts of the Flesh; but to devote our selves
to the Service of that Great God who made us, and to the Obedience of Christ,
who died to expiate our Guilt.

2. He argues in the next place, from the great Uncomeliness and Indecency of
this Practice, in Consideration of our close and near Relation to Christ, v.
15, 16. Know you not that your Bodies are Members of Christ, shall I then take
the Members of Christ and make them the Members of an Harlot? God forbid, etc.
In which Words he declares what our Liturgy has truly and properly expressed;
that we Christians are one with Christ, and Christ with us. And that Union is
not only in the way of Polity Ecclesiastical, as we are Members of his Church,
and entitled to the Spiritual Privileges and Offices thereof: but in a much
Nobler and Diviner Sense, He has taken upon him our Flesh, and he has
communicated to us his Spirit; and this Spirit is the Bond and Medium of that
Unity betwixt us. For by one Spirit we are all baptized into one Body, 1 Cor.
xii. 13. And as the Soul of Man is the Foundation of Life, and of Vital Union
in all the Members of the Body; so is the Spirit of God the Foundation and
common Principle of Spiritual Life and Grace in all true Christians whatsoever.
And as certainly as Jesus Christ has taken on him our true and real Flesh; so
certainly has the same Christ communicated to us of that Holy Spirit which
abides in him. For which reason our Apostle says, v. 17. He that is joined to
the Lord is one Spirit with him, and Romans viii. 9. If any Man has not the
Spirit of God, he is none of his.

Now having instructed the Corinthians in this Doctrine, he recommends it to
their own Serious Consideration, how Unseemly, and Shameful, and Unworthy it
is, for Men in so near a Relation to God, and so close an Alliance to the Son
of God, to have Fellowship and Union with the most Infamously Vile and
Detestable of all Human Creatures. Shall I take the Members of Christ, and make
them the Members of an Harlot? God forbid. This is an Evil that ought not to be
done. This is scandalous and abominable. He appeals to the common Sentiments of
Mankind. It must be preposterous and absurd to pretend Union with Christ, and
to profess that Union, the Foundation of our Hope of Mercy and Salvation by
him: and at the same time to consociate with the most hateful of all Creatures,
by a Vice forbidden under the Penalty of everlasting Condemnation. The very
Nature of God, who is Holiness, and Light, and in whom there is mo Darkness at
all, is a sufficient Proof how disagreeable all such sinful Practices are, how
offensive, how hateful, and how dangerous.

3. He argues from the great Dishonor which a Man does hereby to his own Body.
He debases and reproaches himself. He becomes one Flesh with such a Person, as
he is ashamed to own his Relation to; and for which all Mankind besides will
despise him, though he does not scorn, and loath himself. He becomes in every
sense polluted and defiled. Ver. 18.
Every other Sin that a Man does is without the Body, but he that commits
Fornication sins against his own Body. The Profane is injurious to God, and
the Fraudulent to his Brother, and the Mischief of all other Sins falls first
at a distance from ones self. But the Mischief of Fornication falls more
immediately on the Offenders own Head; his own Body is debased in the very
Trespass he has committed.

Nay the Apostle has improved this Consideration from the former; and tells us,
that by the Residence of that Holy Spirit within us; our Bodies are so honored
by Almighty God, as to be esteemed and valued as his Temples, Places of his
Residence, dedicated to his Use, and devoted to his Service, v. 19. Know you
not that your Bodies are the Temple of the Holy Ghost which is in you, and
which you have of God. And again, 1 Cor. iii. 16. Know you not that ye are the
Temple of God, and that the Spirit of God dwells in you. From whence he takes
occasion to warn them of the Danger of dishonouring of themselves by
Fornication; because, v. 17. If any Man desile the Temple of God, him will God
destroy: For the Temple of God is holy, which Temple are ye.

These are the Arguments which St. Paul makes Use of to convince and to
dissuade all Christians from this Vice. These indeed are Christian Arguments,
founded upon Christian Doctrines, and Spiritual Reflections, but of very great
Force, and not at all to be despised.

For this Union with Christ, by the means of his Spirit, is one of the great
Privileges of a Christian; one of the great Benefits of our Redemption; and
our only Hope of Mercy and Peace, and Comfort, and Reconciliation through his
Blood. Does then Fornication break off this close Alliance with Christ, destroy
this Union? that is to the Soul in a Spiritual Sense, like loping off an Arm or
a Leg from the natural Body. It Is alienating the Man from Christ, and cutting
off all his Hope of Reconciliation in him. It Is in effect rejecting him from
the Covenant of Grace; and blotting out his Name from the Book of Life.

Again, does St. Paul say, that by Fornication a Man dishonors his own Body,
and desileth those Temples which God has consecrated to himself, to be the
Habitations of his Holy Spirit. God, who has punished the Pollutions of his
Temple at Jerusalem, with the Death of the profane Offender, will certainly
punish the defiling these living Temples with Eternal Death, and the most dire
Effects of his severest Vengeance and Indignation. Besides, in desiling the
Habitation of God's Holy Spirit, we must grieve that Spirit, and resist, and
repel it, and drive it away from the intended place of its Residence and Abode.
And how can a Practice be either innocent or safe: that so provokes our God,
that we become abandoned of the true Principle and Foundation of all Grace,
Spiritual Life, and Sanctification? Especially, when St. Paul has so solemnly
declared, That if any Man have not the Spirit of God he is none of his. But to
add yet more force to these Considerations, consider,

III. Lastly, That this Sin in particular is absolutely inconsistent with those
Qualifications which the Gospel requires from us, as the indispensable
Condition of Salvation. To this purpose we all know very well, that when Christ
came into the World to redeem Mankind from Eternal Death, he at the same time
intended to destroy the Power of Sin in us, and call us back from the
Perpetration of those Iniquities, which had been the Original Occasion of our
Misery. For this reason, together with his Promises of Grace, Mercy and Peace;
he has added several Holy Precepts and Commands, and strict Injunctions, and
Rules of living well; which every one who comes into this Covenant, and desires
to be a Partaker of this Hope, is bound to observe. And that we might have a
due and deep Sense of the Necessity of this Obedience: he has inserted it into
our Covenant, and made it the Indispensable Condition of his Promises, without
which we have no Hope, no Title to any of the Blessings, Benefits, or Comforts
of the Gospel.

Now among the several Qualifications which the Gospel on this Account requires
from us; there are those two eminently recommended, and strictly exacted, that
we should be Pure, and that we should be Holy. So that a sincere Christian
needs no better Argument, no stronger Proof of the Greatness of this Sin, and
the danger that attends it; than to consider with himself how contrary it is
to, and how utterly inconsistent with both these Qualifications.

1. We are commanded to be Pure, Mat. v. 8. Blessed are the Pure in Heart, for
they shall see God. And it was St. Paul's Advice to Timothy, 1 Timothy v. 22. Keep
thy self pure. And Phil. iv. 8. there are recommended to us, whatever things
are pure: and St. John declares both the Nature, and the Necessity of this
Purity. He that has this Hope in him, must purify himself as God is pure, 1 John iii. 3. Now this word Pure, in its natural and proper Signification,
denotes the being without any Mixture, that may make a thing worse than it is
in it self. The Vessel is said to be pure that is without Soil or Taint, and
the Wine is said to be pure that is neither mudded by its own Lees, nor by any
Adulteration. From hence it is used in a Moral and Religious Sense, for being
without those Pollutions and Desilements which make us hateful, and
unacceptable to our God. And though under the Law, and among the Superstitious
Heathens, there were many External Defilements; yet in the true, proper, Gospel
Sense, nothing pollutes, nothing makes us unclean, and unacceptable to God, but
what is a Sin, contrary to his pure Nature, and makes us unfit for his Divine
Conversation in Heaven.

All Sin whatever does thus corrupt, and defile, and pollute us; yet it it
remarkable, that this sensual Vice is particularly singled out, as one of those
that has an extraordinary Malignity in this Respect. And the repeated Mention
of Uncleanness, that so frequently occurs in the New Testament, is directly
levelled at Adultery, Fornication, and all unlawful Lusts. Thus St. Paul
speaking particularly of the abominable Lewdness of the Romans, says of them,
Romans i. 24. that God gave them up to Uncleanness through the Lusts of their
Hearts. And 2 Cor. xii. 21. he speaks of those who had not repented of their
Uncleanness, Fornication and Lasciviousness, which they had committed. For this
reason they are joined together, Gal. v. 19. The Works of the Flesh are these,
Adultery, Fornication, Uncleanness, Lasciviousness. And Col. iii. 5.
Fornication, Uncleanness, Inordinate Affection, and evil Concupiscence. These
are the Defilements, and Pollutions, which destroy that Purity, that Christ has
made the Indispensable Condition of our seeing God. And in the Language of the
New Testament to be Pure is to be Chaste; and Chastity is the Virtue very often
particularly intended when the Gospel speaks of Purity.

2. We are commanded also to be Holy; and Holiness is expressly declared to be
that qualification without which no Man shall see the Lord, Heb. xii. 14. Now
in whatever it is that this Holiness consists; it is observable, that to avoid,
and abstain from Fornication makes up one necessary part of it. This is
undeniably evident from St. Paul, 1 These. iv. 3, etc. This is the Will of God,
or that which he requires from you as the great evidence of your
Sanctification; That you should abstain from Fornication, that every one of you
should know how to possess his vessel, or body, in Sanctification and Honor.
If therefore the true notion of Holiness, shall be found to consist in a
Discrimination and Separation from the rest of the World by a nearer relation
to God, and a more particular Devotion to his Worship and Service; it will
follow, that Gods certain Purpose and Design, when he made our Sanctification
to oblige us to abstinence from that Vice, was thereby to declare, that we
should Discriminate and Distinguish our selves from the rest of Mankind
throughout all the Earth by stricter Rules of Chastity, and a more eminent
degree of Purity in all our Conversation* And all Pretensions to the True,
Christian, Evangelical Holiness, are vain and frivolous, and trifling in any
Man, who lives still in Fornication. That Uncleanness is for the Gentile World,
who live in Darkness, and are given up to the Lusts of their own Hearts. But we
have not so learned Christ; We are a chosen Generation, a Royal Priesthood, an
Holy Nation, a Peculiar People, beloved and favored, 1 Pet. 2. 9.
and elected of God; that we should show forth the Praises of him, who has
called us cut of Darkness into his mavelous Light.

It is therefore no excuse for us to look back upon the corrupt Conversation of
former times, and the effects of more inferior and imperfect Dispensations. For
the matter is come to this last issue, whether Jesus Christ into whose Name we
have been baptized, be indeed our Savior, in whom is all our hope of Mercy and
Everlasting Peace; or whether we look for Salvation in any other? If not, it
concerns us to receive his Gospel as the rule both of Faith and Manners; to
suffer its Doctrines to determine our Consciences and Judgments; and its
Precepts and Commands to guide and direct our Lives. Whatever other Men do, we
must cleanse our selves from all Impurity both of Flesh and Spirit; we must
abstain from fleshly Lusts, and flee Fornication; or we shall not inherit the
Kingdom of God. While any Man continues in this wicked Practice, he is void of
Grace, and of the Holy Spirit of God, and of that Evangelical Purity and
Holiness without which no Man shall see the Lord. I proceed therefore*

III. Lastly, To speak a little of the natural Turpitude of this Sin, and the
mischievous Evils and Consequences that attend it. And were Men but sincere and
impartial in their Enquiries into Truth, it were easy to show that this Law of
God in the Institution of Marriage in all the parts of it is founded on sound
and good Principles of Reason.

Divorce countenances the imperious humors of ill natured Men, and gives
encouragement to them to make quarrels and dissentions with the first Wife,
whenever new Charms shall inflame them to desire a Second. Polygamy divides
that Love which ought to be entire, and must and will inevitably be attended
with that unequal Partiality toward one, which will bring the others into
contempt and hatred. And the Jealousy of Rivals upon such occasions, must
needs bring Divisions, and Distractions to a Family.

But our present business is only with Fornication. And to show that all the
Laws and Precepts of the Gospel, have their Foundation in the real difference
between good and evil, and are in themselves Beneficial and Profitable to Men;
let it be considered whether the Dignity, and Honor of humane nature, is not
concerned in our abstinence from this wicked and enormous Vice. Wherein is it
that Man excells Brutes, and becomes in any respect a nobler and better, not to
say, also a Diviner Creature? Is it not in the more valuable faculties of the
Soul? In an overruling Will, and a capacious Understanding; in the power of
Thought and Reason, to which all inferior Passions and Affections were at first
created in a due and orderly Subjection. And does not to this day the true
difference of our Natures consist in this; that Reason is the ruling Principle
in us, and Appetite in them? By which we become capable of better and nobler
Actions; of Communion with God in Heaven, and a Conversation more Divine?

How then shall we vindicate the Dignity of our Diviner Nature, but by keeping
up the Dominion and Superiority of our Reason over the vile Affections and
Inclinations of the Body? Or in what can we more Dishonor or Debase our
selves, than in subjecting the noble Faculties of the Soul, to the Tyrannic,
Usurped power of our depraved Appetites and Lusts? And does not every wicked
Man in Fornication and sensual Uncleanness do this? Does Reason prevail? Does
Conscience, or does Lust bear sway in him, who gives himself up to the conduct
of his loose and sensual Desires? To follow the impulse of vile Affections, and
Inclinations; and without restraint Debauch and Prostitute himself at the
Instigation of his carnal Appetites? What is this but to Dishonor his Nature,
level himself with Beasts, degenerate into a Brute that has no Understanding;
and reproach both the Wisdom and Goodness of God who made him of a nobler shape
and frame? So that if Men would think seriously, and without partiality; it
were easy from the Principles of Reason, and Natural Religion, as well as of
Revealed, to discover that this is a shameful and detestable Vice.

But it will appear yet more odious, if we give our selves the trouble of but a
few short Reflections, on the mischievous and pernicious Consequences that
attend it.

1. First then consider the unhappy calamitous fate of that spurious brood that
happens to be born by this Vice, Shame, Infamy, and great Disgrace; tho the
least of all these Evils, are such as the wiser Heathens had very deep and
lively Apprehensions of. To this purpose Plutarch in his Treatise of the Good
Education of Children, has these Words. That they who desire to have Children
well esteemed and of Good Repute ought by no means to cohabit with common Women
that Prostitute themselves. (...). etc.
For they who either by Father or Mother are infamously born, will have that
indelible Infamy attend them all their Life long, and be a ready occasion
always at hand to every one that has a Mind to affront and reproach them. But
indeed this Evil does not affect only the Character and Credit of the Children
so born: but sometimes it becomes a means of infecting their Bodies, and
shortning their Lives; while they labor under Calamitous Infirmities, and
bring Rottenness, and Abominable Putrefaction into the World with them. Nay
sometimes the Son of Fornication falls an early Sacrifice to conceal his
Mothers Shame: and as one great Evil too commonly is followed by another, this
enormous Vice often becomes the Introduction to Unnatural Murder. And he who
begets such an Illegitimate Child, is inevitably injurious and unjust to his
own Offspring; in that by the Baseness of his Birth, he is cut off from all
Title or Claim to the Inheritance of his Father's Fortune and Honor: which by
the Original Laws of God and Nature, the Offspring of Man should have a Right
and Title to.

And indeed what farther Evidence can we have of the Hateful and Detestable
Apprehensions which all Mankind in all Ages ever had of this Enormous Practice,
than this? That the Children of Fornication have in all civilized Governments
been Neglected and Disregarded; nor allowed any Pretense of Title or Claim to
the Inheritance of their Father. These very Laws and Constitutions of almost
all Nations of the World, are a most Certain and Irrefragable Proof that this
Vice always was detested and abhorred by them?

And yet there is a worse, and far greater Calamity that commonly attends the
unhappy Children of such Ungodly Parents. And that is, that either the want of
Natural Affection or Shame, and a Consciousness of Guilt in the Parents
occasion a certain Neglect and Disregard of the Childrens Virtuous and
Religious Education. And every one that seriously considers the mighty
Influence which Education has to make Men either Good or Bad, must confess that
the Mischief of this Neglect is very deplorable and much to be lamented. This
for ought we know might be one great End and Purpose of God in the Original Law
and Institution of Marriage. By sanctifying which State, and ordaining that
Union to be inseparable and perpetual, he lays so firm and Rational a
Foundation for each Parents Affection to their Children, as will always oblige
them to be careful and solicitous for their good. And that which seems much to
favor this Conjecture, is, That God most certainly did provide, not only for
the Propagation and Increase of Mankind: but also that it might be in such a
manner as might best secure their being trained up in the Knowledge of him. And
as might most strongly oblige their Parents to instruct them in that Virtue and
Piety, which will at last bring them to the Eternal Happiness and Glory for
which they were Originally designed.

And yet however necessary this good Education is in the Judgment both of God
and Man: it is morally impossible that the Children of Fornication should be
Religiously brought up. Oftentimes either the Poverty, or the Shame of the
Parents, cause them to be exposed in the Streets, and consequently to be put
out by the Parish where they are found. And in such a Case they are thought to
fare well, if the Nurse to whose Care they are committed, supplies them with
Food and Raiment; but few or none think themselves concerned in the Good of the
Child's Soul, and to teach it better Principles than its Parents had. Nor is it
easy to imagine that the Parents themselves should do much better in this
Affair. It may be they have not yet repented of their own Iniquity: and if not,
it is hard to believe that they should have any great Zeal to implant Grace in
others, who stiffle and extinguish it in themselves.

But suppose they have; how will they set about a Work that shall bring afresh
into their Minds all the Shame, and Terror, and Confusion that first followed
the Commission of that Sin? The Sense of their own Shame will stop their
Mouths, and the Rebukes of their Consciences Divert their Purpose, and Prevent
their Good Design. So that though other Parents may be careless and negligent in
the Instruction and Tuition of their Children; these lie under almost a Fatal
and Inevitable Necessity of this Neglect. And who knows what great, what
irreparable, and it may be Everlasting Mischiefs this one Calamitous Misfortune
may be the Cause of? Or how little is it to be wondered at, if such a Shameful
Spurious Brood inherit the Vices of their Parents, and become Persons of
Reprobate Minds, and given up to Vile Affections and abominable Lusts? What is
to be expected from such wicked Practices, but a Propagation of Vice and
Naughtiness, and an horrid Increase in great Iniquities: that without some
extraordinary Operation of Divine Grace and Mercy brings the whole Generation
to Everlasting Misery and Torments?

These are Notorious Instances of the lamentable Evils, and Mischievous
Consequences of this Sin. But,

2. The Mischiefs of it falls oftentimes upon the Offenders themselves as well
as upon their Offspring and Posterity. And that in the first Place in their
Credit and Character, and Reputation. As to Female Prostitutes they even by the
Heathens themselves have ever been esteemed the most Infamous and Profligate.
And though Men are generally of a less tender Fame and Credit, yet so inseparable
and unalienable is Shame from Sin and Vice, that neither the Commonness of the
Practice, nor the Authority of great Examples, nor all the Pleas and Apologies
that are alleged for its Excuse, can give it Credit and Reputation. And those
who are almost ready to be Advocates for it, yet in the Commission of it are
generally sollicitous to be concealed, and that not only from the Sober and
Pious and Grave; but from others of the same ill Life and Conversation. And
many of these who have made a shift to harden their Hearts, and sear their
Consciences against the Guilt of it, find it yet very difficult, after all, to
harden their Foreheads too against the Shame and Scandal. And though in a very
Wicked and Degenerate Age, yet there is no Man of what Rank soever, that
continues in this Sin and refuses to be reclaimed; but it will prove a Blemish
to him, and a Scandal to any Dignity, Office, or Character that he bears. And
though in Civility and Good Manners he may not discover this by any outward
visible Disrespect: yet he must lose considerably in the inward Veneration and
Esteem of Men.

Nor does it often fare better with these Sinners in their Estates; of which
besides the Evidence of Reason, we have the Confirmation of almost every Days
Experience. How often do such Men Ruin and Waste their Substance, and at last
become Poor and Despicably Miserable? Thus it fared with these Offenders above
two thousand Years ago: Nor has Time or Experience been able to teach such Men
to escape the Mischief, any other way but by abstaining from the Sin. Keep thee
from the Evil Woman, from the Flattery of the Tongue of a strange Woman; Lust
not after her Beauty in thine Heart, Neither let her take thee with her Eye
lids: for by means of a Whorish Woman a Man is brought to a Piece of Bread,
Prove. vi. 24. etc. And Prove. v. 8, 9, 10. Remove thy way far from a strange
Woman, and come not nigh the Door of her House, lest thou give thine Honor
unto others, and thy Years unto the Cruel; Lest Strangers be filled with thy
Wealth, and thy Labor be in the House of a Stranger: and thou mourn at the
last when thy Flesh and thy Body are consumed. Agreeable to which is that Advice
to the Son of Syrach, Eccles. ix. 16. Give not thy Soul unto Harlots that thou
lose not thine Inheritance.

I may very pertinently add here to all the former Mischiefs, the Pernicious
Effects of this Sin to the Bodies of those that live in it, who frequently
impair their Health, and wast their Strength, and it may be dye Infamous
Martyrs to their Lusts by the Rottenness of their Bones, and the Venomous
Infection of a Noisome Scandalous Disease. But I am unwilling to enlarge upon so
Loathsome and Odious a Subject. And yet methinks it is no small Evidence, no
trifling Indication of God's great Displeasure against this Sin: that he has
entailed a Curse, and a Calamitous Distemper, even to Rottenness and
Putrefaction, so peculiarly upon Adultery and Fornication; that it is not to be
brought upon any of Mankind, but one of these Detestable Iniquities must be the
Original Cause of it.

But I pass by all these things with transient Reflections; Not that they are
in themselves either small or inconsiderable; for an Infamous and a Wicked
Posterity, a Reproachful Character, a Beggared Fortune, and an Infected Body,
are all of them very great and sore Calamities; But because there are greater
Evils and Consequences more pornicious, and more justly to be lamented, yet
behind. I mean,

3. Lastly, The Spiritual Mischiefs, and Miserable Consequences to the Soul, in
Grieving the Holy Spirit of God, and repelling his Divine Grace, which is the
true Fountain of Christian and Spiritual Life in us, and the Blessed Author of
our Sanctification. This is an Evil which a very little Consideration will
convince us is inseparable from this Vice, and from Adultery; And at the same
time more deplorable than all the Evils that can befall our Credit, Estate, or
Life: because these ill Effects will follow Men through the Grave, and make them
Miserable to all Eternity.

For the clearing what I intend on this Head, let it be remembered that I have
already shown, that our Union with God and Christ, is by the Mediation of that
Holy Spirit, which Resides and makes its Abode within us. That this is the
Principle of Grace and all manner of Goodness in us; that to the joint
Operation of this Holy Spirit with our Spirits, we owe both our good Affections
and Desires, and also our Strength and Power to do what is Virtuous and Good.
That therefore, according to the Proportion of God's Spirit in us, and our own
Care to Cherish and Improve it, Such will be the Temper and Disposition of our
Souls, and the Degrees of Goodness and Holiness in us. And that by consequence,
upon the Want and Deprivation of this Spiritual Assistance, we must lose both
our Inclinations and our Power of being Religious. We must become subject to
our Bodies, Appetites, and Sensual Delights; we are then Carnal and sold under
Sin, and led by the Instigation of our Lusts, which first wound our
Consciences, and afterward destroy them. We by these Degrees fall under the
Power and Dominion of Sin, and by means of our own vile Affections are led
captive by the Devil at his Will.

This is what the Gospel in several Places teaches and declare to us; and
however it may seem Strange and Wonderful in the manner of it, to those who
have a weak Faith, and faint Perceptions of things that fall not within the Ken
of their Senses: it is a Divine and Certain Truth, and visibly apparent in its
Effects upon the Tempers and Actions of Men.

Let it then but once more be considered, that Fornication Dishonors the
Body, and Defiles those Holy Temples which the Spirit of God has consecrated
and set apart for his own Habitation; That when we by defiling our Bodies
Grieve the Holy Spirit, he will abandon and forsake us; That for our Resisting,
and Abusing the Divine Grace of God it will be taken from us: Let us but
possess our selves with Just Notions of these mischievous and pernicious
Consequences; and from hence it will be easy to find out what must necessarily
be the Thoughts, and Dispositions, and Inclinations of such Men toward God and
Religion. The Prophet Hosea iv. 11. has plainly taught us what Effects this
Sensuality will produce. Whoredom and Wine steal away the Heart, and it must
needs fare with these Men as it did with the Romans for these Disorders, viz.
that they must be abandoned of God, Romans 1. 24, 26, 28.
and given up to Uncleanness, and the Lusts of their own Hearts; to vile
Affections, and a reprobate Mind; to do those things that are not convenient.
These Men must be entirely under the Conduct of their Corrupt Appetites, and
Carnal Inclinations. They must needs be enslaved to their Lusts, and hardened in
their Sins; and not without great difficulty, to be reclaimed, because they
have at present lost not only their Spiritual Strength, but even the principle
of good Affections and Desires.

Nay, It is morally impossible that these Men should contain themselves within
the bounds of any one single Vice; but Iniquity will increase, and the Works of
the Flesh, and the Lusts of the Body will cloud their Understandings, bias
their Judgments, infect their Minds, and debauch their Spirits. So that they
can hardly refrain, but that from the dire Effects of this deadly Sin; they
must fall into Atheism, Profaneness, Blasphemy, and an Universal Scorn, and
Contempt of God, and Religion.

This our own Reason from the Doctrines of the Gospel will teach us to conclude
must needs happen; and every Days Experience will confirm it. Atheism and
Profaneness are grown to a very great height among us, and are become not only
scandalous but formidable. We are fallen into such an Age, Ad haec tempota
quibus nec vitia nostia, nec remedia pati possumus, perventum est. Live.
as the Roman Historian speaks of; in which our vices are intolerable, and yet
become incurable: But consider how long this has been. Since Adultery and
Fornication have been connived at, and exempted from the Censures of the
Church, and the Punishment of the Civil Magistrates. And who are the Men among
whom this Tremendous Mystery of Great Iniquity does chiefly work? It is among
the Sensual and Unclean, that live in Adultery and Fornication. These are the
Men that dispute the Being of a God, doubt his Providence over the World, and
deny the Immorality of the Soul. These are they who trample under foot the Son
of God, Heb. x. 29.
and count the Blood of the Covenant wherewith they were sanctified an unholy
thing, and do despite to the Spirit of Grace. These chiefly are they that
disdain the Thoughts of Divine Revelation, and set up the Profane Oracles of
false delusive Reason against the Infallible and Holy Oracles of God. These are
they that blaspheme the name of the Blessed Jesus, and profane the Sacred
Scriptures; that speak of a Savior with Derision, and of Redemption with
Scorn; that despise Heaven, and harden themselves against the Terrors of Hell.
These are they in whom the God of this World has blinded their Eyes, and cast a
Vail before their Understandings, whereby Sacred and Spiritual Things are
become to them imperceptible; they know them not, neither indeed can they know
them, for they are Spiritually discerned, 1 Cor. 2. 14. In a word, these are
they that being swallowed up in the Desires of the Flesh, and Sensual Delights,
have Stisted all the Gracious Motions of the Spirit, have no Taste, nor Relish
of Divine and Holy Things; have therefore denied the Lord that bought them,
turned Apostates from the Faith; and labor to make the Doctrines of it
ridiculous, and its Promises and Threatenings contemptible.

Nor is it strange that it should be so. Religion is against them, and
therefore in Policy, and their own Defense, they must set themselves against
Religion. Christianity threatens Everlasting Burnings, and unquenchable Flames,
as the future Recompense of their present for did Pleasures. And they have no
way to harden themselves against these Terrors, and enjoy tolerable Peace
within; but by a seared Conscience, and an evil Heart of Unbelief; 1 Timothy iv. 2.
by rejecting the Authority of these Threatenings, by calling these Flames
Folly, and the Gospel that preaches them a Delusion. Heb. iii. 12.
It is now, since they will not be reclaimed, become the Interest of such Men,
and their only Hope of Comfort, to persuade themselves that all it says is
false. And tho the Truth of Religion is attested by very rational, and strong,
and serious Arguments; yet when Men have once resolved that they will not obey
it, it then becomes their Wisdom too to resolve that they will not believe it.
And tho the Infidelity of such Men seems at first Sight much to be wondered at:
Yet not at all when we seriously reflect upon their Actions. The greatest
Wonder of all would be, that Men could live such Lives, and yet believe such
Doctrines.

While therefore these Vices are tolerated, or connived at, that repel Grace,
destroy the Conscience, and make Men implacable Enemies to Religion, I doubt it
will be in vain to hope for a sufficient Restraint of Blasphemy, and
Profaneness, and wicked Opinions. Censures and Punishments. may stop Men's
Mouths, or make them more secret and retired in their Blasphemy: But the Gospel
of our Salvation will hardly gain much better Veneration and Esteem in the
Minds of Men; till Adultery, Fornication, and all those abominable Lusts are
restrained, that debauch Men's Spirits, and create this great Aversion, and
Abhorence of Christianity. The Flesh lusts against the Spirit, and the
Spirit, against the Flesh, Gal v. 17.
and these are contrary one to another. And therefore it is to be feared that
those Men who indulge themselves in the Works of the Flesh, will be always
inclined, always endeavoring to ridicule, and to deride the Laws of God, and
the Revelations of his Holy Spirit. Erroneous Opinions may do a great deal to
encourage, and countenance, and embolden Men in Iniquity; but they have the
first Original and Source from vicious Practices; and are commonly first
Devised and Broached by wicked Men of Immoral Lives to defend their Crimes, and
quell and stifle the sharp Convictions of a guilty Conscience. And these are
the Men to whom they prove extremely pernicious and mischievous. So that the
most effectual Prevention and Suppression of Blasphemy, and Profanceness is to
strike at the Root of them, and prevent and suppress those Vices that have
occasioned them.

Had it been in the Power of strong Arguments, and sound Reasons, and the
Authority of Divine Revelation, well attested, to do this: Neither the one or
the other could ever have come to that scandalous Height in a Church and a
Nation, where the Gospel has had the best, the most sound, and judicious
Defense of its Principles and Doctrine, that the Christian World ever saw,
since the Primitive Times of immediate Inspiration. But how little force has
the brightest Object where the Humors of the Eyes are mudded and clouded; when
the Power of Reflection is lost, and the Medium of Perception so obstructed,
that it cannot at all affect the Sense? How little signify the strongest
Arguments in Spirituals, when the Heart is sensual, and a Vail cast before the
Understanding? When the Mind is corrupt, the Judgment prejudiced, and biased,
and bribed, to reject their Force, and oppose the Truth. And this is the
Influence which Adultery, Fornication, and all sensual Uncleanness naturally
have on the Mind.

These in a word are usually the Consequences that attend this Unchristian
Practice; and when both Character and Fortune, Reputation and Estate, Body and
Soul, and that both of themselves and their Posterity are at stake, is it not
high time to complain? And may we not be allowed to expostulate with Men, why
they will blind their Eyes, and stop their Ears, and cherish such gross and
palpable Delusions? A Vice that is a certain Violation of God's Original
Institution and Law made at the first Creation of the World; directly contrary
to the repeated Commands and Precepts of the Gospel; and which besides the
other Mischiefs, corrupts the Soul, debauches Men's Spirits, destroys their
Consciences, and creates great Enmity and strong Aversions to God, and to
Religion. What can be sinful? what can be offensive? or what can be dangerous
to Men's Souls if this be not? But how wretched a thing it is to be hardened in
Iniquity, and debauched to a deplorable degree of Inconsideration and
Insensibility! Would Men calmly and cooly reflect; The Shame and Infamy, the
Beggary and Putrefaction, that almost universally attend it, might prove a
sufficient and effectual Restraint. But if Temporal Considerations are not
enough, yet those who have any Esteem for the Christian Faith and the Doctrines
of the Gospel, are bound in Tenderness and Compassion to their Souls, to have a
care. Man may allege what they please, and there was never yet any Vice, but
the Parties concerned in it would plead Not guilty, and offer something for its
Excuse. But there is no withstanding these Reproofs, but by direct Apostasy
from the Faith; nor any way to evade the Force of these Convictions, but by
throwing aside the whole Authority of Christianity at once.

There is indeed a Christian Church that would extenuate the Guilt of this Sin,
by the soft Name of Venial; and that I think is the only Plea now left to be
made in its Defense. But alas! what Defense is to be made from the Authority of
a Church so notoriously Corrupt, both in Faith and Manners; and so far
degenerated from the Primitive Spirit of Christianity. Especially, what a Plea
is this to those who are not of that Communion? Their Opinions are as good a
Defense for praying to Images, and worshipping of Saints. And indeed, instead
of countenancing this Vice, should rather convince us, that according to the
Universal Blindness, which by the Judgment of God has happened to them,
Idolatry, and Sensuality must needs go Hand in Hand, and as inseparable
Companions mutually support and assist each other. Be not deceived then with
vain Words, nor imposed on by such Delusions and frivolous Excuses. But fear
and tremble at the heavy Judgments, which God has threatened and denounced.
Abstain from, and avoid so great, so dangerous a Sin, and so pernicious in its
Consequences, with as earnest Care as you would Death it self, or the very
Gates of Hell.

Deliver thy self therefore from the strange Woman, even from the Stranger that
flattereth with her Words, Prove. ii. 16, 17, etc.
which forsakes the Guide of her Youth, and forgets the Covenant of her
God. For her House inclines to Death, and her Paths unto the Dead. None that
go unto her return again, neither take they hold of the Paths of Life. And
especially, remember that Faith into which you have been baptized; know what
manner of Spirit you are of, Luke ix. 55.
and consider the end of your Conversation. God has not called you to
Uncleanness, 1 Thessalonians. iv. 7.
but to Holiness. Your Conversation is in Heaven; Mortisie therefore your
Members that are on the Earth, Phil. iii. ^^
Fornication, Vncleaness, Inordinate Affection, Evil Concupiscence, Col. iii. 4.
and Covetousness, which is Idolatry: For which things sake the Wrath of God
comes on the Children of Disobedience. Ephesians. v. 7. 1 Pet. i. 15.
Be ye not therefore partakers with them; but as he who has called you is
holy, so be ye holy in all manner of Conversation.

AN APPENDIX CONCERNING Concubinage.
THO the foregoing Discourse does I hope in some measure prove that Fornication
is both a great and dangerous Sin; yet I have taken notice of such a Modern
Distinction between Whoredom and Concubinage, as if not rightly understood and
cleared, may be thought to evade the Force of most if not all of my Arguments.
It may not therefore be improper to add somewhat by way of Appendix upon that
Subject.

As for Concubinage in a Married State (i. e.) when either the Man who keeps,
or the Woman who is kept as a Concubine are married, this comes so near the
Concubinage of Ancient Times, that what has been said already may be sufficient
to the Determination of that Question. For if according to Christ's
Interpretation of the Original Institution of Marriage, Polygamy be Adultery,
such Concubinage must be Adultery also, let the Pretense be what it will. Nor
can the Examples of Abraham or Isaac, or any other justify us in such things.
For however God was pleased to Connive at them, this Original Institution is a
new revealed in the Gospel, and our strict Observance of it necessary to
Salvation.

But there is one Argument I have lately met with, that indeed did at first
surprise me, because it came, as I suppose from a Graduate in Divinity, Jo.
Butler. B. D.
and pretended the Authority of an Apostle, no less than St. Paul or St
Barnabas, to Vindicate the lawfulness of such a Practice. But a little
Reflection serves to discover that a disorderly Man of any Profession may
easily pervert the meaning of Holy Scripture to excuse or extenuate the Guilt
of his own Ill-Manners. And this I think is his Case. He would excuse his
Adultery under the soft Name of Concubinage, and endeavors to prove such
Concubinage Innocent from, Heb. xiii. 4. Marriage is honorable in all, and the
Bed undefiled: but Whoremongers and Adulterers God will judge. From which words
the Argument is formed thus. The Word (...) or (...) is a Particle Copulative,
and therefore the Words so joined ought to be of a different and distinct
Signification. This Bed undefiled according to plain Gramatical Construction
must be aptly Significant of some certain Bed distinct from the Marriage Bed,
and that he says must be Concubinage; or the Words must start a Riddle hard to
be Understood. In this is the force of his Argument if it has any; but indeed
it has none. It Is mere fallacy and sham. I will not dispute with him whether
the Particle (...) be Copulative or Exegetical. Let that pass, The
Determination of this Debate does not turn on so nice a Point. I will suppose
then (...) Marriage and (...) the Bed to have distinct Significations. But why
must this needs mean his Concubinage. What will he say if (...) signifies here
the Marriage Contract, and (...) the Consummation of it? What Riddle is started
by this Meaning? Or what Hardship in it to be Understood?

And this I think is very evidently the Apostles Sense; and this Interpretation
agreeable to Scripture Phrase. (...) is used for a Marriage or Wedding, Matthew.
xxii. 2, 3. Jo. ii. 1. And (...) a Bed in the Sense I now allege, Romans ix. 10.
which our Translators have modestly Translated thus; When Rebecca also had
conceived, (...) by one even our Father Isaac. And that I may not stand alone
in this, let Dr. Hammond be consulted on that Place, and Grotius on this of
Heb. xiii. 4. who shows what his Opinion was by that notion of the Essens,
which he cites as agreeable to the Apostles meaning. They he says abstained from
Marriage, attamen (...), yet they neither disallowed Marriage, nor the
Procreation of Children. The purport of the Text then as I take it is this.
Marriage is honorable, and the Consummation of it without Uncleanness. The
rest of all that fulsom Pamphlet may easily be answered from the foregoing
Discourse.

The next thing therefore to be considered is the Concubinage of unmarried
Persons; that is, when a Man and a Woman consociate on promise of Fidelity and
Constancy to each other: But do not solemnly Marry according to the Laws of
their Country. In which if it be pleaded that they fulfill the design of God's
Institution, although they do not make any solemn Matrimonial Contract as the Laws
of the Land require: I would offer these things to be seriously considered.

1. Whether in this pretended Fidelity and Constancy to each other they be
truly and conscienciously Sincere. (i. e.) Whether they are so firmly resolved
to be thus Constant as to esteem their Separation to be a Sin, and all
Consociation with any other to be Adultery. This we have seen the Original
Institution of Marriage most certainly requires. And if Men would examine
themselves carefully in this Matter, I doubt it would come close to all Persons
that live in such a Practice. For I doubt, it is a thirst for Liberty, and an
unwillingness to be under so strict a Confinement and Restraint that is the
chief Inducement to such Practices. For if Men resolve, and think themselves
bound in Conscience to observe such inseparable Union, and Cohabitation as
God's Law requires: What should hinder them from confirming this Obligation by
Legal Solemnities? If they do not think themselves thus bound, it is certain
they are guilty of Fornication. But

2. There is a Conscientious Obedience due to all the Civil Constitutions and
Laws of the Country where we live. This is one of the chief Acts of Subjection
which we owe to the Supreme Magistrates and Powers. And as God has commanded us
to be Obedient to them: So to despise their Good Laws is to Sin against God.

And this is the more Considerable, because in a great many Cases the Good or
Evil of Humane Actions is to be determined wholly by Municipal Laws. As for
Example; the Laws of Religion oblige us to be Just to all Men, and to do no
wrong. But the Laws of our Country are in a great many Cases the only Standard
whereby to discover what is Just and Right; and what is not. So also in the
Case before us. The Design of the Gospel as I take it, is to condemn all
Consociation of Man and Woman as Fornication but in the State of Marriage. But
then it must be the Laws of our Country that must determine what is Marriage
and what is not. Which consideration will yet have more Force if we add

3. That Marriage must suppose a Communion of Estates and Fortunes. For it
cannot be that Persons so united as to be accounted but One Flesh, should have
divided Interests, and separate Estates. They are the nearest Relations to each
other which the World affords. Our Parents from whom we derive our Being, and
whose Flesh and Blood we are, must yet, according to God's Command, yield to
this closer Bond of Unity. Man and Wife should be united in Heart, and Life,
and Properties. This is agreeable to the common Reason of Mankind; and therefore
the Roman Law declared Marriage to imply a perpetual Consortship of Life, ^ig.
l. 22. Tit. 2. l. 1.
with a Communication of all Divine and Humane Rights. Nuptiae sunt conjunctio
maris and feminae, and consortium omnis vitae, divini, and humani juris
communicatio. In order to this perpetual Consortship of Life; their Law
required that the Man should take the Woman to his own House, and this was
necessary to constitute a Marriage.

For thus it was enacted. Mulierem absenti per litter as ejus vel per nuntium
posse nubere placet, si in domum ejus deduceretur. A Woman might be married to
a Man that was absent, either by his Letters, or by a Messenger, provided that
she was brought into his House. I^. l 5.
Public Cohabitation was always required. And the Communication of their Rights
and Interests is by all Nations esteemed so Natural and Necessary that the
Wife, whether she brought any Dowry or no, has a Right to Maintenance out of
the Husbands Estate, though there preceded no Deed of Settlement. And the Husband
by Marriage becomes Proprietor of all that Fortune and Estate that before could
properly he called her own. To which end our Liturgy has properly inserted into
the Form of Marriage, with all my worldly Goods I thee endow.

For this reason a Public Solemnizing of Marriage according to the Laws of the
Land, becomes as Necessary to make their Cohabitation Lawful and Innocent: as
it is to the Legal Communication of the Interests and Estates. Whatever is
wanting to convey those Rights and Privileges which reason tells us Marriage
in the very Nature of it does and must confer, and which God himself must
therefore be supposed to intend: must needs hinder such from being Innocent and
Agreeable to the Laws of God; and must make that Consortship to have the Guilt
of Fornication. He and she then that are not Married according to the Laws of
the Church and State, and so as thereby to convey to each other, and to their
Children an undoubted Title to their Estates: are not Married as the Laws of
God require, but undoubtedly live in Fornication.

It Is true, a Man may by Deed of Gift, settle his Estate on his Miss, and her
Posterity, if he pleases. And so he may upon any Body else. But it is still in
his own Power whether he will or no. Or if he does, she is never the less
Infamous or Criminal for that. For we speak now of such a Communication of
Rights as has its Foundation in the very Nature of Marriage; and as the Laws
both of God and Man have made inseparable from it, and not left to a Man's
Arbitrary Determination; nothing therefore can be a true, lawful, innocent
Marriage or Consortship according to God's Original Institution: but what is so
celebrated with Legal Ceremonies, and Solemnities, as Publicly to declare them
to be One both in Affection and Interests, and mutual Partakers of each others
Inheritance and Fortune whether Good or Bad. All other Cohabitation is Sinful,
and forbidden.

4. Lastly, The solemnizing Marriage according to Custom of our Country is
necessary to prevent Infamy, and remove scandal. By the Laws of Christianity we
are bound to do only such things as are commendable and of good report; and to
give no offense to the World, or to the Church of God. And this cannot be in
the Consortship of Man and Woman without the Legal Solemnities of Marriage. For
as to the World things that do not appear are as though they did not exist. And
they that are not Legally Married, or do not Cohabit publicly as Man and Wife:
are in the Judgment of Mankind as Unmarried. God it is true knows the Hearts,
and Consciences of Men; but he does oblige us not only to do that which is in
it self Good, but to take care that what we do appears to be so, that our Good
Actions may shine to his Honor. He enjoins not only what is lawful, but also
what is Convenient. He commands not only what is Innocent, but what is also
commendable in the sight of all Men. And we must carefully avoid not only what
is in its nature Evil, but also what is without Offense or Scandal.

And this I am persuaded is a Good Reason why Legal Solemnization, and open
Cohabitation should be essentially necessary to constitute a Marriage in the
sense of Gods Law, as well as of the Laws of Men. For though it be confessed
that a Faithful, and Perpetual Consociation be the first Condition in the
Essence of Marriage, and that which is above all things required to make it
innocent: Yet, as we have seen already that is not all. There must be moreover
a communication of Right; And as the Laws of God consult not only the Natural
Morality of our Actions, but also his Honor in the Reputation of them; and the
edification and Good of our Brethren in avoiding Scandal and Offense: So much
must be necessary in the sense of Gods Law, to a Lawful Marriage, as may keep
it clear of infamy and reproach. Seeing it was his particular Design in this
Institution, to sanctify this estate, and make it Honorable, and of good
esteem: all such Consortship must needs be Criminal, and Guilty before him,
which by its disagreableness to our common Reason, and the common Approved
Institutions both of Church and State, becomes both Injurious and Scandalous.
It is therefore necessary, and essential to Marriage, even in the sense of Gods
Law that it should be Solemnly, and Legally celebrated. Hereby the Ends of it
may best be attained. Hereby Man and Wise become most strongly obliged to
perpetual cohabitation; their Rights are best communicated, and the Honor of
that State most eminently consulted. Hereby alone can it be easily
distinguished who are Married, and who live in Fornication.

If no more were required to make a real Marriage than the mutual Consent of
perpetual Consortship: how shall the World, and especially how shall the
Government be satisfied who are Married and who are not? How shall the Law
distinguish between those who have so consented, and who have not? How shall it
be known whose Children are Legitimate, and whose are not so? Or how shall the
greatest confusion imaginable be prevented in matters of Right or Wrong?
Legitimate Children have a Legal Right to the inheritance of their Parents: but
the illegitimate have none. And yet how shall this be determined: unless
Marriage be publicly and legally Solemnized. Again, here would be the greatest
encouragement to Fornication imaginable; in that Whoredom could not so easily
be distinguished. They who had not consented to this inseparable union would
appear in the same Reputation with those that had: if the Legal Solemnization
was once rejected as unnecessary to Marriage. And can that be free from Sin,
and without God's great displeasure, which is productive of such mighty
mischiefs?

To prevent all this confusion it has universally prevailed in all Nations:
Ignat. ad Polycarpum.
that Matrimony should be Publicly owned. In the Primitive times of
Christianity it was solemnized with the consent of the Bishop. And so agreeable
is this to the common sense of Mankind: that the Roman Law says, Simulatae
Nuptiae non sunt Nuptiae. Counterfeit Marriage is no Marriage. By which I
understand that which is not celebrated Solemnly, and Publicly as the Law
prescribes. Those that are thus Legally Married are Man and Wife, and their
Children Legitimate; the rest live in Fornication, and their Children are of
base and dishonorable Birth.

So that the Evils which unavoidably follow the neglect of Customary
Solemnities are a sufficient Argument how indispensably necessary they are, in
the Judgment of God as well as of Men. For God must be supposed to intend all
that as essential to Matrimony, which appears necessary to make it Honorable,
and to prevent such mighty Mischiefs. And therefore, if Men would but deal
faithfully with their own Consciences; it were easy to discover, that what is
contrary to the Laws of Government; capable of being abused to very ill
purposes; brings on Man and Woman the imputation of Whoredom; on their
Offspring the disgrace of Bastardy; is a scandal to the Church of God, and in
the sense of the World is esteemed and called Fornication: will undoubtedly
have the guilt of such before God, and can never, upon some Clandestine unknown
reserve, be found Innocent and Safe, and Justifiable at his dreadful and
impartial Tribunal, Marriage is Honorable and the Marriage Bed undefiled: but
Whoremongers and Adulterers God will Judge.

FINIS.

