A SERMON Preached before the KING In the Cathedral Church of WINCHESTER, Upon
Sunday, September. 9. 1683. BEING THE Day of Public Thanksgiving FOR THE
DELIVERANCE OF His Sacred Majesty's Person and Government From the Late
Treasonable CONSPIRACY. BY F. TVRNER, D. D. Dean of Windsor.

Published by his Majesty's special Command.



LONDON: Printed for Benj. Took, at the Ship in S. Paul's Churchyard. 1683.

A SERMON ON PSALM. cxliv. 9, 10.
I will sing a new Song unto thee, O God, and sing Praises unto thee upon a
ten-stringed Lute;

Thou have given Victory unto Kings: and have delivered David thy Servant from
the peril of the Sword.

IF ever any might presume to take up the words of David in another Psalm where
he says in behalf of himself and of God's own People, Like as we have heard so
have we seen in the City of our God, i. e. in the Church, God upholdeth the
same for ever; We may be allowed to take them up at this time, and to speak
them in our own behalf. If ever those words of his might be applied by way of
comparing the Great Deliverances which Almighty God has afforded to Kings and
Kingdoms in Ages past, with Mercies no less wonderful in the present Age; Then
I may justly apply those words with reference to the words of my Text: I take
it out of a Psalm appointed in part of our Office for this Solemn Thanksgiving;
and there is none but at first hearing my Text read may see it as it were
fulfilled once more in our own Story, and gloriously accomplished on this Good
Day: for we hear in my Text of a Victory given by God to a King, and now we see
a King who having stood as it were in a Battle not for a single day only, but
for several months, his Enemies are so disappointed, and defeated now, that we
may truly say, God has given him a Noble Victory: We hear of a King in my Text,
Delivered from the peril of the Sword; for it is plain this Psalm was written by
David after he was Established upon his Throne, since he speaks to God in the
second verse, my Deliverer, my Shield, and he in whom I trust, who subdueth my
People that is under me. But we cannot tell whether this Psalm were written
before or after his Encounters with Absalom, the Son of his own Bowels that
sought his Life, or with Sheba that managed a Rising in the City against him,
till the Loyal Party of the City prevailed, and the Traitor lost his Head:
therefore I make no reflection upon those passages, for it is more than I can
prove that David himself reflected upon them, here. But there is no question he
had an Eye to all the Terrible Hazards he had run before he was Crowned, when
Saul and his bloody house were hunting him like a Partridge upon the Mountains:
So that not his own House, which should be a Man's Castle and his Sanctuary;
not his own Bed, which was made to be quiet in; not those very places whither
he fled for Refuge, were free from the peril of the Sword.

This then we hear from the Text compared with the Story of that King; and (to
keep far enough off not only from cold and frivolous Parallels, but also from
odious Comparisons) I shall only say, we see a King preserved from the same
Implacable Enemy that has pursued him above these Forty Years; but a much more
formidable Enemy since he concealed his Enmity, than when he declared himself
openly, even by setting a Price upon the Most Sacred Head.

But David in all these Reflections either upon his Dangers or his Deliverances,
looks up to Heaven, he acknowledges, that the Race is not to the Swift, nor the
Battle to the Strong; and though it be added by Solomon that Time and Chance
happen to all things, his meaning was, that many things look indeed like
Chance, tho guided by a Hand of Providence, to most unseen, which yet was most
visible to King David in the whole Course of his Fortunes; therefore he gives
the Honor to God alone. He thanks him not only for his own prosperous
Successes, but in behalf of all the Crowned Heads in the World, it is he that
gives Victory unto Kings: to the same Great God of Heaven he ascribes their
Preservation from so many Horrid Conspiracies, as while there is a Devil in
Hell, and so many of his Agents upon Earth, will never cease to be carried on;
and when they are taken off, it is He the King of Kings that delivers his
Servant David, or by parity of reason, any other Sovereign Prince, that may be
styled his Servant, from the hurtful Sword.

Lastly, to complete the Solemnity and Honorary Part of his Thanksgivings upon
these Accounts, he resolves to celebrate his Victory and his Deliverance, with
such Music as is proper to be used in the Worship of God, and together with
Church-Musick to Introduce its best Sister and Heavenly Twin, i. e. Divine
Poetry, wherein he will endeavor at Higher and Nobler Strains than ordinary. I
will sing a new Song unto thee O God: I will sing Praises unto thee upon a
ten-stringed Lute.

Now I cannot deny but many of the modern Expositors are careful, in their
Descants on my Text, to instruct us that the religious Use of Instrumental
Music was purely Mosaical and Typical; that it was adapted to the grosser and
duller Constitution of the Jewish Votaries, but by no means to be taken for our
Pattern, nor imitated under the Gospel. But if all this were Typical, I would
gladly learn what a Ten-stringed Lute was a Type of; I would fain know too,
whether the Piety of those Reformers be so much more Refined and Exalted than
was that of David, that they refuse and despise such low Dispensations as
these, which he made good use of. I would willingly understand, why they are
not as well pleased with good Instrumental Music in some few Churches, as they
are with ill Vocal Music in many Churches. In short, if I find it in use with
other Nations as old as Homer's time, with Nations who never received the Law,
and with the Jews before they received the Law upon Mount Sinai, (for Miriam
the Sister of Aaron and the Virgins that bore her Company to celebrate their
Deliverance out of Egypt, played with their Timbrels and danced to the Song of
Moses) I must conclude it a piece of Natural Religion, to which the common
Light of Reason directs all Civilized Nations, especially upon any general
Jubilee and Public Thanksgiving; and if ever any Prince and People had reason
to sing Te Deum, to raise their Affections with Voices, and Strings and
Instruments of Wind fit for their Songs of Deliverance (as David calls them) we
have reason to do it on This Day.

Tho this being no common Day I must be more particular than to spend all my
time upon any Commonplace; yet I have warrant enough to draw from the special
Case of David toward some general Observations; for this Proposition, It is
God that gives Victory unto Kings, is virtually and implicitly universal; he
does not say that God always gives them Victory: We know it has been given
against the Best of Kings to the Worst of all his Subjects; but the meaning is,
that whenever a King is a Conqueror, God gives him Victory: Nor does he say
that Every Sovereign Prince is Constantly Delivered, as David was from the
Peril of the Sword. Alas was our late Royal Martyr so Delivered from it? In
the highest and truest sense of the word, he was never more delivered from all
the Evils of this World than when he was delivered up by Gods unsearchable
Counsels to the Will of his Enemies; but yet not so delivered as David with a
Temporal Deliverance. This only can be gathered, that whenever these Sacred
Princes are so delivered as to be preserved from the Sword, (and so they are
most frequently;) so as to be rescued out of the very Jaws of Death, it is by an
extraordinary Vigilance of the Divine Providence over them, it is God is their
Guardian, and not Man. There is no King (says the same Royal Prophet in another
place) that can be saved by the Multitude of an Host; a mighty Man is not
delivered by much strength. i. e. it is not the Number of his Forces that can
secure the greatest Prince, nor the Courage and Power of the most Giant-like
man, no, though he has never so numerous a Party on his side, that can Preserve
or Sustain him. And as no King is to put his Trust in the Number or the
Fortitude of his People, so neither is any People to Confide in the Wisdom of
their Heads, or in the vastness of their Body, to oppose their Lawful Prince;
for it follows, the Lord brings the Counsel of the Heathen to naught, He
makes the Devices of the People of none effect. Now in the Book of Psalms the
Heathen do commonly signify the Godless-men: So it is as if he had said,
whatsoever Godless men design or propose to themselves contrary to the Will of
God, he blasts and frustrates their Plots, he dissipates all their Cabals, he
unravels all their Intrigues, be they never so cunningly managed by such as
have erected themselves into Secret Councils, be they never so strongly backed
by Factious Associations; still God does in his good time make it appear, that
he governs the World, he makes them feel his hand that think to wrest the
Scepter from them that hold it for him. Whoever they are that use indirect and
unlawful means to Raise or Establish, or but to Secure themselves, to set up as
it were for themselves, without God in the World; they take the certain course
either to miscarry with their Design, or if they do gain their Point, yet their
Success it self is a judgment upon them: proportionable to the greatness of
their Sin will be their Punishment; which if it comes in this world, is
commonly fetched out of the very bowels of the Sin that deserved it, and so as
the Hand of God is illustriously visible in it.

But to be more distinct, I shall lay the main design of my Text into these
three Heads of my Discourse.

1. I take the first of them from the very words of David, That since it is God
who gives Victory unto Kings, it is better to trust in the Lord, than to put
any confidence in man.

2. Secondly, That such as will not trust in God as a Deliverer from any
Dangers they fear, but will take the Sword against their Lawful Prince upon any
Pretense whatsoever; their Sentence is read in the words of our Blessed
Savior; They that take the Sword shall Perish by the Sword.

3. Thirdly, That there is a Peculiar hand of Providence over Kings and Princes
to deliver them from the hurtful Sword; and so also over all their Loyal
Subjects and Good People, that will but trust God and walk in his holy ways.

First then, Since it is God who gives Victory unto Kings, it is better to
trust in the Lord, than to put any Confidence in man. What need I look any
farther for Proof of so plain a thing than to this Great Man in the Text?

When he yielded to that great Temptation of Numbering the People, an Act which
God interpreted to be relying on the Arm of Flesh, and priding himself in the
many that he had at his Service, instead of depending upon God, then God was
pleased immediately to show Himself; the vast Muster-Roll of his Fighting men
was quickly diminished by an Epidemical Plague, a Judgment worthy of God; a
fair warning for every Great Man that puts his trust in the Multitude,
especially for him that follows a Multitude to do Evil, though he vainly supposes
that Good may come of it, or at least that a great Evil and Mischief cannot be
avoided but by running along with the stream. This Principle of yielding, and
steering a crooked Course for fear of the Torrent, was by a Noble English
Martyr within the memory of man, most Christianly Confessed and Condemned with
his last breath, as that which had brought upon him the Guilt of Innocent Blood
Ld. Capel.
. In such hard Cases as these, the resolution of David (though somewhat of the
latest for him after he had Numbered the People) should be our Rule, Let us now
fall into hands of the Lord, for his mercies are great, and let us not fall
into the hands of men: Then how low soever we may fall we are sure to fall
decently, with an humble greatness, and with the honest Pride of a good
Conscience; nay then we have reason to be consident, that God is on our right
hand, therefore we shall not fall, by those floods of Belial; or, those
overflowings of ungodly men, which made even David afraid; for God takes to
himself this Glory, that He stills the raging of the Sea, and the noise of its
Waves, and the madness of the People.

But if ever any one thought to carry all before him by the Number and Force of
his Armed men, in spite of the Living God, it was Senacherib; The Speech that
was spoken in his Name by Rabshekah to the People on the Wall, was like that of
the Giant Capaneus, whom the Poet represents upon the Walls of Thebes daring
and defying all the Gods of Heaven and of Earth. But when the Tumor of the
Assyrians Pride was lanc'd by an Angel's Sword, (which in one Night cut off a
hundred fourscore and five thousand of his fighting men; and so gave a great
Victory to the King of Israel, and so delivered Hezekiah the Son of David, from
the hurtful Sword) then does not Senacherib blush by falling low on his Face to
a God of wood or of stone to give himself the Lie; he that confessed no other
God than his own strong Arm (to that alone he gives the Attribute of
Omnipotence) he is found upon his Knees to his God Nisroch; he who not only
despised the Servants and Worshippers of the God of Israel, but in comparison
of his own strength, derided the Power of a Deity, and pricked all his Religion
upon the end of his Sword, this Scorner of God is slain by two of of his own
Sons while he was crouching to a thing without Sense or Life; in the very Act
of his Public Adoration, God in his infinite Wisdom ordering it so, that he
should seal his Faith (such a faith as it was) with his own Blood, that not
only his Crime and his Punishment; but his Recantation too might be published
to all the World.

But sure I may take your Assent to this for granted, that it is better to trust
in God than to put any Confidence in Man.

2. I proceed in the second place to show more largely, That such as will not
trust in God as a deliverer from any dangers they fear, but will take the Sword
against their Lawful Prince, upon any pretense whatsoever, their Sentence is
read in the words of our blessed Savior, They that take the Sword shall perish
with the Sword.

This also will best appear by some clear and proper Examples, even David the
Hero in my Text, He who had showed himself infinitely tender of touching the
Lords Anointed, though himself were the next to succeed, when he made but one
false Step in point of Duty to his King and Love to his Country, it cost him
almost as dear as his very Life; for when King Saul had driven him from his
Country, when being pursued and persecuted to extremity, he did but fly for
refuge to the Philistines, those mortal Enemies of Israel, how quickly do they
call his sins to remembrance? Is this not David of whom they sang one to
another, Saul has slain his Thousands and David his Ten Thousands? Then was he
fain wisely to act the fool, and to counterfeit the Madman, to let his spittle
fall down upon his Beard. Yet was not that so abject or so ridiculous a
spectacle as to see one lick the spittle of the people from the very Ground, as
the greatest man must do that would court a Party, and set up for base
Popularity: He must be contented not only to play the fool for Company, and to
cant with them; but he must play the Bedlam too, or else he must leave his
Party. Well under this Disguise of a man that had lost his wits, and was not
worth their looking after, David escapes from that fatal Court to a Cave; He
raises some forces: nor was he to blame for this, to go about with a Guard,
when his Life was unjustly attempted by the Philistines, the common Enemy. Every
one (we are told) that was in debt, and every one that was discontented
gathered themselves unto him; Multi quibus Vtile Bellum, many to whom War and
Troubles would afford a subsistence: now he thought himself considerable enough
with his flying Army to offer his service again to the same King Achish of
Gath; and personating the Lunatic no more, he is kindly received there. And
yet it is plain he never intended to make War on their Side against his own
Prince and People, for while he dwelt among them he diverted and employed his
Forces another way against some of the Borderers, the Old Enemies of Israel.
But then to what cruel hardships was he reduced, even to put all to the Sword,
that none might survive to tell any Tales of him? What pitiful Evasions; what
officious Equivocations was he driven upon, to make the Philistines believe
that he was heartily theirs? and then does King Achish bring him to the Test,
to fight with Israel? And Achish said unto David, Know thou assuredly that thou
shall go out with me to Battle, thou and thy men. There Is no stepping back for
a man once engaged on the wrong side, he must either go throughout with his new
Friends, or quit them in plain Field. He answers the Prince whom he had made
his Master, in general terms, Surely thou shall know what thy Servant can do.
He and his men keep in the Rear on the Day of Battle; what he meant to do, or
which way he designed to extricate himself out of these Difficulties into which
his false Politics had cast him, it is impossible for us to determine. Perhaps
he would have thrown himself and his Forces between the two Armies, to prevent
the Fight and to mediate a Peace, and so he would have satisfied both his
Obligations, the one of Loyalty to his Prince, the other of Gratitude to his
Protector.

But the Providence of God decided the Case and drew him out of the Snare, but
made him take shame upon him, when the Princes of the Philistines urged their
King to send him away in disgrace, Make this fellow return, and let him not go
down with us to Battle, lest in the Battle he be an Adversary to us, for
wherewith should he reconcile himself to his Master, should it not be with the
Heads of these men? Thus they in a manner cashiered him, as one to be justly
suspected for a double Traitor; and though they censured him unjustly, yet the
whole Story may serve to strengthen my Conclusion; which David had often
experimented to be most true; that as an humble Confidence of Gods Protection
over us, if we resolve to live in his most holy fear, is the most infallible
course we can take to continue in safety, so on the other side all Policy that
swerves from the strict Rule of Conscience, does rather procure than prevent
extreme Danger.

But to confirm this observation from Experience older than David and yet still
to keep within the Sacred story. The Men of Israel said unto Gideon (that was
in the time of the Judges) Rule thou over us, both thou and thy Son and thy
Sons Son also. Almighty God had chosen him before to be their Leader and Chief;
but what they offer him now was more than an Act of Recognition, or an
Acknowledgment of his Right; for by this Act they bind themselves and their
Posterity to be subject to him and his. But how did they keep their Faith with
him? Much at the same rate as the unconstant Multitude is wont to keep it. As
soon as Gideon was dead, Abimelech his Son by a Concubine (as he is styled)
insinuates himself into them; They furnish him with money under hand, wherewith
he hires vain and light Persons to follow him; for commonly such are the
Followers of Mock-Princes: with the help of this Noble Retinue he assassinates
all the seventy legitimate Sons of his Father upon one stone; yet the People
have still that wicked Partiality for him as to make him their King; But how
did this Murderous Traitor and his Abettors prosper? Jotham the Youngest Son of
Gideon and the only Son that survived the Massacre, cries as a Prophet from God
against the Usurper; and denounces that fire shall come out of the Bramble (so
in his Parable he calls that Base Son) and that this fire shall devour their
Cedars of Lebanon, their Noble men that raised him. And presently after that,
we shall find that their Underwoods, i. e. the Common People were destroyed in
the flame of their own blowing up. For the next account we receive is, that God
sent an Evil Spirit between Abimelech and the men of Sichem: He sent i. e. he
suffered the Devil as his Instrument of Vengeance to go, and he gave him power
over them: And now they grow as weary of their Pageant as once they were fond
of it; they hold their Close Meetings against him, it is said they met in the
House of their God to Eat and Drink, and to Curse Abimelech; this was to turn
their Church into a True Conventicle, where they carried on the work of the day
in their two laudable Exercises, whereof one was inveighing against the
Government, though it was of their own setting up; and the other was indulging
their sensual Appetites under the Cloak of Religion. Then we are told, the men
of Sichem dealt Treacherously with Abimelech, as those that have once been
fellow-Traitors to their Lawful Governors do seldom long continue faithful to
one another. What Tumults there followed? What Insurrections? How the Fields
were dyed with gore, and how much Blood ran down the Streets of their City, you
may read in that noble Story; which finishes at last in the most ignominious
Death of that mighty Man, who took not God for his strength, he perishes by the
hand of a Woman. To make it the more remarkable; he that had murdered seventy
of his Brethren upon one stone, has his own Brains dashed out by another stone:
and to show that the hand of God was in all this, we are told expressly, And all
the Evil of the Men of Sichem did God render upon their own heads, and upon
them came the Curse of Jotham.

But because this distrusting of God and (instead of doing that which David
presses so passionately, O tarry thou the Lords leisure) being ready to say
with that impious Nobleman that was at last trodden to Death by the People,
Why tarry we for the Lord any longer? Because this fatal Impatience seems to be
now one of our National Sins, I shall urge against the sad effects of it some
such Examples as shall be National and Virtually a Multitude of Examples;
Zedekiah the King of Judah having absolutely submitted to the great King of
Babylon, it is said he Rebelled against King Nebuchadnezzar, who had made him
swear by God: Therefore by the way, the resisting a Lawful Prince to whom an
Oath of Obedience has once been taken, though he be a Heathen Prince, as
Nebuchadnezzar was, is no better than a downright Perjury, and a wicked
Rebellion. So Jeremiah the poor despised Prophet of God implies it to be
throughout his Prophecy. But what if these men were perjured Rebels? yet this
was always their Note concerning themselves, The Temple of the Lord, the Temple
of the Lord are these, i. e. they were the Godly, they were the Saints; just as
the True Protestant, the True Protestant, is now the Common Cry of those who
think that Title a good Apology, and a sufficient Plea to legitimate Perjury
and Rebellion, nay more, he is sure to be called a Factor for Babylon (as
Jeremiah was called) that dares but call it Perjury and Rebellion. But by
whatever Names they are pleased to call us, I must tell them by the way, since
in Opposition to their Rebellion we have held our Lives so long at the mercy of
their Perjury, and yet they have found to their Cost that we have stood our
ground still in the Church of England; they that have tried us at this rate
have given a sufficient proof that we are ready to lay down our Lives for the
Church of England. We can say no more than this, and we ought to say no less.
But to return from this short occasional digression to the Story of that
Rebellion I was relating; What came of it? That easy misguided Prince Zedekiah
was utterly lost, his very Eyes were not left him but only so long as to see
his Sons put to the Sword; the Temple that was their Glory, and which they
turned into their Vain Glory, was burnt by Nebuzaradun the Assyrian General,
the main Body of the People was carried away Captive into that same Babylon,
that Heathenish Country which they so justly abhorred.

Again, the same turbulent and restless People being after many Ages in some
degree re-establisht by the Valor of the Maccabees, had made an entire and
necessary surrender of themselves to the Romans as to their Lords and Masters.
Fo fear of giving Umbrage to the Romans of any other Pretender to the Crown but
Caesar, their carsed Politician Caiaphas was for putting our Blessed Lord to
death: those two words Venient Romani, the Romans will come and take away both
our Place and Nation, were effectual incentives to stir up the People to Cry,
Crucify him, Crucify him: As now to Cry loud enough Popery will come in and
swallow us up, serves all the turns of any great Incendiary to break through
all Human and Divine Laws. But how were those Pharisees and Sadduces, those
Hypocrites and Atheists destroyed by themselves? their shedding innocent blood
(and it was the Blood of God) brought upon them a deluge of blood; at last
their open Rebellion against the Romans, their lawful Governors at that time,
caused their whole Nation to be plucked up by the very roots, and to make the
Judgment more apparent, when Titus the Roman came and burnt their Temple again,
so many Ages after its first Destruction, that second Desolation came upon them
(says Josephus their great Historian) Josp. de Bell. Jud. l. 7. c. 9.
in the same Month, on the same day of the Month that the former fell upon; and
when by the same division of Priests and Levites, the same Divine Service was
reading in course; viz. that Psalm, which was written in Admiration of Gods
vindictive Justice, O God, to whom Vengeance belongs, thou God to whom
Vengeance belongs show thy self.

3. After such instances as these, I shall need no more: and in hopes I have
gained this second Point, that such as will needs take the sword against their
lawful Prince shall perish with the sword, I make have to my Third and Last
Part, That there is a peculiar hand of providence over Kings and Princes; to
deliver them from the hurtful Sword: so also over all their Loyal Subjects and
Good People that will but trust God and walk in his Holy ways.

Now then let us look back on the other side, and see but how well they fard in
those same great Conjunctures and Revolutions who took the Prophets Advice to
cease from man, i. e. to trust in God: Upon how easy terms was the whole
Nation offered by God to be preserved? He does as it were renew his old
promise, to fight for them while they should hold their peace, if they would
but reform their Lives: thus says the Lord amend our ways and your doings, and
I will cause you to dwell in this place. See how God takes to himself the
Ordering of State Affairs, as the first Mover and Manager of all second Causes,
then I will cause you to dwell in the Land that I gave to your Fathers. But the
greater number of that People would not take God's word, and he dealt with them
accordingly: But how was the patient and the peaceful temper of mind signally
rewarded in the Preservation of Jeremiah, and the Remnant his little Party? how
was submission and obedience to their Chief (tho he were dead and gone) nobly
requited to Jeremiahs beloved Rechabites in that very time of the Siege?
because they kept to those Constitutions which they had received from their
Ancestor, they had a gracious and a glorious promise from God, Jonadab the Son
of Rechab shall not want a man to stand before me for ever. Under what part of
Heaven soever they have lived, I believe God, that this Religious Family was
preserved (when the whole Nation was almost extinguished) to last the outmost
date of this most true Promise. And if any faith may be given to a Jewish
Author, who Travailed over the greatest part of the habitable World, to visit
the dispersed of his own Nation Benj. Tudel.
; he assures us in his Itinerary, that whatever becomes of his Countrymen the
Sons of Abraham, yet the Posterity of Rechab do still subsist; that they enjoy
a fair Territory; that they have built a strong City, (which they were not for
bidden to do for their necessary defense) and are very formidable Neighbors to
other petty States among the Arabs at this day. Just so it fell out again at
the second destruction of Jerusalem, when the Romans took it; Gallus began the
Siege, but raised it again without any reason imaginable, except this account
may be given of it, that he was overruled from above, to open a passage for
the Christians (who in those days followed nothing but Peace and Holiness) to
fly to the Mountains; so that when Titus came a few months after to renew the
Siege, there was not one Christian left in Jerusalem. Eusebius. l. 3. c. 5.
We must needs believe the most Auihentick Writers of that Story, that the
Christians all escaped to Pella, a City beyond Jordan, while the seditious Jews
were not only cut off by the Romans, but were all the while killing and
slaying, and damning one another.

Take but one instance more of God's extraordinary Care of those that will but
give credence to his Word, and keep themselves within any tolerable compass of
doing their duty; but it shall be an instance reaching from the beginning to
the last fatal End of the Jewish Government; for during all that time Almighty
God was pleased to work more than an Anniversary Miracle for their sakes, when
the Tribes of Israel went up to their great Solemnities thrice in the Year,
leaving their whole Country naked and in a manner exposed to a Foreign Invasion,
God visibly and gloriously performed what he had engaged to do for their
Security; for he struck their Neighbour-Nations and Powerful Cities that were
at Enmity with them, with Panic Fears, and the Terror of the Lord was upon
them, that they drust make no Inroads on the Holy Land, however abandoned for
the Time by most of its own Inhabitants: According to that assurance given 'em
in that wonderful place of Scripture, Exodus, xxxiv. 24. For I will cast out
the Nations before thee and enlarge thy borders: neither shall any man desire
thy Land when thou go up to appear before the Lord thy God thrice in the
Year.

But if such and so extraordinary has been the Providence of God in the
preservation of the obedient People; much more remarkable has the Divine
Protection been over the Sacred Persons of Kings and Princes. I have not time
to expatiate on so noble a Theme, I will come presently home to the wonderful
Instance now before us, and to the peculiar business of this Day: How was our
Native Country, this fruitful Soil, like to have been stained with a most
barbarous Assassination of our Sovereign Lord the King and his Royal Brother,
had not their Lives been precious in the sight of God! There had an Acre of
Ground been made an Aceldama, a Field of Blood, and consider pray, you that
have in your minds the situation of the place where this most horrible Treason
should have been acted; was there ever a place more cunningly found out for the
Execution of so damnable a Design? an Enclosure, an errand Pound; in the midst
of it a House as convenient for the reception of all the Conspirators as the
Master of that House was proper to make One at the head of that execrable Crew.
Set then before your Eyes those lamentable Images, (but most necessary to make
us sensible of our great deliverance) a number of murderous Phanaticks in whose
sight Blood was as nothing, and Royal Blood no more to them than the meanest,
nay the more meritorious Sacrifice; suppose those Armed Traitors rushing out of
their lurking-place, while our Fearless Princes had been talking of indifferent
things, or while they had been reposing themselves in their Journey, pent up in
a Coach, disabled even from drawing their Swords, or Dying Nobly; and for a few
of their Guards what could they have done? Alas the Blow would have been given
before they could have apprehended their Master to be in danger. This was a
perfect Powder Plot in the most literal sense, the deed had been done before
the noise had been heard, the greatest Courage upon Earth had been useless
there; in an instant the Furies had gained their hellish point, had not Heaven
been watchful over us.

If ever you hear Gods Providence called in question by our bold Atheists,
choke them with the fire at New Market, which hastening the King away, spoiled
the whole Train that was laid, and by the loss of a few Houses prevented three
great Kingdoms from perishing together in one Flame. For can you believe or
imagine that all would have ended in a Massacre of the Royal Family? No, doubt
you not, the Massacre would have been carried on as far as they could against
all the Royal Party. What else could they intend? what other thing could they
wish? what other cause of acting so detestable a Treason? for to take off a
most merciful King, and his next Successor, who next to him has showed himself
of a most reconcilable Temper; to do all this with a purpose of calling in the
next of Kin to the Crown, who was bound in honor and conscience to take
vengeance upon them; or with a purpose of setting up some other single Person
that had no Right; this is a degree of madness which none of these shrewd
Phanaticks have to plead in their own excuse. Bring forth the Blind that have
Eyes, and the deaf that have Ears (as Isaiah speaks) If any man will not see a
thing so clear as this, or if any one will not hear this certain truth, That
this Conspiracy was the goodly fruit of that Worthy Association; the design of
which was to establish their Commonwealth in the State, and to introduce a
Chaos or deformed mass of all Religions under the false Pretense and
counterfeit Title of One Protestant Religion in the Church. But then to bring
this to pass, though God only knows what they could have effected, yet they must
needs have intended to cut off immediately all men of note that had adhered to
the Crown, all that had been true to the Church, all that had behaved
themselves honestly in the last perplexed Five years: Ye had all been Popishly
Affected at least, and the Protestant Flails (as they call 'em) had flown about
your Ears long ago. My thoughts are lost and drowned in the horror of what
would have followed; I may be allowed to use that Metaphor of Drowning, for
David uses it here, praying Almighty God to save him and deliver him out of the
great waters, from the hand of strange Children; for a Popular Insurrection is
like an inundation in the Night, when the Sea beats down its walls: A Tyrant
makes indeed a horrible noise like Thunder, but he, like that, does seldom
destroy any great numbers; but an Enthusiastic Multitude breaking loose, does,
like the raging waves, make no distinction or stop, it bears down all
impetuously that stands before it. I speak not only with regard to those Loyal
Noblemen and principal Ministers of State, and Magistrates of the great City,
that were marked out and condemned to have fallen with the King, and a
particular Butcher provided for each one of them, But I must say it to all the
worthy Patriots in this Great Assembly, they ought to make a present of their
Lives and give them back again to the Service of God (whose Service is perfect
Freedom) for perhaps there is not a man among them but owes his Life to the
Goodness of God in this discovery; for what did not those Barbarians swallow in
their own thoughts? Whose Blood did not those Cannibals thirst after? Upon
whose Estate and Fortunes had they not fixed their envious and impudent Eyes? As
great a shame as it is for some profligate and desperate Wretches to have been
left out of the Caballs that managed this Conspiracy, merely because they knew
them to be made up of so much Treachery and Falseness, they would not be true,
no not to themselves; So great a Shame would it have been for any Worthy Men
not to have been in their List of Men worthy; It would have been a Scandal
indeed for any man of Honor and of Conscience to have been suffered to Live by
them, to have survived the Royal Family, and so many good Subjects as would
have fallen with it, had the Villains prevailed.

And yet perhaps they would have spared the Complying men as not worth their
Anger, such men as resolve to thrive under all Governments, or can at least be
well content to sit still, indifferent and unconcerned whatever Religion is
uppermost in the Church: they are Animals incombustible for Religion, (as one
defines them) and whatever Interest prevails in the State, they laugh at the
Notion of being State-Martyrs.

I wish this sort of men who please themselves with being so Passive in so
Active times as these, would consider what kind of Censure or Sentence rather,
an Heathen Legislator has past upon them; Amongst the Laws of S^lon (says
Plutarch, the writer of his Life) that is very peculiar and surprising, which
makes all those Infamous, who stand Neuters in a Sedition: for it seems he
would not have any one Insensible and Regardless of the Public, and securing
his private affairs glory that he had no feeling of the Distempers of his
Country, but presently join with those that had the Right upon their side,
assist and venture with them rather than shift out of harms-way, and watch who
would get the better. These are the words of that wise man, stating and
declaring the concern that every Private man ought to show when his Prince or
his Country are in danger.

But now for any of those that are in a public trust or have a more special
obligation to be upon the watch for the safety of the King and Kingdom; if such
men are asleep David being yet a subject, tell's them plainly, as the Lord
lives (says he) ye are worthy to die, because ye have not kept your master the
Lords Anointed. Awake then you that together with the land which the Lord gave
to your Fathers, inherit their virtue too, the old English Loyalty and Courage:
lay out your thoughts upon something more worthy of your selves than are
thoughts only of your own security: let every one in his Station do his duty
fearlessly: And they that do so prove for the most part the wisest as well as
the most conscientious, the safest as well as the noblest and best Patriots;
let us set it down to our selves that Honesty is the true Policy, and let none
make that accursed Conversion of the Proposition, as if Policy were the true
Honesty; unless they mean to revive that old abominable Gnostick Principle of
compliance with any Usurpations, or Impositions, for fear of Suffering, for
fear of that which a Christian would rather wish for his own sake, could it be
without other men's guilt, i. e. the Crown of Martyrdom; Ita te alius senem cum
Petro cingat, That was St. Hierom's good wish to Damasus then Bishop of Rome,
So let another hind thee when thou art old, as St. Peter was bound, that was,
to be carried to Martyrdom. This would seem but a course Complement, a piece of
ill Courtship now, A wish (says Erasmus) if any now should make it in behalf of
his Holiness and present it in an Epistle to him, I wonder (says he) what
Reward he would assign him? Crucem opinor. But let the worst come to the worst
(as they say) if this be the worst, that it shall please Christ to call any of
us as the Angel from Heaven called St. John the Apostle, come up hither, shall
it be enough to deter us from going thither, that first he may happen to call
us as he did St. Peter, Follow me, that is through death? What a noble Army of
Martyrs have followed the great Captain of our Salvation? The Church the Field
of God has been manured, and enriched with the noblest compost in the World,
the Blood of Martyrs; The times and seasons of the Year are bounded out and
signalized by the dying Days of Martyrs: The Christian Temples are dedicated to
the Memorials of the Martyrs, and Miracles were undeniably wrought at the
Monuments of the Blessed Martyrs. After all this, men of soft and smooth
insinuations would introduce a Principle of Self-Preservation (as they call it)
as if it were unworthy, as if it were unlawful to suffer any thing like
Martyrdom, nay as if it were more Christian to be Rebels and Regicides, than be
so much as Confessors in the Cause of Christ.

But we that have been saved from the Massacre, we that have received a great
and new Mercy our selves in this last wonderful Deliverance of the King from
the hands of his Enemies; have we not reason to sing a new Song unto God, to
sing praises unto him? And I make no doubt but many of those his Enemies will
now change their note, and let them sing our new Song, and let it come from the
ground of the Heart, as the Psalmist speaks, Give thanks, O Israel, to God the
Lord in the Congregation, from the ground of the heart, let them join with us
here in the Offices of the Church to bless Almighty God for this Day, and for
this happy Discovery; Upon these terms they are welcome not only to our
Communion, but to that of the Angels in Heaven; for there is joy in the
presence of the Angels of God over one Sinner that Repents, then much more
joy over many Repenting Sinners. But then I must press them vehemently to bring
forth fruits worthy of Repentance. What Love; what Duty do they owe to God and
the King, out of pure gratitude for being afforded as great a deliverance as
ours, a deliverance from themselves, from the Plague of their own hearts? If
they sorrow after a godly sort, as the Corinthians did for having sided with
that Incestuous Person, they will run through all the Apostles scale of
Repentance. What carefulness will it work in them? what clearing of themselves?
what indignation? yea what fear? yea what vehement desire? yea what zeal? yea
what revenge? If any Catiline hereafter shall dare to come into the Senate,
they will presently rise from his Side, (as Caesar and Crassus did, though they
both had abetted him formerly;) he will see himself deserted, and ready to be
detected by those that once encouraged him; Thus they may easily recover the
false steps they have made by the Services they may do; and all this is little
enough for their own and the Public Security. For I must needs observe to you,
that the King in my Text after he had offered Thanks to God for delivering him
from the peril of the Sword, did not yet think himself so mighty safe, but that
he had need to Pray in the very next words, Save me and deliver me from the
hands of strange Children! and what sort of men were those? his open Enemies?
No, they were the strange Children that dissembled with him. For there are many
that kiss the hand which they would cut off, and we know by what Name he was
called who Kissed his Lord and Master even then when he led up the Band of men to
seize him: it was the Traitor Judas; yet did not Christ reject his Address, but
gave him the title of Friend. But our Blessed Savior himself has given out the
surest Test for prerended Converts, and he gave it to St. Peter upon foresight
that he would deny his Master, when thou art Converted strengthen thy Brethren;
such Infant Converts as those whose tender and weak Loyalty is now in danger of
being over-laid and stifled by the pressing importunity of the Party: They
whose own Eyes are opened should endeavor to reduce those whom their ill
Example has been the cause of misleading. But especially they that have been
guilty of Spiriting others away (for so it may well be called,) They ought to
have dreadful apprehensions of the Curse upon those that lead the Blind out of
the way, unless they take care and pains to bring them home to their Duty. And
now is the time, now that such hidden works of darkness have been brought to
light; that they must be blind indeed who will not see them: now that such
prodigies of Villainy, have been discovered, that he is the greatest prodigy of
all that disbelieves, or denies them: Now that also so great a number, though I
will not say the third Part of the Stars are smillen down (as they were in St.
John's Vision) yet now that so many who shined heretofore in their proper Orbs
are fallen: Now the Apostle will be allowed to be in the Right, that Evil
Communications corrupt good manners; and though it is now to be hoped that noble
minds will consort with none hereafter as their Friends but with those of their
own temper; but though not presently as Friends, until they have reason to
believe their Friendship on both sides is founded upon Virtue, yet as
Physicians, I must tell them from our Blessed Savior, the whole need not the
Physician, but those that are sick; then certainly those that are poisoned have
not only need but right to have an Antidote given' em by the same hand that
hurt' em. And what a noble change, or rather what a glorious Transfiguration
would be wrought upon these men, that were lately such instruments of Mischief;
would they now turn Saviors in their kind, such as the Prophet gives God
thanks for, thou gave them Saviors who saved them out of the hands of their
Enemies. Nehem. ix. 27.

And this I have said to those deluded men who I hope are coming to themselves.
But for the Atheists who make up one main strength of the Party against us; I
will not lose my time in exhorting them to be Loyal, but rather employ it in
imploring for them this only Charity of which they are capable, that they may
be severely punished and treated according to their merit. Let not such
wretched men be bolder in Blaspheming God and the King, than we are in
Asserting and Maintaining our Duty to them both. To what a height of this
Virtue was David come, when he was able to say like one who had no longer any
human thoughts about him, the Zeal of thy House has eaten me up, as a mighty
flame devours whatever stand in its way: and it follows, the Rebukes of them
that rebuked thee are fallen upon me. Again the same Royal Confessor, for thy
sake (says he) have I suffered reproof, shame has covered my face, i. e. (says
S. Austin upon that Psalm) I was contented to be thought a shameless person,
because I would not be ashamed of my Religion. Thou have need of this
Confidence (says he) to encounter some Peoples impudence; When they upbraid
thee for being a worshipper of one that was hanged upon a Tree, if thou do
blush for shame thou art Guilty (says he) of a grievous Sin -- Quid fronti
times quam signo crucis armasti -- prorsus esto frontosus. (i. e.) Remember
that thou were armed in thy forehead with the sign of the Cross, (so long ago
it was used) therefore be not weak-foreheaded (says he) in the Cause of God.

As Heroic an example of such a pious magnanimity as this in David, was that
in King Lewis of France, I mean him whom they style the Saint, and well they
may style him so upon this account; that having made an Edict against
Atheistical or profane talking, with this Penalty annexed, that the Guilty
Person should be Branded in the Forehead with a hot Iron, when great
Intercession was used to procure a Pardon for a certain Right Honorable
Offender, the King commanded that Execution should be done immediately, and
added this memorable saying, That he would gladly t^^e the Brand in his own
Forehead, on condition the name of God should no more be blasphemed in his
Kingdom.

But having done with our Enemies, before I conclude, there is somewhat to be
said to our Friends, to our selves: If we sing a new Song unto God for this
Deliverance, If we sing praises unto him, then the Son of Syrach will tell us,
that praise is not comely in the mouth of a sinner, for it was not sent him of
the Lord. If therefore we will sing a new Song of Praise to God as we ought to
do, then we must lead new lives too: we must consider that the most deceitful
enemy of all is within, Intus hostis, intus periculum, and the greatest victory
that we have to gain in this world, is over our selves, and within our selves;
a victory over our own unruly passions within us; For he that is slow to anger
is better than the mighty, and he that rules his spirit than he that takes a
City, Prove. 16. 32. and a victory over the many Temptations from without,
conspiring with the Tempters within us; For he that resists pleasures
crowns his life, Ecclus. 19. 5. This were indeed a glorious victory: it is
properly that which the Apostle calls overcoming the world: and if Alexander
deserved to be styled the Great for Conquering but some parts of it, when yet
his wild Appetites had the dominion over him; then let but these be subdued,
and we justly triumph.

Such a deliverance from our Lusts, would be a mercy transcendently greater
than even this by which God has given us our lives; for that would save our
souls too. The greatest courage in the world may find room enough to exercise
and show it self in a thorough Penitent; as it is excellently argued by S.
Chrysostom, That David showed a more undaunted greatness of mind in daring to
think of surmounting the sin, and the shame, and to set up again for a Saint,
after his foul, Treacherous, and Bloody Offense in the matter of Uriah, than he
had shewn' in his single Combat with Goliath of Gath. But a Victory that gives
not God this glory, a Victory that leaves it to be said of us, they repented
not to give him Glory, such a Victory may be more perilous than even the Sword
it self from which we are delivered. Good Fortune, unless we use it reverently,
joining good Minds to good Fortune, may be one of the dangerousest things that
can happen to us: But as to mend our lives would be to make the best use of our
present advantage; as to forsake our sins would be the bravest conquest over
ourselves: so it would be the height of Gratitude for our Deliverance. The
Heathens on such an occasion as this would have built a Temple to Jupiter the
Conservatory But this would be done like Christians indeed, to dedicate our
selves as Temples of the Holy Ghost, to God the Preserver of men, as the
Prophet styles him.

Let this great work be done, and then we may conclude with the Psalm, and
secure our selves of all the Temporal Blessings here annexed to sincere Piety,
That our Sons shall grow up as the young plants, That our Garners shall be full
and plenteous with all manner of store, That our sheep shall bring forth
thousands and ten thousands, that so there may be no decay, no leading into
captivity, nor no complaining in our streets; Happy are the people that are in
such a case; yea, Blessed are the People who have the Lord for their God: which
God we ought All to Adore, Invoke, and most humbly Beseech that the Church,
which it was his good Providence so to Reform, as to make it the Best, the
Purest, the most Apostolical of any Church upon Earth; This he would vouchsafe
to Preserve (now that all her Enemies are vanquished by dint of Argument) from
Perishing by the Sword in the Person of Her Gracious Sovereign, since she never
takes the Sword against Her Lawful Sovereign. To which good Prayer let me but
add those Petitions which a most ancient Writer tells us the Primitive
Christians used to make for their Emperor; For his long Life, for the Peace of
his Empire, for the safety of the Royal Family, for Valiant Soldiers under him,
for a Faithful Senate, an Honest Commonalty, a Quiet World, and whatsoever else
ought to be the subject of our Prayers, as He is a man whom we pray for, or as
He is Caesar.

And we may the better hope that God will accept these Prayers we make for the
KING, because the King himself is here in Devotion with us to say AMEN.

FINIS.

