The true Effigies Of Sr. EDMONDBURY GODF^^^ Knight and Justice Of the Peace
who (...) MURDERED by Papists the 12th day of October An^. Dom^. 1678.
F. H. van Hove. Sculp^^^



Memoires OF THE LIFE and DEATH OF Sir Edmondbury Godfrey, LATE Justice of the
Peace for Middlesex, who was Barbarously Murdered by the Papists, upon the
first Discovery of THE Horrid Plot: TOGETHER WITH A full Account of the strange
Discovery of the Murder, the Trial of the Murderers, and the Sham-Plot of the
Papists to charge the Murder of Sir Edm. Godfrey upon himself, Detected.

Protomartyr pro Patria
Moriendo restituit rem.
LONDON, Printed for John Hancock at the three Bibles over against the Royal
Exchange in Cornhill, and Enoch Prosser at the Rose and Crown at the East end
of the Royal Exchange in Cornhill, 1682.

TO THE KINGS Most Excellent Majesty.
Most Gracious and dread Sovereign,
THat I should presume to lay this little Treatise at your Royal Feet, and to
implore your Majesty's most gracious Patronage of it, is not out of any vain
Ostentation of leaping from the distances of my mean Station to approach
Majesty; But rather to do that right to my Subject, as to shelter it against
malicious Censurers, under your Royal and powerful protection. Those that
Persecuted him while living, and at last took away his Life, at once bereaving
your Majesty of a faithful Subject, and the Nation of a useful Member, will I
question not, endeavor (as they have often attempted) to bear down the true
Value of his Merits by unjust Slanders: but he was too well known to be
Scandalized by such men, who are as well known (as they were his, so) to be
Enemies to your Sacred Majesty, your Kingdoms, and the true Protestant
Religion. It was for his firm adherence to all these that he fell an Innocent
Sacrifice to their Revenge and Malice. He faithfully served your Majesty and
Country, while he had Life to spend in such Services. It Is fit the World
should know what he was. He dyed for his Zeal in such Services, for his Loyalty
to your Majesty, and Constancy to the Protestant Religion. To whom then should
the Protection of his Memory upon such accounts be better (though with a humble
respect to your greatness) dedicated, than to our Gracious King and Defender of
the Faith?

Honorantes me honorabo, is the Royal Promise of the King of Kings to his
Worshippers. Sir Edmondbury Godfrey was one that dutifully Honored and Served
your Majesty: And your Majejesty, according to your Native Clemency and
Goodness, and (after the pattern of him whose Vicegerent you are) was pleased
in compensation of his Duty, to confer many Honors upon him. You Honored him
with the Dignity of Knighthood, with admitting him into the Commission of the
Peace, and that great Character your Majesty was pleased to give him of his
Abilities for that Service. He was honored with the freedom of access to your
Royal Presence, and being employed for your Majesty in some great Services.
After his Death, your Majesty was pleased so far to Honor him by your gracious
Sympathy with your People in his loss, as to extend your Justice by your Royal
Proclamation for the Discovering of his Murderers, and then to grant a special
Commission of Oyer and Terminer for their Trial, and to bring them to condign
Punishment.

Unto all these Honors that living and Dead your Majesty has graciously been
pleased to extend to him; May it please your Sacred Majesty to grant one more
in his behalf, in graciously condescending to Vouchsafe your Royal Patronage to
these Memoires of your late faithful, Loyal and Protestant Subject; and of your
Princely goodness, as well to pardon the presumption of the Author, as the
defects of his undertaking.

May the divine goodness that has hitherto (to the unspeakable Joy of your
Subjects) preserved your Sacred Person and your Government against all the
Plots and Contrivances of your Enemies, continue to defend you, and increase
such Loyalty in the hearts of your Subjects, as this man dyed for.

That the Crown may long flourish on your Royal Head, and that you may be
blessed with a long, happy and peaceable Reign over these Kingdoms, is the
hearty Prayer of,

Great SIR, Your Majesty's most humble, Loyal and Obedient Subject and Servant,
Ric. Tuke.

Memoirs OF THE LIFE and DEATH OF Sir Edmondbury Godfrey.
A Good Name (says the Royal Moralist) is better than precious Ointment, Eccl.
7. 1. it is this, that while the Body of a good Man is preyed upon by
corruption, and insected with stench and faetor in the Grave, perfumes the
World with the Odours of grateful and pleasing remembrances fit as well for the
delight, as use of the Living.

That the worthy Sr. Edmondbury Godfrey left such a Name behind him, needs not
the confirmation of this Narrative; there is no place where ever he had a
mention, but is scented with it.

The confection of those great and imitable Virtues with which this Good-Name
was by himself in his life time compounded, I am now to spread before you, and
to open this Box of Nard for your delight and benefit.

The very last Act and Apotheosis of his Life, though Tragical and bitter to
him; yet, as it was occasioned by that loyal Zeal and Resolution for the
Service of his King and Country, which provoked the malicious Papists to cut
him off, was an Offering of a Sweet Smelling Savor, and made this precious
Unguent to savor in the Nostrils of all good Men with the greater redolencie
and sweetness: And notwithstanding the cursed designs of his revengeful
Enemies, after having taken away his Life, to take away his good Name too; it
was not in the power of those dead Flies to corrupt this Ointment.

If the accessions of a Gentile Stock, and generous breeding thereto suitable,
might be any advantage to own Personal worthiness, he might boast of both; but
Sed genus and provaos and quae non fecimus ipsi. Vix ea nostra voco. Ovid.
he had more to boast of (had he been given to that idle humor, which he never
was) from his own acquirements; so that whatever bequests of Honor or Estate
he received from his worthy Ancestors, were accumulated by the acquests of his
own Industry and Virtue; by both which he became tam famae quam fortunae suae
faber; and Ennobled the Coat of his Ancestors with his own Achievements: Yet,
to render him a Gentleman of the truest Stamp, he was so qualified as well by
Descent as Purchase. The Moralist thought the former sufficient, That Nobility
was nothing else but (...); Plutarchus lib. cont. Nobilitatem.
Ancient Wealth and Ancient Worship; but this was not sufficient for him
without building upon an Ancient Basis a New Superstructure of a Personal Merit.

His Father was Sir Thomas Godfrey Knight, of an Ancient and reputable Family
in the County of Kent, where not only his said Father, but his Grandfather, and
Elder Brother were Justices of the Peace, as was this worthy Knight himself
afterward for the County of Middlesex. So that in this kind of Series and
Succession of Magistracy from Father to Son, he seemed as 'twere Born to be a
Justice of Peace, as it is observed by that Learned and Worthy Prelate Dr. Lloyd
in Sr. Edm. Godfrey's Funeral Sermon, Page 14.
that excellent Sermon he preached at his Funeral.

His Father (by several Wives) had a Numerous Issue, no less than Ten Sons, Our
Sir Edmondbury being the Sixth by a Second Venture: yet though the Father
himself was but a younger Brother, the Grandfather left so plentiful an Estate
to him as served to afford sufficient allowances to his Children; None of them
but with what was left them, besides the laudable improvements they made to it
by Trade and Traffic, lived plentifully and in good repute.

Sir Edmondbury had in his youth bestowed upon him an Education suitable to his
Birth and Quality, being first put to Westminster School (that Prime Nurserie
and Pae dagogie of Tyronick Learning,) where in a little time by the strength
of his extraordinary Parts he arrived to that proficiency as to be sent to the
University in order to his maturation in Studies of an higher Nature.

Having continued there for some time a diligent and industrious Student in
those parts of Learning, which afterward qualified him for great and worthy
Employments; he was afterward sent over to Travel in Foreign parts, to advance
the Theorie of his speculative acquirements by Observation of Men and Manners,
and became thereby the better qualified to discharge himself in those public
Places to which he was afterward called.

During the time of his Travels, he kept himself (by the aids of the Divine
Grace) as well free from the contagion of the Immoralities as the (equally
dangerous) false Religion of the places in which he conversed; the two
destructive Rocks, upon which most of the unseasoned youth of the Gentry of
this Kingdom, when exposed to the like Temptations by their incautelous Parents
(out of a vain humor of a fancied accomplishment to be gained by Travel) do
infortunately split.

For by those sound Principles of Religion and Virtue which he had imbibed by
the means of his careful Parents and Instructors, he was sufficiently antidoted
against both; returning home rather informed than corrupted; like the laborious
Be extracting the Honey of useful Experience and Observations from the worst of
things.

After his return home to his Native Country, his careful Father, to render
him as well accomplished in Domestic Learning as Foreign Experiences, sent him
next to (...), and admitted hi^ (...) Member of the Honorable Society of
Greys-Inn, there to Study the Regal and Municipal Laws of this Kingdom; And in
this place though he continued not long enough (according to the Rules of such
Societies) to assume the Graduates Robe of that Profession; yet he arrived to
that mature proficiencie as gave him a good Title to it: And wanted nothing but
a Complement of time to make him capable of it.

But the reason of his so soon leaving the Society was a sense he had in
himself of a defect in his Hearing, or a kind of Deafness, which (though not
very great) was always Natural to him, and was judged by himself and Friends
might be an hindrance to him in the nice and difficult practice of Pleading,
where the circumstances of debated Matters from the Mouths of Pleaders or
Witnesses not being audibly received might be a great prejudice to the Clyent's
Business; and withal some unhealthiness in his Body, which in the laborious
employment of the Law-practice might be prejudicial to him. For these Reasons
after some Years continuance in that Inn he removed himself into the Country
amongst his Friends.

Amongst whom he diverted himself for some time: but his generous Soul being
too active to be confined to the retirement of a private Solitude and
conversation, could not long rest in this inert and useless Capacity, but put
him upon some undertakings, wherein he might improve the activity of his
industrious Spirit for the good of himself and others; Idleness being always a
burden to him to whom Labor never was so; the fatigues of the latter in its
most difficult Quis autem vir bonus and erectus ad honesta, non est laboris
appetens justi, and ad officia cum periculo promptus? Cui non industrioso otium
poena est? Senec. lib. de Providentia.
managements were so little ungrateful to him, that he seemed never better
pleased, than when he had least case: for indeed Business was so natural to him
that it was never uneasy; He was most in his Element, when he was employed in
public or private Offices of doing good, and none was ever more indefatigable
in such Offices than himself.

And Providence was so auspicious to him in these generous designments, as in a
short time to offer him a fair occasion of putting them in Execution, by means
of an intimate Friend and Relation of his, who had lost a great part of his
Estate by reason of his Services for the King in the late Wars; and having
reduced the rest into Stock, resolved to improve the same in way of Trade by
taking a Wood-yard, and Buying and Selling Wood and Coals; an Employment not
only creditable, but known to be usually very gainful to the Undertakers;
especially such as have any considerable Stocks to manage it with.

Sir Edmonbury Godfrey being a younger Brother, and what Estate he had,
consisting in Moneys to the value of 1000 l. or thereabouts, was advised (as a
fair way of improvement) to join Stocks with the aforesaid Gentleman, and to
come in a Partner with him, in managing the Trade of a Wood-wharf, which he
accordingly did; settling themselves first at Dowgate, within the City of
London; where in a few Years that they continued Trading together, it pleased
God so to bless their honest industry and endeavors, that they advanced their
Stocks to a very considerable increase and advantage; so indulgent is
Providence commonly to the honest endeavors of industrious Persons, that the
more laborious they are in the Employments they are called to, the more they
thrive and are blessed in them.

How may the Example of these two Trading Gentlemen, reproach the unthrifty
humors of too many of the Gentry of these Days, who study no other Arts but
that of spending, and wastefully to consume the Patrimonies, that their careful
Fathers had gathered for them, in all the expensive Modes of Luxury and Riot?
and while they scornfully disdain those laudable Employments and means of
Thrift by which they might be Quis est istorum qui non malit Rempub. turbari
quam comam suam, qui non solicitior sit de capitis sui decore quam de salute,
qui non comptior esse malit quam honestior? Senec. de Provid. Cap. 12.
serviceable to the Commonwealth and advance their Families, what do they by
taking the contrary courses, but precipitate themselves upon the Rocks of
unavoidable contempt and Beggary? and so become themselves the Scorn of those
industrious Persons whose ways of Thriving they formerly contemned.

Having thus by their joint Trading (as I have said) acquired considerable
advantages to their particular Estates, in a few Years that they dealt
together; It afterward happened that Mr. Harrison, Sir Edmondbury Godfrey's
Partner, altered his Condition by Marrying a near Relation of Sir Edmondbury's;
the other continuing still, and to the Day of his Death in the state of
Coelibacy: but whether it were upon this account, the Family being too much
enlarged for their commodious Cohabitation; or that their Stocks being likewise
so much enlarged, there might be a necessity (as was the case once between
Abraham and Lot) of a Separation, I know not; but these two Partners having
first fairly and justly stated the Accounts betwixt each other, agreed upon a
parting: And accordingly Sir Edmondbury (resolving still to follow the same
Employment) having found out a convenient House and Yard fit for his purpose at
the other end of the Town, at Hartshorn-Lane, near Charing Cross, removed
thither; And having furnished his Yard with a good Stock of Wares, began now to
Trade for himself: And found the same Providence that had hitherto been
propitious to him, to succeed his industry and endeavors in this his new
undertaking, with a suitable Blessing.

The Arts he used as means (subservient to the Divine Providence) of his
Thriving in the World, were no other than those of an ingenious industry and
unreproveable Integrity, the two best and most solid Bases of a prosperous
condition. He being in his private Capacity, as strict an Observer of the Rules
of Commutative Justice, as he was afterward of the distributive, when called
to the exercise of a more public Function.

And it was not long that he continued in this private way of Commerce and
Trading; but that the great Abilities both of Estate and Parts of one so near
residing to the Court being represented to his Majesty (who as of his piercing
Wisdom, he is most able to judge of; so of his Native Clemency and Goodness is
most ready to prefer such Persons to Places of Trust and Honor, wherein they
may become serviceable to himself and People) It pleased his Majesty to admit
him into the Commission of the Peace, as one of his Justices for the County of
Middlesex, and City of Westminster; in which Place he faithfully served him,
till such time, as for the last Services wherein he performed the greatest act
of Loyalty to his Prince and Country, that lay in the power of a Subject to
do, he was by the malice of his, and our implacable Enemies, the Papists, taken
from us.

We are now therefore to consider him in his more public Capacity as a Justice
of the Peace, in which place as he spent many and the last Years of his Life,
we may remark more solemnly those Graces and Excellencies which always did
illustrate his most imitable Conversation.

But whether or no any happy Conjunction of Sydereal influences might auspicate
this Honor to him by way of Succession to his worthy Ancestors; it is certain
one of the greatest of Princes thought him not unworthy the Office.

And was so well satisfied in his choice of him, that in confirmation of his
approvement, He [that ought to know best (says the Learned Doctor in his
Threnodia) Sir Edm. Godfrey's Funeral Sermon.
has often said, He took Sir Edmondbury Godfrey to be the best Justice of
Peace in this Kingdom;] and adds a great Word of his own in the first Clause of
that Paragraph; That [He was perhaps the Man, the Man of our Age, that did the
most good in that Station; He did (says he) Dedicate himself wholly to it;
made his Country his Family; his Parish his Wife and Children; attended wholly
to their good; to keep up Law and Justice, and Safety and Liberty; to save
others from Violence and Wrong, to reduce them from Disorder and Violence.

What greater Testimonies, than these of so judicious a Prince, and so Learned
a Prelate, could be expected or desired to Illustrate the Merits of a worthy
and deserving Magistrate?

But if we may Comment upon this Royal Theme, it will be worth our while to
consider those Excellencies apart which rendered him capable of so great a
Character. And here we may not unfitly take the opportunity to give you in
brief the Character of this Excellent Person, both as to his Natural and Moral
Indowments; by which it may be easily judged, how well qualified he was as well
for the Honor as Trust of that Eminent Place in which he served.

As to his Person, the Graver has furnished you in the Frontispiece with a
Copy (not much disagreeing to the Life) of his comely and graceful Countenance;
in which, as if Nature had cast him into a Mould fit for the purpose of his
future Office, we may perceive a duly composed Feature equally mixed with
gravity and sweetness, a becoming mien that carried as well Authority as
ingenuity in it, and commanded at once both awe and love from the beholders.

The gracefulness of a Man's presence (in the Fancies of some) adds much of
respect and reverence to their Persons, especially where their Characters
require it or deserve it. And therefore Howell treating of the qualifications
of Ambassadors, gives this for one: That being to represent Howels Treatise of
Ambassadors.
the Person of his Prince, he ought to be a comely and graceful Person. And
such an one was Sir Edmondbury; his Stature was elevated somewhat above the
common Size of ordinary tall Men: the habit of his Body spare, far from
Corpulencie; but well set and exactly proportioned. He was indeed (as most tall
Men are) somewhat inclined to stoop in his going, which might be occasioned by
the Thoughtfulness of his musing Head, mostly working upon some good and
generous Designs in the way of his Business. His disposition and humor were
such as obliged love and respects from all that knew him, being Naturally of a
kind, courteous, and affable temper, free of access, and ready to hear the
meanest Persons, that in way of complaint, or business, had any thing to do
with him; and this accompanied with a faceteness and pleasancie of humor, that
was no less Natural him, rendered his Conversation lovely and delightful to all
Persons.

If it may not seem impertinent, I will give you one instance for all of the
Urbanity of his temper. That he being one Night attending at the Council Table
at Whitehall, till it was somewhat late, and being then to go to the Temple
upon Business, called a Coach at the Court Gates; and perceiving a Gentleman
standing there, whom he had observed likewise attending upon Business at the
Board, was pleased courteously to enquire of him, whether his way lay toward
the Temple: understanding which, he was pleased, though a Stranger, to take him
into the Coach with him, and gave him his passage thither.

Civility and Courtesy were the Flowers and Ornaments of that excellent
temper; the ground of which consisted of an exact Justice and Complete Charity;
both these were Eminent in this Worthy: None more punctual and exact as to the
Commutative parts of Justice than he; in his dealings, in the keeping of his
Accounts, in performance of his promises, rendering to every Man his right, and
discreetly looking to his own. And for his Charity, as he was Naturally endued
with a large and bountiful Spirit, so the expressions of it were Visible in
such circumstances and instances, as may perhaps be paralleled by few Men of
this Age, if we respect either the Charity of his Mind, or the Charity of his
Hands.

And as to the First, how free was he from a censorious Spirit; the unhappy
temper of too many of this Age; and no doubt the main ground of our present
differences both in Church and State? when Men not content to enjoy the
satisfaction and liberty of their own persuasions, do injuriously censure and
perhaps maliciously despite those that are of the contrary: But this Good Man
was none of that Leaven; he was himself of a Sound and Orthodox persuasion and
principles; yet censured none that differed from him in lesser Circumstances
not material to the Essence and Vitals of Religion; but honored many such for
the Characters of a solid goodness appearing in them from whom he differed in
his own private Judgment and Opinion: though he was most strict in reproving
and punishing grosser Enormities; yet he could charitably bear with the lesser
infirmities of such in whom a controuling Virtue did more eminently prevail. In
fine, though he had a severe regard to himself, and his own actions; yet he
could bear with others for greater miscarriages than he allowed in himself:
though he always frowned upon the frontless Sinner; yet (such was his candor)
that he would rarely put a modest Transgressor to the Blush.

As to the Charity of his Hands, it must be a labor (though a delightful one)
to any that should go about to enumerate those labors of Love, those Offices
of a true Christian Charity in which he abounded.

It may now be lawful to declare to the World, that which in his Life he most
labored to conceal; for indeed his Charity was so truly Christian and Heroic,
that in the expressions of it, his left Hand was a Stranger to what his right
Hand did: few have more merited applause in this kind than himself, none sought
it less; being co^^ted to have done his duty, expecting his reward from his
Heavenly Father, and leaving the fame of it to the contingent notice of a
posthumous Memory.

It is now known which durst not before be mentioned, how kind he was to a
Religious, but suffering Family in the City of Westminster, allowing them Ten
Pounds per Annum, toward their support, and this Annuity he continued to them
for several Years together.

But this was but one Family of many that were in the like nature, though in
different proportions, relieved by him.

Although he was ever severe against idle Beggars and Vagabonds, such as
refusing the honest ways of Industry and Labor to maintain themselves, lived
altogether upon the Alms of others; yet he was so much a friend to those that
were necessitatedly poor, and whose poverty was neither occasioned by ill
Husbandry, nor continued by idleness, that such should never want his Charity;
but he would either set them on Work, or otherwise relieve them by some
charitable donation.

Although, as I have said, it was the Christianity of his temper to do his Alms
in secret, there are many Hundreds of living Witnesses that are able to give in
their Testimonials to this part of his Character, that he was a truly
charitable Man.

And as he arrived to this grade of the beatifying Scale of being Merciful;
Mat. 5. 9.
so he declared himself to be a true (...), a Child of God by ascending
another; he was a Peacemaker, one that coveted not so much the Triumph of the
Laurel as the shadow of the Olive-bough: Moderation and Peace were the proper
Elements of his Nature. If he observed any differences to arise betwixt any of
his Friends or Neighbors, how industrious would he be to reconcile them! nor
would he rest, whatever pains he was exposed to, till he had accomplished his
ends.

The reputation of his Peacemaking humor occasioned him much trouble by such
as desired the benefit of it, by putting him frequently upon Arbitrations and
composing of differences: which province as by reason of his great judgment and
experience, he was very capable to manage; so he rarely declined it, though it
were a great hindrance both to his Public and Private Business; it is well
known by the Neighborhood amongst whom he lived, how much of his time and
pains were laid out in such friendly Services.

Thus was he as a Man: take him as a Christian, and a Religious Man; and I
cannot give you his Character more truly and fully than is mentioned by the
aforesaid Learned Prelate in his Funeral Sermon: one who as by reason of his
intimacy with him, he had the greatest opportunity; so by his faculty was most
capable to judge of him in this particular. His words are these:

As to those things which belong Funeral Sermon page 12, 13.
to a private Christian, I ought to know him better than most others. And I did
know that by him which gives me abundant comfort in his Death. I knew him to be
a just and charitable Man; A Devout, a Zealous, and Conscientious Christian.
His Religion was more for use than show. And yet he was constant in all the
Acts of Gods worship, as well out of Judgment as Affection. And though the
compassion that he had for all Men that did amiss, extended it self to all
manner of Dissenters, and amongst them he had a kindness for the Persons of
many Roman Catholics: yet he always declared a particular hatred and
detestation of Popery. I say this on purpose to be remembered (because some
would have him a Papist, or inclined that way) I never pleased him with any
duty I performed, at least he never thanked me for any so much, as he did for
those Sermons which I preached here against Popery.

Thus far the worthy Doctor, whose words I have quoted at large, as a Noble
confirmation of what has been before hinted, of his Piety, Charity, Moderation,
and Religion; and withal (under this Head) to take off that groundless and
malicious calumny, devised no doubt by the Papists themselves, of his
inclination to their Religion; a Scandal so grossly absurd (to them especially
that were acquainted with his Conversation) that if the known opposition he
made against them and their Practices in the first discovery of their present
Plot, and his dying for it by their violent and malicious Hands, were not a
sufficient refutation; we have here an unexceptionable confirmation from the
Mouth and Pen of this worthy Bishop; whose judgment was too great, and who knew
him too well, to be deceived in so material a cirstance.

We have by these rude touches given you a rough draught of some of those
lineaments that made up his Excellent composition; some faint Ideas of his well
featured Soul, whose several Graces as they were singly most Excellent and
Lovely, so the Harmony of their contexture agreeing in an exact Symmetry,
rendered him a pure form of Virtue: the complexion of which was not of a faint
or fading Nature, like some tender Constitutions that change with every Air;
but strong and permanent, not to be altered by any Vicissitudes of Fortune or
Condition: What he was, he was always, of whom it may be said, as it was
(...). vita Arhan.
once of the great Athanasius, That he was A living and immortal Pillar of
Virtue.

We shall lastly consider him in his more public Capacity as a Magistrate or
Justice of the Peace, in which province as he stood more liable to Vulgar
notice, we shall observe those remarkables of him that may be satisfactory to
the Readers attention and his own due merits.

How well he deserved this Office, needs no higher or greater Confirmation,
than that he was elected to it, and approved in it by him that bestowed it on
him: A Great and Wise Prince, who as he is himself the Fountain of Justice,
cannot be thought to commit the Administration thereof (especially to one in
vicinity, so near, and so well known to him, as Sir Edmondbury Godfrey was) but
to Persons of exact approvement.

Besides, what we have before hinted of his fitness for this Service by the
happiness of his Education, having been brought up a Student in the Laws of
England; he was otherwise qualified for it, by many excellent Endowments of
Nature, requisite to the composition of a good Magistrate; a deep and piercing
Judgment to search into the Niceties and Intricacies of such difficult business
as he often met with, and to determine accordingly; An indefatigable Patience
mixed with a genuine serenity of Mind, whereby he could bear with the Clamours
and Impertinencies of such as came before him, leisurely attending to the
Allegations both of Appellants and Criminals, and fully hearing whatever (and
so long as) they had any thing in reason to offer to him; rather than the Truth
on either side should be undiscovered by any prejudicate fore-stalling of the
Evidence.

A right and sound Integrity of Mind, the golden Vein that ran through the
whole body of his Actions, and all the parts of it, not to be corrupted by
gifts, bribes, or pensions (the common taint of Justice) nor to be warped or
byas'd by any sinister Interests, but plain and upright, uninterested, and
regularly conformable to the exactest rules of Justice and Honesty, in all the
particular administrations of his Province, being well known, as to any
partiality in his actings, to be no Respector of Persons.

Add unto all these, an Heroic Fortitude, and Invincible Courage of Mind,
which was the Shield of his other Virtues, and whereby he was bravely armed and
defended against all the difficulties and discouragements (which were not a
few) that he met with; still keeping his ground with a steadfast Uprightness,
and unmoved Virtue amidst such Trials, as persons of less Courage than himself
would have sneaked and grovel'd under; (...). Plato in Lachete.
Fortitude is styled by Plato, One of the most Fair and Excellent Virtues; And
is by Aristotle in his Ethics made to bring up the Van of the Four Cardinal
Virtues, Quia haec virtus circa res arduas and difficilimas versatur; Virtutis
autem proprium est versari inter difficiliora. A Virtue therefore certainly
most becoming a Good Magistrate, who must dare to be such in the worst of
times, and greatest of dangers.

It Is vulgar Virtue (says the Learned Prelate, speaking on this head) that puts
men only upon Safe good things; It Is Virtue Funeral Sermon page 16.
in its perfection, when one dares do well, and suffer for it: And of this
Degree he showed some as great proofs as perhaps have been given in our days.

We shall in the first place give you one Instance which (with due Allowance to
the unusualness of the Practice) may give sufficient proof of the greatness of
his Mind, in daring to be just to himself, (Justice as well as Charity
beginning at home,) in a case wherein a Sneaking Softness or Compliance might
have betrayed him to the ruining advantages of a Sconc'd and Insulting
Adversary.

Having a considerable Debt owing to him from a Great Person at Court, to whom
he had made many and often applications for the Payment of it, without any
other satisfaction than that of fair promises, from time to time, and nothing
performed: Sir Edmond-Bury well knowing the Ability of the Person, and that his
pretenses were but so many formal delays to deferr the Payment of that which
(though justly due) he knew (by reason of his privilege) he could not in an
ordinary course of Justice be troubled for, resolved however to sue him at
Common Law, (notwithstanding his said Privilege) and rather to cast himself
upon His Majesty's Clemency, for infringing the Privilege of his Household,
than to suffer himself to be unjustly defrauded of his due Debt, by one that
would make such a Protection an Asylum to that Injustice, which he knew His
Majesty would never patronize or allow of.

Accordingly after all other fair ways, unsuccessfully attempted; he got the
said Courtier Arrested by virtue of the Kings Writ, and a Warrant thereupon
granted by the Sheriff: and the Defendant was thereupon taken into Custody,
till such time as he should give in sufficient Bail to answer the Action,
instead of which the Defendant insisting upon his Privilege: sent to
White Hall, and got an Order for the Commitment of Sir Edmond-Bury, for breach
of Privilege, upon which he was taken into Custody, and so remained for the
space of six days a Prisoner, and was so to continue till such time as he
should discharge the other of the Arrest, which Sir Edmond-Bury would not
consent unto, but rather suffered the severity of that uneasy restraint, than
to gratify his Adversaries stubbornness with a too easy compliance:

His Majesty being then acquainted with the Circumstances of the Case, was
pleased graciously to Order Sir Edmond-Bury Godfreys discharge; and taking
notice, in his Princely Judgment, of that Magnanimity and Heroic disposition
he showed, in hearing the brunt of this trouble, was pleased not only to pardon
the Misdemeanour; but by this Action to take such farther notice of him, as to
conferr upon him the Honor of Knighthood: and as a more special token of his
Grace and Favor, to admit him again into the Commission of the Peace, out of
which he had, by means of his Adversary, been then lately before stricken out.

But a more noble instance than this to prove the fortitude of his mind, as
well in daring dangers, as bearing troubles, appears in his staying in Town in
the time of the last great Sickness, when the two great Cities of London and
Westminster were in a manner deserted by their Inhabitants, and few left but
such of the poorer sort who wanted Money or Friends to remove themselves
farther; when the Arrows of the Almighty were scattered abroad in every corner:
when almost every House was turned into a Sepulcher, and Epitaph'd with the
doleful Inscription of a Miserere Domine, while the Dead and Living seemed
buried together; when the fear of the Contagion rendered the few Inhabitants as
unsociable to each other, as they would with wild Beasts in a Wilderness, every
man fearing to come near another, lest he should meet with his own Executioner,
when their very words (conveyed with a lethiferous Air) were feared as Bullets:
when breath it self the Instruments of Life in one, should be death to another
as it passed from him. In fine when death and danger filled all places, and
turned the whole Town into one universal Scene of Misery and Mortality: then it
was that this worthy Magistrate showed the greatest proofs of a true Christian
Courage and Resolution, in adventuring to stay for a Public Good in all the
greatest heats of this dangerous Contagion. The famous Roman, Curtius, is
celebrated in History for his unexemplary Courage, in that for the love of his
Country, and to evert a great Judgment then upon them, he fearlesly rode
headlong into a vast devouring Gulf, becoming so the Sacrifice of their
Redemption. The action was full of Gallantry and Bravery, suitable to the
Heroic temper of a true Roman Spirit: but Sir Edmond-Bury, from a better
Principle, of a truly Christian Zeal, at least equalliz'd his Courage in this
great undertaking; wherein death in a thousand several appearances, seemed
ready to devour him, if his Tutelar Angel (consigned by the Divine Providence)
had not preserved him to greater purposes.

It was no unadvised forwardness, or injudicious temerity that put him upon an
exploit so hazardous as this was to his life and safety, neither any designs of
advantage by it, but a Just and Conscientious regard to his Duty in that place
wherein he knew he might (in the absence of those his fellow Magistrates that
were fled from the danger) be instrumental as well to preserve the Lives, as
Properties, of such as should be exposed both to the danger of the Contagion,
and the Rapine of some ill minded people, who frequently take the advantage of
such Public Calamities to enrich themselves with the spoils of the miserable
Deceased.

These were the only ends he had of his staying in Town, for a Public Good,
and was therefore esteemed by the Inhabitants of Westminster, as their Guardian
Genius; as the Asylum and Sanctuary of their distressed conditions.

He was the man (shall I say the only man of his Place,) that stayed to do
good, and did the good he stayed for; shall we go about to instance in
particulars? it is impossible, they are innumerable. It Is easier to say, what
good did he not that lay within the Verge of his Province? His House was not
only the Seat of Justice, but an Hospital of Charity, where besides that Relief
which he commonly afforded the Poor at other times for the necessity of Living,
he now extended his Charity to give them Physic, to preserve them from dying,
when they were in a more immediate danger by the Contagion, then of Starving;
He was the Man, (and where was there such another,) that laying aside the
Grandeur of his Circumstances, would familiarly visit his Poor Sick Neighbors,
and Administer suitable Reliefs to them; He was the Man, that at that time
durst venture himself into the very Garrison of Death the Pesthouse (the
ordering o^ which, he took into his peculiar Care and Administration) and there
amidst the deadly Fumes that arose from their Putrid Sores, would he stand by
the Diseased Lazars, and see them dressed, not denying them any Relief or
Assistance that lay in his Power to afford them.

His Justice was no less remarkable then his Charity, when there was any need
of it, as many times there was, to right the Dead, as well as to relieve the
Living; a notable instance whereof, we shall give you in this following
Narration.

A Profligate Wretch that had taken up a new way of Thieving, (yet it is said
too much Practiced in those times) of Robbing the Dead, notwithstanding the
Horror that is naturally concomitant to such Actions, had in the dead time of
the Night used to Invade the Cemeteries and Churchyards that were now more
Peopled then the places they belonged to; and there breaking up the mournful
Clods, would Sacrilegiously ransack the Graves, and pillage them with as much
freedom, as Soldiers do the bodies of their vanquished Enemies in the Fields of
War, taking from them their Dying Apparel, the Sheets and other Linen in which
they were Inhumed, and decently covered, leaving the Poor Carcasses inhumanly
Naked.

This Trade he followed so long till he furnished a Warehouse with the Spoils
of the Dead; and had gotten into his Possession (some say) to the number of a
Thousand Winding-sheets: when by some means being at last discovered,
information of these barbarous Actions being given in to Sir Edmnud-bury, he
condiscended to go himself with the Constables Guard, to the Place where (he
was informed) the Good, were Harbored, and Seized them. In the mean while the
Criminal having got notice of the design against him, was fled; and being
hardened against the fear of Infection by his too much familiarity with the
Dead, had taken Sanctuary in the Pesthouse, where he thought himself
sufficiently secured against the Attacques of any that should pursue him; for
who should venture upon so imminent a danger, as to seize a Malefactor in that
place, where possibly they might run upon their own Deaths? And indeed, the
Officers to whom Sir Edmund-bury had directed his Warrants to that purpose,
were too faint-hearted to do it, and declined the Service; But then the Noble
Knight himself (as a Pattern of unpresidented Magnanimity) out of his Zeal to
Justice, ventured in his own Person to go unto that Fatal Place (made Sacred
against all Approaches by the danger of it,) and there with his own hands
Seized and carried off the Offender, then delivering him into the hands of the
Officers to be secured, in order to be at a convenient time Examined about the
Fact.

And upon due proofs made out to him by several Witnesses, the Criminal being
Convicted, Sir Edmond-Bury Godfrey in respect to Justice, and to make so great
a Villain an Example for the future to all that should be tempted to any such
execrable designs, pronounced this Sentence upon him, as most suitable to the
nature of his Crime, That he should be carried to the Church yard, the place
where he had perpetrated his Nefandous Villainies, and there to be stripped naked
to the Waste, and by the Beadle belonging to the Parish, to be severely
scourged round the place; which Sentence was accordingly Executed upon him, in
the presence of a great number of Spectators, who were assembled out of
Curiosity to see so remarkable an Execution: Mortui non Mordent, it is
proverbially said; but one that durst so boldly venture to spoil their passive
Carcasses, found an active revenge inflicted on him, for so doing, in the very
prospect of their injured Relics; yet neither the smart, nor shame of his
punishment could mollify the hardened wretch to any kind of relentings for his
notorious Villainies; but rather excited in him a Spirit of Revenge against the
Authors of it: which he especially designed against the worthy Sir Edmond Bury,
by whose Sentence it was inflicted, so that turning his Covetous designs
against the Dead, into a malicious Revenge against the Living, he vowed and
resolved upon his death whenever he should find an opportunity for it:

And in pursuance of such his Devilish resolves, being one time late at night,
unhappily befriended with an occasion of meeting Sir Edmond-Bury Godfrey, in
the Street going homewards toward his own House, the Barbarous Villain, in an
inhumane manner, assaults him with a Cudgel that he carried about him (perhaps
for that purpose) and had certainly brained him, if Sir Edmond-Bury, perceiving
his design, had not prevented it by a timely defense, which he did by drawing
out his Sword, and therewith Warding the blows that were aimed at him, yet
without any offensive violence or hurt to his Adversary, but only to defend
himself, which he did till such time as Company coming by, and taking notice of
the Outrage, Rescued him from the Assault, and seized upon the Ruffian, who
was thereupon Committed to Newgate, where he continued till the next Sessions
of the Peace holden for London and Middlesex, at the Old-Bayly, and there
(besides for this) several other Indictments coming in against him for Felony,
he was Convicted, and received Sentence to dye; but by the mercy of the Court
he was only Transported into some Foraign Plantation, where persisting still in
his wicked Courses, not withstanding these seasonable warnings, being Convicted
of some Criminal Fact, that by the Laws of the Country deserved death, he had
Judgment of death accordingly passed upon him, and was Hanged.

During all the time of this great and dreadful Sickness, Sir Edmond-Bury
Godfrey, (as we have said) continued his Station: and did worthily, that while,
supply the defect of those that out of a Pusillanimous Phil-auty, had deserted
their Charges to secure themselves; such selfish Principles as theirs were
abhorrent from his Generous and Public Spirit, who durst attend his Duty in
the Face of the greatest difficulties and dangers. And it pleased God (as an
encouragement to others in the like discharge of their Duties) to reward his
faithfulness with a singular Protection, preserving him from those imminent
Perils, that he was (by his forwardness to be useful) continually exposed to,
that he might continue to be farther serviceable to his King and Country in
better times.

And many years after this it pleased God to continue him to us for a Public
Blessing: in which time, though we cannot note any great remarkables of him to
supply a History, yet remarkable it is, and worthy note, that he was still the
same; the same Good Useful man that he always was; none of the Fleeting Mobile
that aspire at Names, and to be made the Discourse of the World by their
fluctuating and giddy Changes, he kept his Station, and contented himself with
a private and retired acting in that Sphere, wherein he had opportunity enough
of doing Good, and being Useful to the World, the greatest thing that he ever
aspired to.

About the Year 1678. Having been by the constant Fatigues and Labors of his
Business, reduced to a sickliness of Body, and Distempers growing upon him, he
was advised by the Phisicians to go to Montpellier in France, the Air of that
Country being accounted very Restorative to wasting and decaying Constitutions;
according to whose advice, having settled his Affairs in England for the short
time of his intended stay, he went over thither, and took, together with, the
benefit of that Salutiferous Air, a Prospect of several remarkable Places in
that Kingdom; especially of a Great Work that the French King was then
undertaking, in making a Navigable River through those Countries into the
Levant. He continued for some months in that Country (in which time it having
pleased God to restore him to a good measure of Health, (the end he went for)
he returned again to bless his own Country, and Relations, with his much
longed-for presence.

And not long after his return it was, that the late (I fear we have too much
reason to say the present) Hellish and Damnable Plot of the Papists against the
King and Government, broke out in England. An unhappy Juncture in which his
last actings, that concluded the Catastrophe of his worthy Life, exposed him to
an untimely and cruel Death, by the hands of those bloudy-minded Papists; the
Proto-Martyr of those Innocents that were designed by them to a merciless
destruction; but blessed be God, his Death, however maliciously designed by
them, occasioned a prevention of the ill effects of their Malice against
others, by awakning the Magistrates, and generally the whole Kingdom, by this
early instance of their Treachery to a more narrow watchfulness of them and
their proceedings.

The History of the first beginning and Discovery of this Plot, is so generally
known, and mentioned in so many Narratives and Informations Published of it,
that it were needless for us to say much of it, or more than is necessary to
let you know how far Sir Edmond-Bury was concerned about it.

Dr. Oats, Reputed the first Discoverer of this Plot, having been beyond the
Seas, and here in England, a long time Conversant with the Managers of it, as
being Listed one of their Party, and privy thereby to all their Designs and
Managements, Was resolved to make his Discovery of this Mystery of Iniquity,
and the Intrigues of it, upon the first fair opportunity that offered it self
to him. And having got into some acquaintance with Dr. Tongue, a Worthy and
Learned Person, who had lately before Translated a Book, Entitled the Jesuits
Morals, into English, the said Book reflecting so severely upon that Brood of
Vipers, exasperated them to that height, that nothing would satisfy them but
his blood (the usual Alloy of their merciless Revenges) and Dr. Oats, then a
great Confident of that Party must be the man (enjoined thereto by their
Provincial Whitebread) that should dispatch him. Dr. Oats could do no less
than accept the service, but (as it never was in his purpose) was so sar from
Executing what he had promised that after a little time of acquaintance with
the Doctor, he Discovers to him not only what they had designed against his own
life, but the Plot in General, with their designs against the King and
Government, and Protestant Religion Established in these Kingdoms; and looking
upon the Doctor (as he was) as a person of approved Trust and Integrity, did at
the same time Communicate to him the General Heads of this multi-form Treason,
with the names of the Actors concerned it it.

But the business being of so Extraordinary Consequence, and Mighty Opposition
and Difficulty supposed to be met with upon the Discovery of it; it was
consulted between them, what fit Person they should pitch upon to acquaint his
Majesty with it.

And accordingly they agreed upon Colonel Kirby, a Person of known Fidelity to
the King, and Zeal to the Protestant Interest; the Colonel cheerfully
undertakes the Service, and taking a convenient opportunity of meeting the King
walking in St. James's Park, begs his Attention, and informs him some heads of
the Treason, and particularly, of the Designs of the Papists, to take away His
Sacred Life, and that Pickering and Grove, besides others, were Engaged to
Attempt it in that very place of His Recess; His Majesty was much Surpised, to
hear of a Danger, (that by reason of his Native Innocence and Goodness) he
needed not to have feared, but graciously accepting at the hands of his Loyal
Subject, this seasonable Notice, was pleased thereupon to Order him, together
with Dr. Tongue, to wait upon Him that Evening at White Hall with the
Informations, which they accordingly did; delivering to him an Information
consisting of Forty three Articles, drawn up by Dr. Oats: the Origional of
which, (this being but a Copy) he kept in his own hands His; Majesty
graciously received the Papers, but being to go the next Morning to Windsor,
was pleased to order them to be left in the hands of a great Lord and Eminent
Minister of State, whom His Majesty would entrust as well for the safety of
them, as his Secrecy in the Affair, and accordingly they were left with him,
and several Attendances were spent upon his Lordship, in order to acquaint him
with other Matters relating to the Concern.

In the mean while Dr. Oats discovered himself to Colonel Kirby, who had not
had all this time any acquaintance with him; and gave him in some further
Information, as namely, of the coming to Town of the Provincial Whitebread,
Bedingfield a Jesuit, and others of that Gang and that they having by some
means got intimation of this Discovery, had him in Suspicion for it; And had
designed to prevent his Progress therein, by making him away: this they thought
in their devilish Policy the likeliest way to forward their Designs, by first
removing such Persons out of the way as should be likely to be Instrumental in
the intended Discovery.

This they then attempted against Dr. Oats, and this they afterward Executed
upon the worthy Sir Edmund-Bury, who was not so lucky to escape their Murderous
Hands, as he was. For the Doctor more than mistrusting their Designs against
him, had the good luck to avoid the brunt of their Revenge against him, by a
timely flight; the particulars of which, he related to Dr. Tongue: and that now
having thus got himself loosed from his Treasonable Company, he was resolved to
cast himself upon the Mercy and Protection of his Majesty; which Resolution of
his, Dr. Tongue very well approved, and till such time as they could meet with
a convenient opportunity of accomplishing it, did kindly invite him to continue
with him (as a good place of Safety and Retirement to him,) at his Lodgings at
Foxhall.

During which time, Dr. Oats wrote over fair Copies of his Informations, and
upon the King's Return to White Hall, Notice was one day given to Dr. Tongue
and Colonel Kirby, That it was his Majesty's Pleasure, that they two should
Attend him the next Morning in Council, to be Examined before that great
Presence, about the Particulars of their Informations.

In Order to which, it was necessary, that their several Copies should be Sworn
to, to render them the more Authentic when they should be delivered into the
Council; And Sir Edmund-Bury, as a Person of known Loyalty to his King and
Country, was the Magistrate whom they chose to be Sworn by, and to entrust with
this great Secret.

A Loyal, but unhappy piece of Service to this poor Gentleman, who having with
Horror and Astonishment perused the said Informations, and taken their Oaths of
the truth of them (which they Swore to before him) would needs desire a Copy of
them, to be left with him, that he might in his own Loyal and Judicious
thoughts take them upon an after view into a more serious consideration, and so
be the better enabled to Act in that Province he was in, if need should be, for
the prevention of the growing mischief.

Little dreaming (Dear Soul) at that time, that his Loyal Intentions therein,
should expose him to that Malice of his Enemies (who too well knew the honesty
and integrity of his mind, not to be concerned at it) that should be the
occasion of his Death; the sad and doleful Narrative of which, as it was by
this means occasioned, we shall presently give you:

The Two Informants having thus sworn to their Informations, went with them
before the King and Council, who afterward sent for Dr. Oats, and they were
all Three severally Examined before them, and their Services herein so well
accepted, that to secure them from the Malice of their Enemies, His Majesty
(out of his Native clemency and goodness) was graciously pleased to take Dr.
Tongue and Dr. Oats into his Royal Protection, and to order them Lodgings in
his Palace at White Hall.

The Plotters (that had Spies in every Corner to observe the progress of their
Designs, and the successes of them) were now strangely surprised, that the
scent was taken, and that we were already in pursuit of the game, before they
were aware of it; They dreaded the Rumor of it more then any particular
Informations; They knew that Information had been given in and Sworn to; They
knew who it was that gave them their Oaths, and that he had Copies of the
Informations; They knew so Loyal a Person, so True a Protestant, would be more
then a Speculative or idle Observator upon such Treasonable Subjects, they knew
his Place, they knew his Parts, they knew his Power, they knew his Interest at
Court; his free access to the King, his esteem amongst the People, and were not
ignorant how able, how ready he might be to improve all these advantages to the
ruin of their Designs: They knew his Integrity, that there was no hopes of
corrupting him, and therefore resolved to destroy him; that by such an
Execrable instance of their Revengeful temper they might deter all other Loyal
Magistrates from intermedling with their Affairs, and to render their Arcana
inferna Sacred against all such intermedlings Flectere si uequerunt superos
Acheronta movebunt.
by the danger of their Revenges. His Murder now is fully resov'd upon, and
several persons employed to effect it.

The Persons principally concerned were Father Girald, and Father Kelly, two
Irish Priests, Robert Green Cushion-man to the Queens Chapel, Laurence Hill,
Servant to Dr. Godden Treasurer of the said Chapel, Henry Berry Porter of
Somerset House; Mr. Miles Prance a Goldsmith in Covent Garden, and Captain
William Bedloe, who though he was not an actor in the Design, yet was made
privy to it, and afterward made his discovery of it: besides there were others
that were likewise privy to it, as namely, one Lawson a Priest, and Phillip
Vernatti (belonging to the Lord Bellasis) who afterward fled, Prichard, Le
Fair, Welsh, Kains, and others; these last Five being all Jesuits.

Vernatti and the Priests were the Persons (it is believed) that first
undertook the Design, and then drew in first Green, Hill and Berry (the actual
Murderers) and afterward Mr. Prance, to engage with them in this Hellish
Conjuration.

The Scene of the contrivance was the Plough-Ale-house, near the Watergate by
Somerset House: the time upon a Sunday after Evening-prayer, when the said
Priests coming from the Chapel met with Mr. Prance there, and upon conference
with him, told him, That Sir Edmundbury Godfrey was a bitter Persecutor of
Catholics, and a particular Enemy to her Majesty's Servants, (of whom Mr.
Prance counted himself one, as being employed to work in work of Gold and
Silver for Her Majesty: and that he had very lately Examined People against
them, and got Depositions to fix base Crimes and Scandals on their Religion,
and that Catholics would be ruined unless he were taken off; and therefore it
was necessary, for the Glory of God and good of the Church, that it should be
done: And when Mr. Prance seemed to scruple at what they proposed to him to
engage him in the Murder, the two Priests Girald and Kelly told him, It was a
meritorious work, and no sin, but a work of Charity -- How cruel are the very
Mercies of the Wicked! How impious the Religion of such unsanctified Zealots!

They prevailed with him, at least he seemed to be prevailed upon, to engage
himself in the Design, and several consultations were afterward had about the
management of it.

Upon Saturday the Twelfth of October, Lawrence Hill, one of the Conspirators
(as they had laid their design) was employed to go to Sir Edmondbury Godfrey's
House in the Morning about the time of his stirring, to speak with him, but
what his Errand was, is unknown: afterward the said Hill meets with Girald and
Green, and they three together way-lay Sir Edmonbury at his coming forth, which
was about Ten or Eleven a Clock (the usual time of his setting out) being all
alone; they followed him and watched him all that day from place to place, till
about Six or Seven a Clock in the Evening: And then these that lay in wait to
shed Blood, having lodged their innocent prey at a place where they saw him
enter, sent their fellow Green (while they in the mean watched his
forthcoming) to Mr. Prance, to summon him with all speed to hasten to
Somerset House Watergate leading down to the Thames, where Kelly and Berry the
other two designed Executioners were to meet him, in order to accomplish the
Tragedy.

These three Assassinates abided for some hours the Horrors of the Night, with
a devilish impatience of seeing their expected prize; when about Nine a Clock
their companion Hill comes with cruel have to inform them he was coming: and
now for a Gin wherewith to entrap him into their bloody Hands, it is presently
contrived, That Kelly and Berry should begin a seeming quarrel; and in the mean
while Hill that watched for that purpose, was to engage Sir Edmondbury at his
coming by, to come down and use his Authority for the parting of them.

When Thieves fall out (it is said) honest Men come by their Goods; when
Murderers feignedly do so, it appears such Men may lose their Lives.

The Innocent Gentleman not dreaming of any other Treachery (if he thought of
any) than what he knew intended against the Public, soon after comes by, when
Hill (the Judas in the Plot) having treacherously insinuated himself into so
much acquaintance with him as to be known by him; meets him upon his approach,
in a seeming great earnestness and counterfeit concernedness, Entreating him
for Gods sake to come in, for there were two Men a quarrelling, and he was
afraid there would be blood shed: Murder be sure there was, as it was by this
artifice designed and executed; his presence (as a Magistrate) was urged as a
likely means to chill the heats of their fury, and to make them quiet. Sir
Edmondbury was unwilling to engage himself, especially at that season of the
Night; but the other by his importunity in a manner forced him to it, Hill
leading the way, and Sir Edmondbury Godfrey following him through the Gate
leading down toward the place; Girald and Green were watching near by, and
observing the motion, immediately fell in after them; Mr. Prance as soon as Sir
Edmondbury was entered the fatal limits, goes down to secure the Watergate,
that no Body should enter that way to disturb their proceedings; and Berry at
the same time (that the Scene of their mischiefs might be altogether
inaccessible) was to watch the Stairs and Passage by the Chapel; but first He
and Kelly the pretended Quarrellers stood about the Rails by the Queens
Stables; and as Sir Edmondbury went down toward them, (sweet Soul whose
Thoughts were only then affected with generous designs of hindering the Effects
of a pretended Outrage, and little dreaming that himself was the designed
Subject of it) that Villa in Green suddenly threw a twisted Handkerchief about
his Neck, and forthwith all four of them pulled him down and throtled him,
drawing between them the ends of the strangling Instrument so hard, that at
last his pure and innocent Soul, after some Convulsive struglings against the
violences of such an unnatural dissolution, was dislog'd from the Body, and
conveyed by Angels to the place where blessed and Martyred Saints lie under the
Altar, crying out their Quousque Domine's, for a just revenge of their innocent
Blood upon the Heads of their malicious Enemies: It was no easy death, and he
being a Man of a strong Make and Constitution, they were fain to use the more
violence to dispatch him, giving him (when prostrate on the ground) many
violent punches on the Breast with their Knees; and Green to perfect the
Execution, wrung his Neck almost round with all his force.

Prance and Berry being come to them by that time he was quite dead, they
altogether helped to carry the murdered Body into Dr. Goddin's Lodgings,
where the said Hill lived; who went before and opened the Door; when they were
got in, they carried him five or six Steps into a little Room on the right
hand, and there left him that Night and Sunday all Day and Night.

There were some unhappy Omens of this Tragedy which Sir Edmondbury himself had
conceived Vide Narrative of the Trials of Green, Berry and Hill.
(it seemed in his own mind) some time before the Execution of it, which he
not long before declared to Dr. Oats, after he had received the Informations;
That he had received Affronts from great Persons, for being so zealous in that
business of the discovery of the Plot; and that (being threatened by some great
Men of the Popish party) he went in fear of his life by that party, having been
dogged by them for several Days; but (being advised to take his Man always
with him) Answered, That he did not fear them, if they did but come fairly.

And to Thomas Robinson Esquire; (discoursing with him about the Plot) he declared
himself to him in these Words: Upon my Conscience, I shall be the first Martyr;
but I do not fear them if they come fairly, I shall not part with my life
tamely.

But notwithstanding these (more than suspected) dangers, being fortified with
his own Innocence, that meant wrong to no Man, he adventured so far as Murus
hic ^heneus esto -- Nil conscire sibi. Horat.
to become at last a prey to his Malicious Enemies.

But to return to our History: The Monday Night following, Hill and some others
of them removed him into a Room in the upper Court; and Prance having a mind to
see where they had laid him, they all went together with a dark Lanthorn to the
said place (Dr. Goddins Lodgings,) where also Captain Bedloe came, who had not
hitherto before engaged himself in any actual performance with them, and
perceiving Mr. Prance there amongst the rest, took such particular observation
of him, as served him afterward to make a discovery of him and the rest
concerned in the Murder.

On Tuesday Night they conveyed the Body to another Room in the long Entry over
against Dr. Goddins Lodgings; And the Wednesday Night following, being removing
it again from thence to the place where, it was first lodged, Mr. Prance
happening to come suddenly upon them at unawares, they fearing it had been a
Stranger, left the Body in the Entry and ran away together in a fright, till
such time as Mr. Prance (perceiving their mistake) called out to them, and
discovering who he was, they went back together, and carried the Body into the
little Room where it was first placed.

And now to perfect their Villainy to the height of malice, (that they might as
well Murder his Reputation as they had done his Person, a thing more than once
by them attempted) the two Priests, Girald and Kelly advised to carry him out
into the Fields, and there to leave him, run through with his own Sword, in
some obsure place; where (upon discovery) he might be supposed to have
murdered himself; and therefore his Money, Rings and such other things of
value as he had about him, were all to be left with him.

Captain Bedloe had before the Murder been acquainted by them with the design,
and fain they would have engaged him to have assisted them in the Execution;
for which they told him there was 4000 l. to be given by a great Lord of the
Popish Party; and acquainted him with the time when they intended to dispatch
him, then desiring his assistance, but he honestly failed them; which made
Monsieur Le Fair (one of the Undertakers) very angry with him; but meeting him
on the Monday following, told him that the business was done without him; and
having showed him the Body (as we have before told you) would then have engaged
him to assist them in carrying it off, according to their last mentioned
contrivance; and bound him to it upon the Sacrament he last took (a pretty
knack of profane Conjuration, by which they usually adjure their Parties to
Trust and Secrecy) Captain Bedloe promised to meet them at Twelve a Clock that
Night to that purpose, as judging that the fittest time for such deeds of
Darkness to be transacted in; but failed them again, and came no more at them;
but instead thereof taking a journey to Bristoll, where some time after, the
horror of this fact had made such impressions on him, that thereupon changing
his mind as well as he had done his Company, he sent up to one of the
Secretaries of State, in writing, together with a discovery of other matters
relating to the Plot, an Account (so far as he knew) of this Murder.

But in the mean while the aforesaid Accomplices being thus defeated of his
assistance, went about the work themselves; to which end they had procured a
Sedan, into which (though with some difficulty, by reason of its stiffness)
they crowded the Murdered Body; this was done about Twelve a Clock (the Hour
appointed,) Prance and Girald carrying him out at the great Gate, the Door of
which Berry the Porter opened to them; having (to avoid their taking notice of
the action) invited the Soldiers who used to attend there, to his House, and
there treated them with Drink and Tobacco, till such time as they had conveyed
away the Body.

What breasts besides those of these hardened and cruel wretches, would not have
quiver'd with the horror of such inhumane actions? to deal so familiarly with
the Carcass of a murdered person, a person murdered by their own hands, and
whose blood they could not but think at the same time cried loud for vengeance
upon their heads! But oh the Stiffness of a Romish Zeal! how immalleable does
it render their Stony Natures to the force of all humane Impressions!

Yet neither the horror of the Fact, nor yet that of a dark night, could scare
them from their hideous purposes; but they proceeded with their dead Burden
(carrying it in the Sedan by turns between them) till they came to So-hoe
Fields, near the Grecian Church there lately built; and there Hill attended
with an Horse ready for their purpose, upon which they placed the Body before
Hill, who held it from falling; (Oh horrid Boldness!) Mean while the rest
conveyed the Sedan into an House that was building, but unfinisht, that stood
near by, to remain there till they came back: And then Girald the Priest said,
I wish we had an hundred such Rogues as secure as we have this.

Mr. Prance then because he was an Housekeeper, took his leave of them and
returned home, and the other four went away with him, one leading the Horse,
Hill riding and holding the Body, and the other two walking by.

They carried him into an obscure place, about two miles out of Town, toward
Hamstead, near a place called Primrose-Hill, and there in a ditch they left the
Body, after all these harrasings to its quiet repose; this was the Grave they
had prepared for him; but before they left him (as a token of their malicious
design) Girald runs Sir Edmondbury's own Sword through him, laying the Scabbard
together with his Gloves on the bank, at a small distance from the Body.

In the mean time Sir Edmondbury's Servants, and then his Friends, and then the
whole Town were not a little concerned for his absence; and there was once a
Proclamation ordered to discover him, but countermanded, by reason of false
Informations spread about by some of the Popish Party, that he was living and
well: And there were several persons that went designedly up and down to
Coffee-houses to spread false Reports upon this Subject; as that he was gone
into the Country to be married to a certain Lady, whom they took upon them to
name, and that they saw him in such and such places.

Upon Saturday the twelfth of October, the very Evening that Sir Edmundbury was
Murdered; Father Harcourt the Jesuit afterward Executed, sent away a Letter
to Father Ewers a Priest at the Lord Astons in Staffordshire, wherein were
these words; This Night is Sir Edmondbury Godfrey dispatched. This Letter was
received there on the Monday, and shown to Mr. Dugdale, as he has since made
Oath at seveveral Trials, and the same since confirmed by Mr. Chetwin a worthy
Gentleman, who being then in that Country, heard a report of it there by means
of that Letter on the Tuesday; which was before ever there was any discovery
of it at London.

But as Murder the great Object of the Divine Justice, does most unseldom
escape Discovery; but that the Murder is detected, and the Murderer by some
means brought to light; God was pleased by his Providence so to order it, that
the Murder of this good Man (the miss of whom had caused great Thoughtfulness
of Heart (I may say) all the Kingdom over) was in a fevv days after Discovered.

For upon Thursday the Seventeenth Day of October, which was the next Day after
they had left him in his uncovered Grave, two Men by chance passing over the
Fields, spied the Gloves and Scabbard, and upon further search discovered the
Body it self lying in the Ditch, with the Sword run through it, in such manner
as his Murderers had left it; besides that they found about him, his Rings,
Watch, and some Moneys both Gold and Silver, all which the Covetousness of his
Enemies dispensed with the loss of, to gratify a more unjustifiable end
thereby, of a malicious Slander, which they thought might be thereby
occasioned, of being his own Murderer.

These two honest Discoverers well weighing the circumstances of what they had
seen, and that there was no Blood any where appeared, upon the Wounds made by
the Svvord run through him, concluded it was some Extraordinary case, and
thereupon one of them fetching a Constable and some others to assist them,
conveyed the (yet restless) Body to an house, where he lay not long before
upon the rumor the Body was, known to be the Relict of the much desired and
wanted Sir Edmondbury Godfrey.

The Coroner of Middlesex was then sent for (as is required in such Cases of
unnatural Deaths) to inquire of the Death of this person; who by the Oaths of a
Jury of substantial Credits, found that Sir Edmondbury Godfrey was murdered,
(not murdered himself as the design was laid) and the Verdict was recorded.
But yet the Felons concerned in the Murder, could not be yet discovered.

His Majesty being graciously inclined to be concerned as well as others in
the loss of this good man and faithful Subject; understanding that what was
feared was now certainly proved, that he was Murdered, was pleased upon
the twentieth day of October following to issue out his Royal Proclamation;
Commanding all his Subjects and Officers to use their utmost Diligence to find
out and Discover the Murderers of Sir Edmondbury, graciously promising 500 l.
reward to any that should make such Discovery; and if any one of the Murderers
should Discover the rest, he should not only be Pardoned, but likewise have the
same Reward.

But this Royal Offer could not prevail with them to come in for the present,
(guilty Consciencies are awed as well by the Clemency as Justice of the
Magistrate) but they seemed more hardened in their Wickedness by its Success.

For it was not above a Fortnight afterward, that they drew up a Narrative of
this so meritorious Act of theirs in killing a Protestant Magistrate, in
writing, which Vernatti read in an insulting manner at a meeting they had at
the Queens-Head at Bow, where he declared that the same was drawn up to be
showed to one of the Popish Lords (now in the Tower) and other great Persons
that were the Original Designers and Promoters of the business, for their
Satisfaction, by whom it might possibly be sent to Rome; and there no doubt it
would find a great approbation and acceptance.

The Murder we see is found out, but the Murderers yet undiscovered,
notwithstanding his Majesty's gracious Proclamation, with promises of reward
(besides Pardon) to the Discoverer: Captain Bedloe had (as we have told you)
sent up a general account of it, but not being himself present at the Murder,
could not give a particular account of those that were actually concerned in
it: So that the Assassinates for about ten weeks had lulled themselves into a
fond Security, becoming almost as fearless as they were graceless: But the
Keeper of Israel, that neither slumbereth nor sleeps, and from whom no
Secrets are hidden, was then pleased (to make the Triumphs of his own Wisdom
and Justice the more Illustrious, when all humane attempts to that end seemed
in a manner defeated) to work out a Discovery by such unthought-of means, as
plainly showed it was Digitus Dei and the Lords own doing.

We have before informed you that Mr. Prance was drawn into the cursed
Combination, and how far he Acted in it; who as he was bound by the Ties of
Secrecy to a sinful Silence, had hitherto concealed the Fact: But there
happening some misunderstanding betwixt him and a Neighbor of his, the latter
knowing Mr. Prance to be a Zealous Papist, and having understood by some of his
Servants that one time about Michaelmas then last, he had absented himself two
or three nights from home; an imagination came into his Head, that Mr. Prance
might be concerned in Sir Edmondbury Godfrey's Murder; although indeed, such
his absenting was a fortnight before Sir Edmondbury's death, not upon the
account of that, but some others more dangerous to him; The Proclamation being
then newly issued, prohibiting all Papists and Popishly affected persons from
staying in Town; about which time, when the Plot was first noised abroad,
Fenwick, Ireland, and others of the Conspirators were seized, whom he was so
Zealous to defend in a public Coffee-house; that for some Words then spoken,
he was threatened by some persons present to be Prosecuted; and upon that
account only lay from home the said two or three nights, (as he was able to
prove by credible Witnesses) till such time as the business might be composed;
However, this Neighbor of his, upon the bare suspicion, took out a Warrant
against him to appear before the Council; which Mr. Prance readily obeyed, as
knowing Vide Mr. Prances Narrative, page 20, 21.
him not able to prove any thing against him upon that account. But being taken
by Virtue of that Warrant, upon the twenty first of December, and being first
carried into the Lobby by the House of Commons, Captain Bedloe (whom he did not
then know, having been seen by him but once before, (viz.) upon the View of Sir
Edmondbury Godfrey's body in Somerset House, before mentioned, at which time
Mr. Prance took no great notice of him) knew his Face again, and charged him
with that Murder, whereupon, after a strict Examination, he was Committed
Prisoner to Newgate.

The next day being the 22th of December, he made his Discovery, (the Narrative
of which is since by License of Authority Printed, and thereby charged the
before named Dominick Kelly, Robert Green, Henry Berry, and Laurence Hill, as
Confederates in this Murder; of whom the three last were apprehended, but the
two first Escaped; the Subtle Priests, according to the old Proverb of those
that have the better luck, shifting for themselves, and leaving those whom they
had drawn in to answer for themselves. Although afterward Kelly was taken up
in Surrey, by the name of Daniel Edmonds, as a Recusant; but understanding
Prances being taken, got out upon Bail (hired by him for that Service) before
he was known to be Kelly, though afterward the same was Discovered; the
account of which, because it is not so pertinent to our present History, we
shall here Omit.

The 24th. of December Mr. Prance was Examined before the King and Council, and
having given in the particular Circumstances of the Murder, and in what
respective Rooms and places the Body was kept as aforesaid, several Lords were
ordered to go with him, to see if there were such Rooms as he had described,
and whether he could readily go to them; which he did to their full
satisfaction.

But some time after, remaining in Prison without any assurance of his Pardon,
he was so far prevailed with, to retract by word of Mouth what he had truly
Confessed upon Oath; As once upon a further Examination to say before the King
and Council, that He was Innocent, and they All were innocent: But as to the
Temptations he was under, and the Circumstances that swayed him to that ill
Action he has since (in that Narrative which he has published to the World of
these matters) so ingeniously set them forth, as may satisfy any unbiased
person, and take off that Calumny vvherevvith the Papists have endeavored to
bespatter him, and to Invalidate his Evidence on that account: In answer to
which, he offers these considerations (as the just and Mr. Prances Narrat.
page 24.
true Sentiments of his Soul;) These are his Words, as you may find them in his
Book, page 24.

That what he had declared concerning the Murder in manner herein before set
forth, was Solemnly upon Oath: That the supposed Retractation was suddenly
done, under Consternation and Fear, and not upon Oath.

2. That he was at this time under certain danger of his Life, if he had
persisted in that Confession, for he had no Pardon granted, nor any certainty
of obtaining the same.

3. That if he should obtain his Pardon, he considered that yet his Life would
be still in danger, from the Revengeful and bloody Priests and Jesuits.

4. That his mind was sorely troubled, as with all these dangers, so with
this further Apprehension; that if he should escape with his Life, yet by this
Discovery he should lose his Livelihood, and in all humane probability, both he
and all his Family be certainly undone; For he was the Queens Servant, and
that his Trade and Subsistence chiefly or indeed wholy depended on her
Majesty's Custom (which was certain and considerable) and that of other Roman
Catholics; so it was not to be doubted but the most crafty and implacable
Priests would soon use means (...) (...) Representations and Scandal to
deprive him thereof, if he proceeded in his Discovery.

5. That he retained still a certain respect to the Popish Religion, in which
he had so long been educated; for that he had not yet entirely got his Soul out
of that Snare; and therefore he did then conceive, being swayed by such
powerful inducements, that he might lawfully say he was Innocent, and so they
were all; which Note
in Popish Construction, is not to deny that they killed Sir Edmondbury
Godfrey; for that, according Note the sincerity of Popish principles, where
such Equivocations are allowed of to justify the greatest Villainies.
to their Divinity, and what the said Priests had Solemnly declared, was no Sin
or Crime, and consequently they might all in such their Catholic Sense still
be innocent: Yet this he must acknowledge, he somewhat doubted, because he
never was at Confession nor received Absolution since the Fact committed; which
all the rest (as some of themselves had declared) had done, and so might more
peremptorily persist (as they did) in averring themselves to be Innocent; and
he does ingeniously declare, that had he received Absolution, it is his Fear he
should never without extreme Difficulty have been brought to any acknowledgment.

These Circumstances together with a great Distemper of Body, contracted by the
Incommodities of Confinement, want of Air, etc. occasioned that sudden revolt
of his Reason and Duty, under that perplexity of Spirit; but as soon as he had
done it, Conscience slew in his Face, and would no longer be laid asleep with
any delusive Popish Charms. When he began to recollect himself, the power of
Truth dispersed all these Temptations of Interest, Fear and Superstition: If it
were true, that he might hazard his Life and lose his Trade if he did persist
in the Confession of the Murder, it was as true, and he found it by
experience, that he never should have peace of Conscience if he denied it.

And therefore, he was no sooner returned from the King and Council to Newgate,
(which coming in a Coach, it is certain was not half an hour) but he most
earnestly requested Captain Richardson, (who had been with him, and heard what
he had said that Morning) for Gods sake to go back, and assure the King and
that Honorable Board from him, that the first Confession which he made on
Oath, was true in all Circumstances, and that whatever he had said before them
that Morning, was occasioned only by the Consternation, Fear and Perplexity of
mind he was under: which the Captain immediately did, and has since declared
the same upon Oath.

Thus far the words of Mr. Prances own Narrative, which we have thought
pertinent to be inserted: The perusal of the Narrative it self, may serve not
only for the Readers Satisfaction in this, but as well to inform him of the
several notorious Villainies of a great number of Popish Priests, therein by
name exposed; to which as a very confirming circumstance we may add, that
falling very dangerously ill soon after, he then when he had nothing but a
certain Prospect of approaching Death before his Eyes, declared and asserted to
diverse Persons his first Confession to be true in all points; and also
afterward as soon as he had recovered his health, he repeated the same with
all Stedfastness before the King himself, and the Lords of the Council:
whereupon his Majesty was most graciously pleased to grant him his Pardon.

From all which it is most plain, that all the noise which the Priests and
Jesuits have made about this matter is but empty Air, as good as nothing, and
the just Truth thereof is become Evident to any ingenious person that will but
impartially look into these transactions, and consider them as they are, and
not as they are Represented by their false Perspectives.

Thus far we have given you (according to the most exact accounts that have
been hitherto produced) a Narrative of the Discovery of this most Horrid and
Execrable Murder, and by what strange and unthought of means it pleased God to
effect it.

In Order of History, we should before this have acquainted you with the
Passages of his Funeral; It was fit so good a Man, so Loyal a Subject, so great
a Sufferer for the public Interest, should not go without Honor to his Grave.

After his Relicts, so long disturbed by his restless Murderers, had been
Viewed by the Coroner, and then quietly deposed into the Hands of his
Relations, care was taken that he should have a Burial suitable to that general
Esteem that all persons had of him; which accordingly upon 31th of October next
after the time of his Murder, was performed by his said Relations in a most
decent and becoming manner, without any Pomp or Pageantries of Ostentation
(that which in his Lifetime he was most averse to, and no man ever declined
more than he did:) The Body being first carried to Old Bridewell, a place
agreed upon for that purpose; as being for its amplitude most fit to receive
the numerous Congress of Persons, that out of the City and other places
adjacent, came thither to pay their last respects to this Martyred Worthy.

From thence accompanied with great numbers of persons of Quality, eminent
Citizens, Ministers and others, that were all hearty Mourners upon this sad
occasion: He was carried in a Solemn manner through Fleet Street and the
Strand, to the Parish Church of St. Martins in the Fields, and there decently
Interred: The Funeral Sermon upon this occasion being then Preached by the late
Reverend and Learned Prelate Dr. Lloyd, then Incumbent there, and since by him
Published; a Discourse so Sympathising with the Subject, and so excellent in
all its parts, as deserves better than a transient Mention.

WE have hitherto given you a Summary of the Excellent Life, Tragical Death,
and lastly the Discovery of the Murder of this worthy Gentleman: It remains
now (and it may be expected by the Reader) that we give some Account of the
Trial and Execution of those Villains that were concerned in the Murder.

You have heard before, how that upon the discovery made thereof by Mr. Prance,
and of the Actors in it, Three of them, viz. Robert Green, Henry Berry, and
Lawrence Hill, were taken and committed to the common Gaol, in order to their
Trials.

The Parliament sitting about that time, were pleased to take such notice of
the fact (considering what relation it had to the Plot, about which they were
then sedulously inquiring) that it was Ordered by the House of Commons, that
Sir John Earnly a Member of that House, should immediately carry an Address
from them to his Majesty, That his Majesty would be pleased to issue out a
Commission of Oyer and Terminer for the Trial of the aforesaid Malefactors:
Which Address his Majesty graciously accepted, and was pleased to say, That a
Commission should forthwith be issued out for that purpose.

Which was accordingly done; and upon Wednesday the 5th of February, the said
Green, Berry and Hill, were brought to their Trials at the King's Bench Bar at
Westminster, where before the Judges there sitting, they were severally
Arraigned, and pleaded Not Guilty -- And a Rule of Court entered for their being
brought to Trial on Friday the tenth of the same Month; and then a Jury of able
and worthy persons (being Impannel'd by the Sheriff) were Sworn to try the
fact: Their Names were as follow, viz.

Sir William Roberts, Bar. Sir Richard Fisher, Bar. Sir Michael Heneage, Knight.
Sir Thomas Bridges, Knight. William Avery, Esquire Charles Umphrevile, Esquire John
Bathurst, Esquire Richard Gowre, Esquire Tho. Henslow, Esquire John Sharp, Esquire John
Haynes, Esquire William Moyle, Esquire
Dominick Kelly and Girald the two Priests, and Philip Vernatti, (whom we have
before mentioned to be principal Actors in this Murtherous Design) stood
charged in the same Indictment for the Murder, but they being more wary than
the rest, were fled, and for that time escaped the hands of Justice.

Mr. Prance (the principal Evidence) according to the Informations he had
before given in to the Council, declared the Series of the whole matter from
first to last, according as is before related, but declared that he never had
any Conference with Captain Bedloe in his life, before he was committed to
Prison.

Captain Bedloe swears, that a little before the Fact, Le Fair, Prichard and
Keynes, three of the Confederates and some others of them, (all of them
Priests) discoursed him about killing a cercain Gentleman, whom they would not
name: and encouraged him with the promise of a very considerable Gratuity to be
assistant to them; and then directed him to insinuate himself into Sir
Edmondbury Godfreys acquaintance. Which in compliance to their Wicked humors,
(which he durst hardly refuse to do) he did: and did under several specious
pretenses insinuate himself into an Acquaintance with Sir Edmondbury, (who was
never hard of access to any) but made not that advantage of his acquaintance
that they maliciously had designed.

But he informed the Court, that the very day Sir Edmondbury Godfrey was
murdered, Le Fair (at a Tavern near Temple-Barr) told him there was a
Gentleman to be put out of the way, (that is, in their Popish sense,) to be
murdered, that Night; and would engage his assistance: And that there would be
4000 l. reward given by a Great Lord of the Popish party to recompense the
Undertakers: For (said these devilish Politicians) should not this Gentleman be
cut off, things would be discovered to that degree, that they should not be
able to bring their designs to pass; they knew what a Remora the activity of
his Loyal Spirit would be to their proceedings: To prevent which, they request
Captain Bedloe to meet them at Somerset House near the Cloisters that Evening,
being the place in which they designed to act the Tragedy. This he promised to
do, and (as we have said before) he durst do no less; but knowing against whom
their designs were intended, he wilfully failed them. That on the Monday
following, Le Fair again meeting with the said Captain Bedloe, charged him with
breach of promise, and appointed him to come to Somerset House about Nine of
the Clock that Evening; where he told him he had done ill, in that he denied to
assist them in this business, but if he would help to carry him off, he should
still have part of the before mentioned reward: Why, said the Witness (as
surpised at the News of it) is he murdered? Yes, replied Le Fair. Whereupon
the Witness asked if he might not see him? which was granted, and Le Fair led
him through a dark Entry into a Room where there were several people, that had
no light but a dark Lanthorn amongst them, and were consulting together how to
carry him off: When one of the company throwing off the Cloth with which the
body was covered, Captain Bedloe had a View of his face and presently knew it
to be Sir Edmondbury Godfrey's, with whom (by the instigation of these
Murderers,) he had been so well acquainted as easily to remember him. The
Captains advice to them was, to tie weights to his Head and Feet, and throw him
into the River: but this they did not think fit to do, but said they would put
it upon himself. And to that end resolved to put him into a Chair (or Sedan)
the Porter Berry being to sit up to let them out at the Court-gate, and at
Twelve a Clock that night was the hour appointed to carry him off; Captain
Bedloe promising to them, upon the Sacrament which he had took the Sunday
before, to return again to them, and help them; but being got from them, never
came at them more.

The Constable that Viewed the body in the Ditch, gave an account how he found
it with the Sword Sticking through it, but no blood appearing upon the ground.
And that he found a great deal of Gold and Silver in his pockets.

The two Chyrurgeons moreover Swore, that they verily believed the Sword was
run through him after he was dead and Cold; but that he died of Suffocation and
breaking of his Neck, together with the bruises on his Breast.

To confirm Mr. Prances Evidence, that they had been several times at his
house, inquiring for him, and that Hill (as he and the rest told Prance) was
there on the morning of that day in which he was murdered, there was produced
one Elizabeth Curtis, that at the same time dwelt with Sir Edmondbury, his
menial Servant; she Swore directly that Green had been at her Masters about a
fortnight before her Master was killed, and talked with him about a quarter of
an hour in French: And that Hill was there that very Saturday morning on which
he was murdered, and spoke to him before he went out, and was there a good
while in the Parlour with him, but could not tell what his business was: That
the night before, there was a strange man brought a Note to her Master, which
she gave to him, and the man staying for an Answer, Prithee (said Sir
Edmondbury Godfrey) tell him I do not know what to make of it: But this was
none of the three persons at the Bar, but supposed to be one of their
Fraternity.

As for Hill, she was sure he was there on the said Saturday morning, by the
same token he had then on the same Clothes as he now had at the Bar; though now
he denied he was there, yet he acknowledged he had not changed his clothes, but
wore the same Suit ever since before that time.

The man at the Plow Alehouse (where Mr. Prance swore the Murder was
consulted) and his Servant, did both Swear, that Prance did use to come thither
with Hill, Girald and Kelly, several times within five weeks before the
Murder. The relation that Mr. Prance gave of the meeting at the Queens-head at
Bow, is confirmed by a Messenger that they sent for a Gentleman living about a
Mile from that place, to come to them.

Sir Robert Southwell deposes, that Mr. Prance having related these things to
the Council, and being to attend the Duke of Monmouth and the Earl of Ossery,
to show them the places he mentioned, He readily went to them, and they
appeared to be all such as he had described them; only as to the Room in the
upper Court, where the Body was laid one Night, having never been there but
once, and that in the dark too, he said he could not positively assign it, but
pointed to some Rooms, and said he was sure it was thereabouts, and this
doubtfulness the Court observing did give more credit to the rest of his
Evidence. For a person that right or wrong will Swear any thing, will stick at
nothing.

Lastly, It was proved that Berry the Porter, pretended Orders given him, that
he should Suffer no Strangers or persons of Quality to come into Somerset House
on the twelfth, thirteenth and fourteenth days of October, the first being the
day on which Sir Edmondbury Godfrey was Murdered, and the two days following
the time that he lay there; and that Prince Rupert coming in there within that
time, was denied entrance.

These were some of the principal heads of the Evidence that were given in
against the Prisoners, which, notwithstanding the directness of the
circumstances to prove the Fact upon them, they had all the Stoutness to deny.
And it was no wonder that men of such profligate Consciences that would not
stick at the perpetrating such Villainies, should not boggle at the denying of
them.

The defense they made for themselves was very Strained and unconvincing.

Hill would needs except against Mr. Prances Testimony, because he once
formerly denied it (the reason of his so doing you have had before related,
from the words of his own Narrative.) But this exception the Court easily
overruled, for that besides the before mentioned reasons that induced him to
it, he had now affirmed the truth upon Oath, and his denying of it was but his
bare saying, and so he could not be now Perjured upon that single assertion,
nor the credit of his now Evidence be any wise the more mistrusted, considering
the circumstances he was then under.

And further, the said Hill to Evade, offers some Witnesses of his own
Religion, to aver he was never from his Lodgings after nine a Clock at night.
But these did it so nicely and generally, that no Stress could be laid upon
them, it being proved that they had several Keys to the door, and Hill might go
in and out without their knowledge; and one of his Witnesses makes See
Narrative of the Trials.
a palpable mistake of an whole Month, p. 55. and two of Green's Witnesses a
whole Week, p. 66. So unhappy were they in their Calculations of the time they
were brought to speak to.

The Evidence that Berry gave in to the Court were the Soldiers who were
placed Sentinel at the Gate. They say they saw a Sedan come in, and so far they
agree with the Kings Evidence, but then they confidently aver that they saw
none go out all night. But what was this to matter of Fact? or what did it
relate to the Murder Committed, so positively in all its circumstances Sworn
to by the Kings Witnesses? The Sentinel might be from his Post, and it is most
probable he was so: For Mr. Prance had before informed the Court that Berry had
inveigled the Sentinel in to drink, and so not being in the way at the time of
doing it, he might truly say without any discredit to the Evidence of the other
side, That he did not see the Sedan go out, it might be morally impossible he
should; At least the Sentinel knowing he had committed a dangerous fault by so
doing, might be so wise for his own safety as to conceal it. Yet these poor and
slender Evasions were the best defense these Wretches could make for
themselves; which besides their own weakness being opposed with so many
undeniable Arguments of truth and certainty by the Witnesses of the other side,
found so little Credit with the Jury, that after a little time of
Consideration, they brought them in all three Guilty of the Murder.

Upon Tuesday the eleventh of February, they were brought again to the Bar in
Order to receive their Sentence, which (after a grave and seasonable Speech
made to them upon that occasion by Mr. Justice W^ld, whose province it then
was, as being second Judge of the Court) was pronounced against them in common
form: That they should be carried back to the place from whence they came, and
from thence to the place of Execution, and there be Hanged by the Necks, till
they were dead.

According to which Sentence Robert Green and Lawrence Hill were Executed at
Tyburn on the twenty eighth day of the same Month. At the place of Execution
they behaved themselves with the Courages of true Romans of the new Stamp,
denying the Crime they Suffered for, with that their formal Evasion of being
Innocent as the Child unborn; that is as no body. A Child unborn may be a Non
ens -- Had it been as a Sucking Child, I question whether their dying
Consciences could so well have dispensed with the Expression. But what other
might be expected from Consciences so charmed as theirs was, by the
Sophisticating Juggles of their Superiors, tied up by so many Oaths and
Sacraments to conceal that truth which by the divulging must necessarily turn
to the Scandal of the Romish Church -- whose principles will rather admit the
blame and punishment of a Crime than the shame of it.

And that there were some designs contrived to oblige them to such a profane
concealment (in so solemn a case as dying I can give it no fitter an Epithet)
is evident by one notorious Circumstance: That when Hill and Green were Hanged
and dead, Captain Richardson the Keeper of Newgate, with several others, saw
the Executioner (amongst other things) take a Paper out of Hill's Pocket,
purporting to be the form of the Speech that he should use to the People at the
Gallows, which being penned in a singular way of expression, I shall take leave
to insert Verbatim, as follows.

I Am come now to the fatal place where I must end my Life, and I hope with
that Courage that may become my Innocence. I must now appear before the great
Judge who knows all things and Judges rightly; and I hope it will be happy for
me a Sinner, that I am thus wrongfully put to Death. I call God, Angels and Men
to Witness that I am wholly Ignorant of the Manner, Cause, or Time, of the
Death of Justice Godfrey; although on that account by the Malice of wicked men
brought to this shameful death, which I hope will give me a speedy passage to
Eternal Life. In this hope I dye cheerfully because of mine Innocence, and the
benefit of the precious wounds of my blessed Savior, by whose Merits I hope
for Salvation. I dye a Roman Catholic, desiring all such to Pray for me: And I
beseech God in his Justice to discover this horrid Murder, with the Contrivers
thereof, that my Innocence may appear. And though from my Heart I forgive my
Accusers, Yet I Cite all such as have a hand in this bloody Contrivance, before
the great Tribunal of Gods Justice to answer for the wrong they have done the
Innocent; and particularly the Lord Chief Justice, and the Brothers of Sir
Edmondbury Godfrey, with Jury, Witnesses and all their Partakers. Oh Lord bless
and Preserve his Majesty and be merciful to this poor Nation, and lay not
Innocent Blood to its Charge.

Dying words ought to have their just allowances of credit, as supposing men,
if ever they dare speak the truth, will do it then when they are within an
immediate prospect of a sudden appearance before the Omn^^ient and righteous
Judge of Heaven and Earth, to answer for what they have said and done.

But when the truth has been once determined (as in this case) by no less than
a Cloud of Witnesses, some of them unknown to the other, yet all of them
harmoniously agreeing in the particular circumstances of the Fact; and the Fact
it self sufficiently proved on all hands by persons that prosess such a
Religion as gives no allowances to lying or dissimulation.

When on the other hand the truth so proved shall be denied by persons
instructed in such false principles as these; to deny the truth when the
secular Interest of their Idolized as well as Idolatrous Church shall be
endangered by it; to invert the moral nature of good and evil, and to account
those actions and things good, virtuous and meritorious, which in their own
nature (besides the express commands of Gods Word) are wicked and sinful; No
wonder if such persons upon such principles should deny or conceal the truth,
especially when they can make such unhappy distinctions betwixt the form and
reality of a Fact; as to deny the crime of Murder when they know themselves to
be guilty of killing a person, killing in their sense being sometimes no more
Murder than it was for the Priests of old to kill a Sacrifice, or for the Jews
to slaughter the reprobated Amalekites, they arrogating to themselves the same
dominion over the lives and properties of Heretics (as we are accounted by
them) that the Jews (that privileged people) of old had over the execrated
Pagan Nations; so that in their sense, Killing is no Murder.

Upon which considerations it (...) easy for any impartial man to judge how
much credit such dying attestations may admit of, against such clear and
undeniable proofs as were brought against them.

And it is more than probable, that the words of the aforesaid Paper were not
Hill's own words, but dictated for him in that form by those of his party that
were afraid of a Confession, and durst not trust the reputation of their cause
to the hazard of any unwary expressions, that the consternation of death might
extort from him.

Wherefore otherwise might not a verbal expression of his Innocence (if he were
minded to declare it) be looked upon as more credible from one in his dying
circumstances, than a set and Studied form of Speech calculated for the purpose?

But they feared either the terrors of death would force him to a plain
Confession, or that the power of truth fortified with such awful Sentiments,
would over-bear his Tongue in some circumstance; or at least that he would not
deny the Fact so resolutely, and in such a taking manner as might fix a
Suspicion and odium upon the Witnesses, Judge and Jury in the minds of the
People, which was the great thing they aimed at.

No doubt therefore this form of what he should say at his Execution, was drawn
up for him by some of the Religion, that every word might be according to their
mind, and to the purposes of their designs, how remote soever it were to his
thoughts or the truth.

And no Wonder it is that they should instruct their Proselytes to make
Speeches just as they say Prayers, resting in the Opere Operato, without any
understanding or attention, or consent of mind to the words they use, when a
bare doing or a bare saying can excuse an intention.

To conclude, It is evident that the words were framed by another for him to
Con by heart, and not of his own doing, by this undeniable circumstance, that
he never had Pen, Ink nor Paper all the while he was in Newgate, and his Wife
being Examined about it, testified that it was not of his handwriting, nor did
she ever see it before, or know how he came by it; yet he began his Speech with
these very Words, and repeated as much thereof as his memory under such
confused circumstances would serve him to do.

In the Speech it self we may observe the great Charity of the Author of it
(whoever he were) in citing all such as had any hand in his Death, before the
great Tribunal of Gods Justice, particularly the Lord Chief Justice, Sir
Edmondbury Godfrey's Brothers, with the Jury, Witnesses, and all their
partakers -- And yet, but in the words just before, he declares that he does
from his Heart forgive his Accusers. We may see by this Passage of what nature
such men's Forgiveness is; seeming to Pardon, when at the same time they cry out
for Vengeance upon their Adversaries.

The Papists (for the still better coloring of the business) have commonly
reported that Berry was always or at least dyed a Protestant, which is
notoriously false, having been known to be a Papist for many years; induced
thereto (as he confessed to the Ordinary) out of Lucre, and to get an
employment; And though he did not believe many things (as he declared a little
before his Execution) which the Romish Doctors teach as necessary Articles of
Faith (which is no more than many other Papists will affirm) Yet the said Berry
neither before nor at his Execution, would ever disown the Romish Church, nor
in the least declare himself a Protestant.

I would not have these last Passages thought altogether an (at least
impertinent) digression from our Subject, the design of their rehearsal being
chiefly to Evidence the truth, against the subtle Designs of the Papists to
suppress it, which they have managed not only by suborning (if I may so say) or
at least seducing their mischievous Agents to persist to the very death in
denying of what they did: But (despairing upon just grounds of the success of
that Imposture, so liable to detection) they have since by their malicious
slanders endeavored to remove the Charge of the fact from those that were the
real Actors, and from all their own party, to those that were most clear of it.

And perceiving that the Belief of their designs and actings against the Life
of this Innocent Gentleman, was in the length of time not only the more
confirmed, but that the credit of it had a fatal influence upon their further
proceedings, they were so effrontless in their Villainous Prosecution, that they
stuck not to commit a second Murder upon the good Name as well as they had
before done upon the Person of this worthy Martyr for his King and Country, by
endeavoring to charge the Murder upon himself, a brief account of which, to
shut up this Tragical discourse, I shall now give you.

But by the way it may be observed from this last account of Hills Confession,
that he or his Party had at that time no thoughts of fixing such a slander upon
him, of his being Felo de se, but did own it as a Murder committed upon him by
others (though Hill would have shifted it off from himself) as appears by the
words of his Confession -- I beseech God in his Justice to discover this Horrid
Murder: The manner of the expression may sufficiently evince that he meant it
not of his being Murdered by himself, but others.

The Popish Plot, which by the goodness of the divine Providence was hitherto
prevented in its progress by surprising discoveries, was forced to shift its
Scenes, and assume new forms of Enterprise, upon the defeats of the former: And
now a new Instrument of theirs is brought upon the Stage: One Fitz-Harris
lately Executed for Treason; who upon his first Arraignment before the Justices
of the Kings Bench, did offer upon a private Examination to discover to them
some persons (before unknown) who were instrumental in the Murder of Sir
Edmondbury Godfrey, himself (by his own confession) being one that was
concerned in it, and so had the better opportunity to know the rest.

These Examinations were taken in private, and therefore what the Effects of
them were, and who the persons particularly were that were thereby accused,
Time (the Parent of Truth) may hereafter discover.

But whether the Accusation of some persons mentioned in the Informations might
provoke them to it; or that the Revival of this new Evidence might Stimulate
the malicious party to the undertaking, a new design is contrived to fix this
Murder upon the Murdered Person.

This was one of their Sham-plots; many of which they have set up with an
irrefragable persistance, by such Methods (if possible) to amuse us into a
disbelief of the real one, then and yet in Prosecution.

They never want Instruments to effect their Villainies, when they have once
contrived them; and had one at this time fit for their purpose, an Irishman,
Mac-gar by name, a Zealous Papist, and one of a suitable reputation; who coming
lately over from Ireland, and judged by them to be a man fit enough for the
purpose of an ill design, they engage him to spread about reports up and down
the Town, that Sir Edmondbury Godfrey had Murdered himself; but that to save
his Estate from a forfeiture, by reason of his so doing, His Brothers had
engaged him (the Informant) to run Sir Edmondbury Godfrey's own Sword through
him, and so to leave him in that Condition in which he was found in the ditch
upon the first Discovery.

This Tale could get little credit amongst the Townsmen -- who were upon just
grounds more apt to abhor it than believe it; so that not succeeding with the
mobile (as the People by the wits of this time are finely termed) it is
resolved that he should apply himself to persons of greater note and influence.
And to that purpose Mac-gar is next instructed to apply himself to a Great
Person then a Prisoner in the Tower, to whom he sends word, that he had such a
matter to inform him of concerning this murder. But the other refused to have
any discourse with him about it, till he had acquainted the Constable of the
Tower with it; who upon notice thereof came and Examined Mac-gar about what he
had to say of the business; he formally relates the Story as aforesaid: But the
Constable of the Tower judging it to be a matter of too great importance to be
slightly canvas'd; resolved to acquaint the Privy Council with it, and Mac-gar
was carried before them to be Examined about the particulars -- He there gives
in the same Information, and obstinately persists in the asserting of the truth
of it; but that Honorable and Judicious Assembly, though sufficiently
convinced in their own minds of the maliciousness of this Calumny, yet the
better to find out the depth of the design of it, Ordered the said Mac-gar to
be taken into a Messengers hands, in order to a further Examination at such
time as he should be appointed again to be brought before them.

While he continued thus in Custody, being conscious to himself as well of his
Crime, as of the likelihood of its Discovery, and the disgrace that thereupon
would fall upon him and his party; he contrives with himself how to acquaint
his Imployers with his condition, and to desire their further direction and
Assistance, either to carry on the design, or to bring him off (as to what he
had already acted) impune.

To this purpose he gets leave of the Messenger (in whose Custody he was) to
have Pen, Ink and Paper, in order to writing to one of the Secretaries of State
some things that he had in his mind about the present business; which favor
being granted him, he Seals up a Paper directed to one of the Secretaries as he
pretended, but withal, at the same time had written a Letter to Mris Celliers
the Popish Midwife, (so notoriously infamous for her contrivances and actings
in the Popish Plot) acquainting her with his Proceedings, and what kind of
success he had met with; that if she and the rest of the Friends that engaged
him in the design, would not now stand by him, the Cause must perish and he too.

The aforesaid Letter to the Secretary, was but a color to make way for the
pasport of this; so having gotten a Messenger to carry the former (which was
allowed him) he slips the latter (directed to Mris Celliers) into his hands,
expecting no doubt but it would be delivered, and to have a certain return of
it.

But his confidence failed him, for the wary Messenger partly knowing his
Circumstances, and knowing what a person Mris Celliers (to whom the Letter was
directed) was; instead of carrying it to her, conveyed it to White Hall to be
perused by the Council, who upon consideration of the particulars of it,
perceiving the Intriegues of the design, were resolved to take it into a more
strict Examination: And to that end Ordered Mac-gar (at a time appointed) again
to be brought before them; when at first taking no notice to him of the
surprised Letter, they began to Interrogate him about the points of his former
Evidence, which he still stiffely stood to the Justification of, so far as
Lying and Dissimulation would help him, but at last perceiving his Incorrigible
Obstinacy, they produced the aforesaid Letter against him, the Autography of
which he had not then Confidence enough to deny, but by the irresistible
Convictions of his now overpowered Conscience was forced to Confess both the
Writing of that, and (upon Questions put to him) to Discover the whole Design;
upon what account it was contrived, and who were the Contrivers of it; denying
all his former Evidence, as false and Forged, without any grounds of truth.

So it pleased the Divine goodness, always propitious to the Innocent, to
detect this new upstart Villainy; which if it could have met with any hopeful
Success, must have been both a second fate to the Reputation of that Martyred
worthy whom they themselves had Murdered, and to the repute of those worthy
and honest Gentlemen his Brothers; whose pious Zeal in Vindicating his Memory,
and pacifying the cries of his Blood, by a just Avenging it upon the Heads of
his Murderers, is too well known to be in any wise contradicted by such sly
and malicious Artifices of a plotting Faction.

Thus we have given you some short (yet we hope, not unsatisfactory) accounts
of the most imitable Life and Tragical Death of this Excellent person; taken
off by the hands of his bloody Enemies in the six and fiftieth Year of his Age,
and in a time of our greatest expectations from him: Gods Providence Suffered
it, though wicked men contrived it, and our sins deserved it, that he must then
dye: There was such a sinful necessity for it, as was once pronounced by
Caiaphas against the Life of our Redeemer; he was too much a Friend to Religion
and goodness, too much an Enemy to Irreligious men and their Practices, to be
suffered to live by such men: had he been less good, less useful, less just, he
might have lived unto this day. But had he lived (they thought) their cause
must have dyed, their Treasons would not have prosper'd; they knew he was firm
and fixed to his duty; They could not scare him from it, they could not Bribe
him, but they could Kill him. They could not have thought of a more compendious
way than this. Funeral Sermon, p. 28.


We have related to you, the strange manner of the Discovery of this Murder,
the Trials of the Murderers, their Execution and manner of their Dying; and
lastly, the happy discovery of their Sham-designes, to turn off the Murder
from themselves upon his Friends. We shall here conclude our Memoirs; only by
way of Postscript, with which we shall entertain you, instead of Music, upon
the close of this Tragedy, with some strains of excellent Poetry, composed by
two of the greatest Wits of this Age (as their writings testify) upon this
Subject; the one a Pindarique Stanza, Selected out of an ingenious Poem (by an
unknown hand) called Bacchanalia, or the drunken Club, Printed in the Year
1680. the other a Poem calculated for the very Purpose, upon the issuing out of
his Majesty's Proclamation against the Murderers, by that late Prodigy of Wit
and Fancy, Dr. Robert Wild: We recommend and leave them to the Readers
Judgment; but as to our own present undertaking, we shall here conclude with

FINIS.
Bacchanalia, OR THE DRUNKEN CLUB.
Stanza 11.
ARe these the Popes Grand Tools?
Worshipful Noddies! who but blundering Fools
Would ever have forgot
To burn those Letters that revealed their Plot?
Or in an Alehouse told that Godfrey's dead,
Three days before he was discovered;
Leaving the silly world to call to mind
That common Logic, They that hide, can find?
But see their Master Policy
On Primrose-Hill,
Where their great Enemy
Like Saul upon Mount Gilboa does (...),
Fallen on his Sword, as he himself (...).
But oh the Infelicity! (...),
That blood was fresh and gusht (...) the
This so congealed that not one spot was sound,
No not upon his Sword, as if it would
Tell us 'twas guiltless of its Masters blood;
Some Carcasses by bleeding do declare,
This by not bleeding, showed the Murderer.
But to his broken Neck I pray
What can our Politicians say?
He hanged, then Stabbed himself, for a sure way;
Or first he Stabbed himself, then wrung about
His head for madness that advised him to it;
Well Primrose, may our Godfrey's Name on thee
(Like Hyacinth) inscribed be:
On Thee his memory shall flourish still
(Sweet as thy flower, and lasting as thy Hill.)
Whilst blushing Somerset to her
Eternal Shame shall this Inscription bear,
The Devil's an Ass, for Jesuits on this spot
Broke both the Neck of Godfrey and their Plot.
THE PROCLAMATION Promoted, OR AN HUE-and-CRY and Inquisition AFTER TREASON and
BLOOD; UPON The Inhumane and horrid Murder of that Noble Knight, Impartial
Justice of Peace, and Zealous PROTESTANT, Sir EDMONDBURY GODFREY of
WESTMINISTER.
An Hasty POEM.
O Murder! Murder! let this Shriek fly round,
Till Hills and Dales, and Rocks and Shores rebound.
Send it to Heaven and Hell; for both will be
Astonished and concerned as much as we.
First send to Endor where of old did dwell
An Hagg, could Fates of Kings and Kingdoms tell.
If that cannot be found, to Ekron go,
To Pluto's Oracle and Hell below.
There serve this Hue and Cry, for there 'twas hatched,
(Except the Priests their Gods have overmatch'd.)
Methinks Beelzebub, if he be outdone
In his Grand Mysteries, and Rome needs none
Of his Black Arts, but can Out-Devil Hell,
His Envy and Revenge this Plot should tell:
And by disclosing in his own defense,
Not only Vindicate his Innocence;
But hasten their destruction, and prevent
Loss of his Trade, (the Jesuits intent)
Unless he fears them, as indeed he may;
When once in Hell, none shall Command but they.
But if this Tragedy be all his own,
And Roman Actors (taught by him) have shown
How they can play all parts he can devise;
Female or Male, with or without disguise:
And need no Cacodoemons prompting Art
Or Whisper, but can fill up any part;
Fast, Pray and Weep, Swear and for swear, decoy,
Trappan, Kiss, Flatter, Smile, and so Destroy,
Stab, Pistol, Poison Kings, Unking, Dethrone,
Blow up or down, Save, Damn, make all their own.
Knows not he then, though founder of the Stage,
The Laws of Theaters in every Age?
That the Actors, not the Author of the Play,
Do challenge the Rewards of the first day?
Make then their Names renowned, and come to hide
Such Children of thy Revels and thy Pride;
Send to their Father, and thy eldest Son
That Lucifer of Rome, what feats they have done:
That he may make their names be understood,
Written in Kalenders of Martyrs Blood.
But if the Fiends below be Deaf and Dumb,
And this conjuring cannot overcome,
They and their Imps be damned together: I
To Gods on Earth will send my Hue and Cry.
Arise Just Charles Three Kingdoms Soul and mine,
Great James thy Grandfather could well divine;
And without spell the bloody Riddle Spell,
Writ by like Secretaries of Rome and Hell.
And if Thy Proclamation cannot do,
We pray Gods Spirit may inspire Thee too.
If thy Prophetic Usher did not err,
The Mass would enter by a Massacre.
The Wounds Thy Godfry found were meant for Thee,
And thou lie Murdered in Effigy.
In Gods, Kings, Kingdoms Cause this Knight was slain:
Let him a Noble Monument obtain,
Erected in your Westminsters great Hall,
That Courts of Justice may lament his Fall
And may (when any Papist comes near)
His Marble Statue yield a bloody tear.
Yet let him not be buried, let him lie,
The fairest Image to draw Justice by.
There needs no Balm or Spices to preserve
The Corpse from Stench, his innocence will serve.
Ye Lords and Commons join your speedy Votes:
A Pack of Bloud-Hounds threaten all your Throats.
And if their Treason be not understood,
Expect to be dissolved in your own Blood.
O Vote that every Papist (high and low)
To martyred Godfreys Corpse in person go;
And laying hand upon his wounded Breast,
By Oath and Curse his ignorance protest.
But oh the Atheism of that Monstrous Crew,
Whose Holy Father can all Bonds undo:
Whose Breath can put away the heavi'st Oath;
Who fears no Heaven nor Hell, but laughs at both.
Therefore a safer Vote my Muse suggests,
For Priests and Jesuits can swallow Tests
As Hocus Pocus does his Rope or Knife,
And cheats the gaping Farmer and his Wife.
Oh Vote each Sign-post shall a Gibbet be,
And hang a Traitor upon every Tree.
Yet we will find Wood enough for Bone-fire piles,
TO inlighten and inflame our British Isles
Upon the approaching fifth November night,
And make Incendiaries curse the light.
November Fires Septembers may reveal,
One Burn (we say) another Burn will heal.
Lastly, And surely, let this Hue and Cry
Reach Heaven, where every Star looks like an Eye:
To that High Court of Parliament above,
Whose Laws are mixed with Justice and with Love;
Whither Just Godfrey's Soul's already come,
And has received the Crown of Martyrdom;
Where Murdered Kings and slaughtered Saints do cry,
Their Blood may never unrevenged lie,
Ye Saints and Angels, has that Scarlet Whore,
Whose Priests and Brats before your shrines adore,
And in their Massacres your Aid implore;
Staining your Altars with the precious Gore.
Pour down your Vials on their Cursed heads,
And in Eternal flames prepare their Beds.
And Thou Judge Jesus Hanged and Murdered too,
By Power of Rome and Malice of the Jew,
In Godfrey's Wounds Thine own do bleed anew.
Oh Rend Thy Heavens! Come Lord and take Thy Throne,
Revenge Thy Martyrs Murder and Thine own.
FINIS.
ADVERTISEMENT.
THere is now Published a Book, Entitled, The Plot in a Dream, or the
Discoverer in Masquerade; fully and truly relating the History of the present
Popish Plot, from its Original until this time; as namely, the first
Contrivement of it beyond the Seas: The Ways and Methods there resolved upon
for the effecting of it: The manner of its first Discovery: The Description of
the Papists Grand Consult, and proceedings upon it: Sir Edmonbury Godfrey's
Murder related: The several Trials and Executions of Staly, Coleman, the
Jesuits that were employed to kill the King: Reading's Subornation and
Punishment: The Story of the Meal-Tub-Plot, and other Sham-Plots since: The
Proceedings against the Lords in the Tower, with the Trial and Execution of the
Lord Stafford: An account of the last Parliament held at Oxford, with the
Proceedings against Fitz-Harris, etc. Intermixed with Verses and variety of
Fancies; with several Cuts to illustrate the Design; and the whole digested
into Chapters, with Contents for the better Satisfaction of the Reader. By
Philopatris. Price bound 1 s. 6 d.

The Life and Death of Captain William Bedloe, one of the Chief Discoverers of
the horrid Popish Plot; wherein all his more Eminent Cheats, and whatever is
Remarkable of him, both Good and Bad, is Impartially discovered. 8o. Price
bound 1 s.

Both these are sold by John Hancock, and Enoch Prosser, Booksellers, at their
Shops at the Three Bibles at the end of Pope's Head Alley over against the Royal
Exchange, and at the Rose and Crown in Sweetings Alley, at the East end of the
Royal Exchange in Cornhil. 1681.


