A SERMON Preached before THEIR MAJESTY'S K. JAMES II. and Q. MARY. AT Their
CORONATION IN VVestminster-Abby, April 23. 1685.

By Francis Lo^d Bishop of ELY, and Lord Alm^ner to His Majesty.

Published by His Majesty's special Command.

DUBLIN, Reprinted by Andrew Crook and Samuel Helsham; And are to be Sold by
Samuel Helsham at the Colledge-Arms in Castle-street.

A Sermon Preached before their Majesty's King James II. and Queen Mary, at
their Coronation, etc.
1 CHRONICLES. XXIX. 23. Then Solomon sat on the Throne of the Lord as King, instead
of David his Father, and prospered, and all Israel obeyed him.
THen Solomon sat on the throne of the Lord. Then, that is to say, on the day
of his Coronation, which is mentioned in the foregoing Verse: Then, when they
anointed him. This may suffice to show, my Text is suitable enough to the
present royal Solemnity. But if I had any mind to parallel all the greatness
and solemn glories of this day from the story of that King, I should be forced,
as great as King Solomon was, to borrow some Illustrious Remarks from several
other of his best days, besides that of his Coronation. For when Solomon was
Enthroniz'd, no Temple was then built, or so much as begun: but to day we have
seen a spectacle full of all decent splendour in God's House, and filling our
hearts with joy. We have seen a King standing, as Solomon (on the day when he
dedicated the Temple) stood before the Altar of the Lord in the presence of all
the congregation of Israel, and spread forth his hands. Nay, we have seen his
Majesty in an humbler, that is, a devouter posture. To day we have seen another
spectacle of magnificent Piety, a Queen, for whom it were too low a comparison,
should I compare her to her that was raised immediately to a Throne near to
that of K. Solomon, then, when it is said, his mother crowned him again in the
day of his espousals; But a Queen, the most faithful companion of her royal
Husband's sufferings and hard travels; the fitter to be now the Consort of all
his Triumphs. We have seen her also like her self; that is, like Humility it
self, which is the Queen of Virtues.

The Story of K. Solomon, could I bring skill to set it forth, would furnish an
entertainment for the devotions both of a Royal Audience, and a mixed Assembly.
For the King in my Text made himself his Text; He made his own life the subject
of an excellent Sermon. He was pleased to style himself the Preacher, as well
as the King in Jerusalem. He once had been instructed by the King, his Father,
the man after God's own heart; but afterward he was taught of God, on purpose
to be set up for an everlasting Guide, by the rules and directions he should
leave to all other Princes and people.

To begin then where they began with him in the Text: It Is said, they made
Solomon, the son of David, King the second time. The first time was then when
Adonijah exalted himself, and said, I will be King; when he prepared himself
Chariots, and Horsemen, and fifty men to run before him. But the race is not
always to the swiftest, nor to him that sets out soonest for Popularity; yet
then it was high time for David to declare the Succession; for then he was
told, The eyes of all Israel are upon thee, that thou should tell them (on
supposition, as I shall show anon, that God had told him already) who should
sit upon the Throne of my Lord the King after him. Thereupon Solomon was
declared, and presently anointed to succeed. But because the Ceremony then was
performed in a kind of tumultuary have, it is now repeated at more leisure with
greater state.

To keep my self within some compass, and from wandering in such a world of
matter as the Story of K. Solomon would offer me, I shall be willingly confined
to these four Points, through which we may see K. Solomon in all his glory:

1st. That his Title was firm and good: It Is said here, He sat on the Throne
of the Lord, and he sat there, as King, instead of David his Father. And,

2dly, For his Government; that was as good as his Title: His management was
such as became so wise a King as Solomon. And,

3dly, His people were an obedient people; and all Israel obeyed him.

4thly, The Blessing of God was upon him and his Government. It Is said, He
prosper'd.

In the First place for his Title, to make that good, if this be not Argument
enough, that it is said here, He sat on the throne of the Lord; and that he
sat there as King, instead of David his Father; let me farther observe to you,
That he was a King of God's own Nomination, to prevent dispute among the Sons
of David, 1. Chron. 22. 9. Behold, a Son shall be born to thee his name shall
be Solomon, and I will establish the throne of his kingdom. His Brother
Adonijah, after his vain Attempt to seize the Crown, makes this express
acknowledgment of King Solomon's Right to the Kingdom, Though it were mine from
the People, yet it was his from the Lord: For God's Choice and the People's are
not always the same.

But if this were the Case, that he was raised to the Throne, not properly by
the King his Father, much less by the People, but by God himself, how comes it
to be said here, They made him King? They, that is, all the Congregation. Were
they the King-makers then? Were they the Original of Regal Power? Had they it
first in themselves? Else how could they impart it? Toward the clearing of
this, be pleased to compare the story of another King's Coronation in the Book
of Kings, with that self same story in the Book of Chronicles: And whereas in
one place we read, the People anointed Joash we find in the other Place, that
Jehojadah, the High Priest, and his Sons, anointed him; so not the people's
Anointed, but the Lord's Anointed. Only the People stood by, as they do here
and express their unanimous good Will with such loud Acclamations as you heard
e'ne now: not that we imagine our united voices contribute any thing of Right
to our Hereditary Prince; but to show that if the Kingdom were Elective, we
think him most worthy to be King. But it is most plain, and most evident, that
God by his special appointment set over his People, the first three succeeding
Kings, Saul, David, and Solomon; and where ever it is said the People made them
(or any other) Kings; no more is meant, but that the People owned them as Kings
of God's making But that immediate Designation of their Kings from Heaven was
to cease one day, and the Kingdom was to be Hereditary. This appears from the
Conclusion of those Provisional statutes Deuteronomy* 17. those precepts for the King
that should be set over them that he may prolong his days in the Kingdom, he
and his Children in the midst of Israel.

But as Solomon's Right to Empire was thus visible, so

Secondly, His other Royal Qualifications were most conspicuous; whether his
natural Endowments be considered, or his supernatural Gifts to fit him yet more
for Government. When God bid him ask what he would, he ask of God nothing but
Wisdom, and he had that he asked, with an overplus, not only of all other
excellent things: but also of more Wisdom than he knew how to ask of God,
before he received it. He is reckoned about eighteen years of Age, when he
began to Reign, so that he styles himself a Child; tho, his dying Father gave
him that great Character, as no more than his due, Thou art a wise Man, and do
therefore according to thy Wisdom. How wisely did he foresee any coming danger?
How perfectly well skilled was he in the times and seasons? When and upon whom,
or what sort of men, it was fit to show Justice or Mercy? presently he made it
appear how true it is, that being in a place of Government, shows what a man
is. For instantly he penetrated the ambitious Intrigueing design of Adonijah,
that was playing an after-game for the Kingdom, laboring to set up himself
again upon a new Alliance, that had a powerful interest in the Court. But, tho,
Solomon had Pardoned his Rebellion (yet so as to keep him still on his good
Behavior) and had promised him a favorable Pretection, if he would show
himself a worthy man; yet his Justice would spare him no longer, when once he
made himself unworthy of that Mercy. Then his early severity upon Joab, whom K.
David going out of the world, had delivered over not as a Traitor, but as a
Murderer, to the righteous Judgment of K. Solomon: That was a most effectual
Declaration to all his Subjects, that they must expect no more pardons in the
case of Murder, since neither the greatness of his past services, nor his
nearness of Blood to the Royal Family, could secure Joab from falling under
that Law, He that sheddeth man's Blood, by man shall his Blood be shed. But at
the same time, behold the Clemency of K. Solomon to Abiather, because he had
been a faithful old Servant to K. David, and a Sufferer with him; tho, he had
been a great Offender with Adonijah; nevertheless K. Solomon remitted him both
his Life and Estate. He gave a noble Instance, how proper objects of Royal
Goodness and Compassion, are old Royalists, tho, some of them may have been
mislead to make false Steps, and have fallen into fatal Errors: On the other
side for Shimei, that had cursed K. David, and flung stones at his Head in the
day of his distress; they do wrong to the dying King, who think he retracted
his Act of pardoning Shimei's Life, when he bid his Son, Hold him not
guiltless, that is, Treat him not like an Innocent person: And when he spoke
what follows there, not as a King commanding, but foret^lling (as even his
natural Divination might serve him to do) his hoar head thou shall, or thou will bring down to the Grave with Blood (for so it may well be translated) on
Supposition that such a one as Shimei would offend again: Therefore Solomon did
like himself, to set such a restless implacable Spirit his bounds, which he
should not Pass, and when he transgrest afresh, then to call his old Sins to
remembrance, and to take that Life, which such an execrable Wretch had
forfeited the second time,

III But as Solomon was a famous good Governor, so thirdly, his People were
eminently Loyal. All Israel obeyed him. Of which there follows upon my Text a
farther Explication; all the princes, that is, the Sanhedrim, or the Senate
acknowledged his just Sovereignty over them. And the mighty men, that is, the
Military men made their Addresses to him, as confessing the power of the
Militia was solely his. And all the sons likewise of K. David submitted
themselves to Solomon the King; for Adonijah had called them all, except
Solomon, to Countenance his taking upon him to be King; but now that cabal was
dissolved, and their leader was taken off; their faction grew weary of it self
and the King no doubt received their Submission with a Goodness well becoming
his own Greatness. But tho, ^ll his Subjects yielded him such entire Obedience,
yet still they served him as Freemen, not as Slaves. It was his greatest
Honor, as well as the happyness of his People, that as Gods Service is perfect
Freedom, so in Imitation of it, was that of God's Vicegerent; for we are told
in the Book of Kings; that of the Children of Israel did Solomon make no
Bondmen. but as it follows there They were men of War, and his Servants, and
his Princes and his Captains, and Rulers of his Chariots, and his Horsemen. And
thus all Israel obeyed him,

IV: But all this had never been so happily Administered, had there not been a
fourth Concurrent of more Consequence than all the three foregoing; Had there
not been an extraordinary Blessing of God, not only upon that Great Prince, but
upon all his good Subjects; had not he been Religious, as well as Politic; and
had not they been a People capable of that blessing. But He and They were duly
qualified for it: They joined with him, to derive it upon His Sacred Head, and
from thence upon their own, like the Ointment upon Aaron's head, which ran down
and diffused its self over the whole Body. He Built the Temple; they all
Contributed. He brought up the Ark of God; they attended it. Sacrificed whole
Hecatombs; they at the same time kept a solemn Feast to the Lord. He made that
fervent prayer to God; they all said Amen to it. He blessed, the People, He blessed
God: God ratified the Kings Blessing upon the People, God returned the Divine
Blessing upon the King.

In the midst of all this it is said, He prospered. How could it be otherwise
than so? Great peace and plenty at home, with as much honor and interest
abroad. The Native Wealth of his own Country was improved, and Commerce
increast mightily; all foreign good things were imported* and made his, by the
particular care he took of what concerned Navigation. His City the Seat of
Empire was then more than ever the joy of the whole Earth. What could be added
to all this Prosperity except Victory over his Enemies? Yes, it was a vast
addition to his almost unparalled felicity, that he had no enemies He was
able to send this Message to his friend K. Hiram, now the Lord my God has
given me rest on every side, so that there is neither Adversary nor evil
Occurrent.

Thus it was with him till he left off Serving God. Then indeed God was angry
with him. Yet from the fall and rising again of K: Solomon may be fetched the
last (perhaps the highest) Instance of his Blessedness: for as he stands a
formidable Example of Human Frailty: so we may allow him to be not only a
comfortable, but also a most admirable Instance of the Divine Omnipotent Mercy:
As he lost himself after so many wise contemplations by trying those costly
experiments in sinful pleasures, As he forgot God and himself, and his own
godly dictates in the Book of Proverbs; so it is generally agreed that he wrote
his Ecclesiastes, as his Penetential; that he remembered himself, and turned to
the Lord his God, that he is numbered among the Children of God, and his lot is
among the Saints.

And now, to dwell no longer on the particular Story of that great King, I may
set it down in general as certainly true, that wherever in any Prince and
People all the same causes of prosperity meet together; there (and no where
else) The like wonderful blessed effect will assuredly result and follow.

1. And first for a King and People to be happy, the King must have a right to
his Kingdom. For how can an Usurper expect to Reign prosperously? when many
under his Government must needs think themselves his equals, if not his
betters; and none can reasonably think themselves obliged to be his Subjects?
And how miserable is a King and Kingdom, when every private man, that is but
audacious enough, has a fair pretense, if he can but gather force, to overturn
any Settlemen that can be in such a case: Such a Pyrat-Prince must be always
exposed to tempests; and if, like the great Leviathan, he can take any pastime
in them, he may thank his sick fancy for the pleasing dream. I will mention
only two that were both of them royally descended, yet unjustly possessed of
this Crown: King Stephen was none of our worst Princes, and one of the most
valiant; but an Intruder he was, and he sped accordingly: his Reign was the
most turbulent of any, except that of K: John another Usurper, and this latter
was reduced to that extremity, that he very meanly surrendered his Imperial
Crown to the Pope, who had Interdicted all public Divine Offices in this
miserable kingdom for above six years; and who never afterward mentioned that
Prince but with the Title of John our Vassal.

But then again, to provide well for the peace and quietness a Prince and
People, it is necessary not only that the Title to the Crown look fair, but that
it be such as is not easily liable to be contested: else there will be
Competitors, and that of it self is a heavy Judgment. Nay, I add farther, the
worthier those Competitors, the more capable they are of confounding all before
them. As in the fatal Dispute between Tork and Lancaster, there were two
Princes, Henry the sixth, and Edward the Fourth, each of them extraordinary in
their different characters: one of them accounted a Saint, the other a most
active generous Prince: Both of them had fast hold of the peoples affections in
their several Parties, and they rent the Kingdom in pieces between them: They
made our poor Country an Aceldama, a Field of Blood; killed up whole Families,
and the greatest number of both those Royal Families, till the woeful
controversy was happily ended by that auspicious Marriage, from which a Race of
Kings with undoubted right, and our present Gracious Sovereign is Lineally
descended.

2. But as the Title to the Crown must be clear and right; so secondly the
management of the Scepter should be as wise as the Tenure is just and Royal.
Our two unfortunate Kings, the Second Edward and Richard, had an indisputable
Right, which they could never lose: The more was the wrong done them, though
they lost themselves by their Maladministration of the Government. But on the
other side, what vast hopes may be justly conceived? what blessed wonders may
be wrought for the public good, where the Sovereign Prince has all the
dexterity, together with all the Activity that is necessary to make his motions
as regular as they are vigorous, in so bright and so high a Sphere? Then will
the saying of Solomon prove it self, That the King by Judgment establishes the
Land. Nay, then it will extend to other kingdoms; for Kings have long hands,
especially such a King as may hold the Balance, and give Peace and War where he
pleases, and consequently may give Law to other Nations; He may reach out, as
Solomon did, the fruits of his wise Conduct to all the World.

3. But in the third place I must needs add, be the Title of a King as good as
a Warrant from Heaven can make it; Be it so undoubted as Hell it self can find
no pretense to question it; be the King like an Angel of God for his knowledge
and Conduct in the Government; yet if his Subjects will be Sons of Belial, Sons
of the Devil (so Rebels are called in Scripture) Belial, that is, absque Jugo,
men that will bear no yoke; it is still in their power to be as miserable as
they please; Since the Wills of men are free; it is confessed their leaves must be
asked, whether they will be happy or no: Whether they will obey, and enjoy the
blessing of Peace; or, Whether they will resist, and pull down ruin upon
themselves and their posterity. For want of a people obedient, and willing to
be ruled by a gentle hand, the best of Kings was most vilely cast away, as if
he had not been Anointed with Oil, How dear these Kingdoms have paid for the
Murder of that Blessed King, is too grievous a Reflection at this time. But one
consideration I would offer, though the maintenance of Religion is commonly
made the most plausible pretense for Rebellion (as it was for the last among
us, and has been made use of since toward the encouraging of another,) yet
Rebellion almost constantly proves (as that last proved) the means to destroy
Religion. My meaning is not only this, that as soon as ever men begin to be
Rebels, they cease to be inwardly religious, and truly good men; but I drive it
farther, That to Rebel is the ready way to ruin the Constitution of the
outward, professed, and established Religion in a Nation. What need I look any
farther for an example of this, when I have a most remarkable proof in the
History of that King in my Text? King Solomon in his declining age fell, so as
no Christ^an Prince can ever fall, unless he renounce his Baptism: from making
Beauty his Idol, he fell even to worship the Pagan Deities, that is, Devils;
for as the Apostle says, The things which the Gentiles sacrifice, they
sacrifice to Devils, and not to G^d Yet all that while all Israel obeyed him,
and cont^^^ed in the worship of God, as they might do without an inconsistence
whatsoever.

But when Solomon was dead and gone, Jeroboam came in by Rebellion: for tho he
was promised the Kingdom, it is said the Mat^er was from the Lord, yet it was
promised him only upon cond^tions, which he never performd, If thou will
hearken to all that I command thee as David my Servant did: But he would
hearken to nothing that God commanded him, nor would he wait God's time as
David had done. He drew Ten of the Tribes into Rebellion: But then the
Prevailing Rebel for a Politic interest calls and compels (as much as in him
lies) all the Families in Israel, every man of the ten Tribes, to Worship the
Golden Calves: He forthwith Interdicts their going up to the Public Worship at
Jerusalem. Thus Idolatry was Established by a Law of a Rebels making, not only
Introduced but Established by Jeroboam that made Israel to Sin, out of this one
Rebellion came all that Sin: out of that one Sin of theirs came all their
Calamity, and at lenght their Captivity: After this one Rebellion, their Church
and State never had one good Day. It brought that Dispersion upon those Tribes,
under which they are most Miserable to this Day.

4 But now to dispatch my Fourth and last Consideration, It Is impossible to
Honor and obey the King for Conscience sake, without a fixed principle within
us of that Fear of God which cannot fail to produce Uniform Obedience to all
God'^ Holy Commandments. Unless that Uniform Universal Obedience to God be a
National Virtue, How can a National blessing be expected from God? and without
God's blessing how can we ook to prosper. It Is only the Dew of heaven can make
a Kingdom flourish. If the Sweet Influences from above be restrained, the most
hopeful Plant will by the next East Wind be blasted in one night: all Second
Causes are but visible means in the Unseen hand of the first, who if he be
displeased, m^kes them move quite contrary even to their own Natural Tendency:
God is not obliged to stand by the best Title, he may seize or dispose of the
Goodliest Inheritance as he Lases Be a prince as powerful as Solomon; be a
people as Obedient as Israel then was; God could raise up a little Fugitive
Child Hadad that escaped a Massacre in Edom, to be the Adversary of K. Solomon
in his Old Age, and Rezin a Fugitive Syrian to Reign in Damascus in defiance of
him and all Israel, and to be the Father of those Benhadads the scourges of
Solomon's posterity

What Obligations then are upon us all of this happy Island as it has been
dy^ed of old) not to interrupt the blessings which this day seems to prepare
for us, if we do our parts to make our selves fi^ to receive them? We have been
the care of Heaven in all those three great instances of my Text; The Title to
the Crown being unquestionable; the King born for Empire, by nature and
education fitted for Government, the people having now showed themselves
obedient, and willing to be Governed.

1. For the first, No Title by Gods immediate Designation (as it was in
Solomon's Case) is now to be expected: No Prophet or Vision to be looked for:
Nothing but ordinary Providence. But by this Providence we that are Subjects
believe our Selves entitled to whatever we call Ours in this World. The best
Title to any Inheritance of Ours is from our Ancestors, and the best of that
kind is from Times beyond Memory. But who can pretend such a Successive Title
to his Estate, as his Majesty can show to his Crown? How many Ages of our
Ancestors have wanted such a Title as this? How are some other Nations like to
be embroiled with their Neighbors about their Succession to the Crown, for
want of this Blessing of a clear Title? A Blessing signally Bequeathed to us by
our late Sovereign Lord of blessed Memory For I must needs put you in mind, you
that had the Honor to attend him on his Deathbed, How did we see him like
David bowing upon the Bed to his Successor, Embracing his Royal Brother as his
beloved undoubted Heir, Resigning all to him (that was the kind word) to him
that was more ready to Dye with Grief, than to take that affectionate
Resignation.

And as his Majesty's Title is most firm, so Secondly we have very promising
hopes, from his gracious and glorious Beginings, of a Steady Government. We
have a King that has not been bred up at Ease in the Court of his Father, but
in the School of Hardship and Affliction; (as the Apostle tell us) works
patience, and patience experince. Sure I may say without Imputation of
Flattery, No Prince within the Memory of man has come to a Crown with so vast a
Stock of Experience. We have a King who understands and considers, that in an
Hereditary Monarchy, it is the great peculiar advantage of the Prince as well as
people, that their Interest is one and the same, their Happiness so closely
united, that (if I may apply the Apostle's expression to this Case) Whether the
body suffer, the Head suffers with it; or the Head be honored, all the Members
rejoice with it. We have a King whom greatness of Mind has seated as much above
Fear, as all the Hard-hearted impotent Passions which commonly Fear produces,
are beneath him; and is himself so incapable of Dissimulation, that he would
naturally Despise those strange Children (as David calls them) that should
Dissemble with him: As Constantius the Father of Constantine the Great,
generously disdained and disgraced some Servants of his for being too good
Courtiers, who (as Eusebius relates) upon a certain Trial which the Emperor put
upon them, on purpose to find who were honest, quitted their Christian
Profession for fear of losing their Places; but He retained and exalted those
who scorned to prevaricate with their God; for he Judged aright, That such
only would be faithful to their King. Lasty, We have a King, who tho I will
not say he was the Partner of the Empire while he was but a Subject (and yet I
am not afraid of Envy if I own how much he Governed, since at the same time he
knew so well how to obey, and set us all that perfect Example of Submssion) yet
I may say he was particeps Curarum; the Sharer of his Royal Brothers Cares;
That he felt the Thorns in his Crown; that he was all that while habitually
practicing Justice with Equity, governing according to Law, yet with tender
Mercy, as the Royal Chief Minister of Charles the Merciful. And I presume to
Style him the very Similitude and Picture of Charles the Martyr. With such
Love as casts out Fear we see in the Serene Aspect of our Sovereign, every Line
of his Blessed Fathers gracious Visage, As Trajan the Emperor triumphed in
Essigie after his Death; so does that Glorified Prince in his Living Sacred
Image on this Day.

3. And Thirdly, God has blessed the King with an Obedient People. After he might
say with David in the most literal sense, That the Waves and Storms had gone
over him; after That also is overpast which David joins with the raging of the
Sea, and the noise of its waves, that is, the madness of the People; In plain
terms, after his Majesty's Deliverance, as well as Ours, from that abominable
Excluding Bill; as great a Deliverance as that from the Sinking Gloucester
Frigot (for both which Preservations we must always bless God) after all this;
his Majesty's peaceful Entrance upon His Government, is a Sufficient, real,
happy proof of an Obedient People. And as I must vehemently exhort you to
perserverance in that which is not only your Duty but your Practice; so I do in
Effect commend your strict adherence to your former Protestations, and to your
Oaths of Allegiance.

Be thankful to God then for those Blessings you have, and to the King under
whom they will be continued to you. Be satisfied with your condition; take heed
of overturning or undermining the whole fabric, because you cannot have the
room that you would choose in it, Take heed of de^^roving your Country to
build your own house, take heed of ruining all, because you cannot mend your
selves in this or that Particular. Destruction and Death is not all you are
like to get by it: Take heed of that which follows: There Is another Death to
come after: God has warned you of it, They that Resist shall receive to
themselves Damnation. As you would avoid this, take heed of that which leads to
it. Do that which is best for you here, and hereafter, best for the Public and
for your Private Interests; best for your selves and for you^ Children; as ever
you desire to leave them all these Blessings.

And for a powerful motive to his Sacred Majesty to act well his Sovereign part
for the good of this great people; the place it self where he will be presented
anon with all the Regalia set in the seat of Empire, and made the Anointed of
God; the place which is the Royal Golgotha, the burying place of Kings; where
we have lately deposited the venerable Remains of Majesty; will put him in
mind, from the Royal Prophet; Though Kings are made as Gods, they shall dye
like men. And then I must put you all in mind, from the Apostle, That as it is
appointed to men once to dye, so after death the Judgment. Mortality! Behold,
consider, and stand in awe; there is an acre of ground sown with the richest
seed that ever the earth received since the first Adam's transgression
occasioned the second Adam, like a corn of wheat to fall into the ground and
dye. Think how much Royal dust and ashes is laid up in yonder Chapel; there
the Houses of York and Lancaster rest quietly under one roof, there does Queen
Mary and her Sister Q. Elizabeth lie close together, their ashes do not part.
In the story of Polinices and Eteocles, two Brothers rivals for a Crown; we are
told their smoke divided into two Pyramids as it ascended from one Funeral
Pile: But here these dusts do as kindly mingle, as all the old Piques and
Aversions are soundly asleep with them. And so shall we be ere long: most of us
in a meaner lodging, but all of us in the dust of death. A great King, upon
sight of a vast concourse of his Subjects, wept at the very thought, that in a
few years there would not be left alive so much as one of them. And well may we
as seriously, though not so sadly reflect, that when this numerous glorious
ass^mbly shall break up hence, we may e'ne adjourn our meeting to the general
resurrection. But if we put into the Scale that last most weighty
consideration, that God shall bring every work into Judgment, with every secret
thing, whether it (...) good, or whether it be evil; Then from these Premises
that inference will be forcible indeed which Solomon makes at the end of his
Ecclesiastes, Let us hear (says he) the conclusion of the whole matter; Fear
God and keep his Commandments, for this is the whole duty of man. This is all
that God expects from the greatest King, yet less God will not accept from the
meanest Subject.

Let but this one thing necessary be thoroughly done, then we may be able to
use in our own behalf those words of a King, Happy are the people that are in
such a case, yea, blessed are the people who have the Lord for their God. Then
may we hope from the Divine Goodness to see with joyful eyes such a miracle of
happiness in this World, as here we cannot read of but with admiration. that
God will magnify the King (as he did Solomon) exceedingly in the sight of all
Israel, and bestow upon him such Royal Majesty as has not been on any King
before him in Israel. And may both their Majesty's after the longest possession
of all earthly Greatness, with as little uneasiness as ever any Crowns brought
along with them, at last see God, and Reign with Christ in heavenly Serene
Glory for ever and ever: And let all the people say, Amen.

FINIS.

