PILKINGTON MAYOR.
Martis XIV. Die Maii 1689. Annoque and Regine Willielmi and Mariae Angl etc.
Primo.
This Court does desire Mr. Tully to Print his Sermon lately Preached in the
Guild Hall Chapel before the Lord MAYOR and Aldermen of this City.

Wagstaffe.

LICENSED

Z. ISHAN.
June 5th. 1689.
MODERATION Recommended IN A SERMON Preached before the LORD MAYOR And Court of
ALDERMEN AT Guild Hall Chapel, May 12th. 1689.

By GEORGE TVLLIE, M. A. Sub-Dean of York.

LONDON, Printed for Ric. Chiswell at the Rose and Crown in St. Paul's
Churchyard. MDCLXXXIX.

TO THE Right Honorable Sir THOMAS PILKINGTON, LORD MAYOR OF THE CITY of
LONDON.
My Lord,
THO I am sensible of the obligations I have to your Lordship and the Court for
your approbation of this plain Discourse, yet I am apt, at the same time, to
believe that it may chance to meet with a different sort of entertainment from
some or other in the World: For when Men's prejudices are awakened, their
passions up, and they resolve before hand on division, it is in vain for a Man
to expect from either side any instances of that Moderation he advises both to,
it being natural for Men, when unhappily divided into parties, gradnally to
contract an aversion to those who give them not countenance enough by running
into the same Excesses with themselves.

However, my Lord, I have very little concern upon me for any men's unreasonable
heats, and extravagancies, as being sure to have them of my mind, when they
return to themselves, and think soberly and Religiously on things, for then, of
necessity, they cool into that very temper I here persuade to, In short, my
Lord, I am sure moderation is a virtue, and a very excellent and useful virtue
too, notwithstanding that in our late years of extremities it was almost jested
and railed out of Countenance. I am farther persuaded that the sincere practice
of it on all sides would go a great way to the uniting us both in interest and
affection, and that it more especially becomes those, of whatsoever
Denomination they are otherwise, to whom God has committed the Ministry of
Reconciliation. On these considerations alone I first Preached, and now, in
Obedience to your Lordship's and the Court's Command, publish this Discourse,
which if it chance to dispose but any small number of Men to Amity, Temper, and
Brotherly Love, and thereby contribute to the support of our Holy Religion
against its common and immortal Enemies, I have my end, an end for which I am
content to undergo all the unreasonable obloquy and reflection in the World.

My Lord, I am your Lordship's most Obedient Humble Servant. GEO. TVLLIE.

A SERMON OF MODERATION.
PHIL. IV. 5. Let your moderation be known unto all Men.
IT IS one of the great Excellencies of the Christian Institution, that the
Virtues and Graces it recommends to our Practice, do not only render us good
and holy in our individual capacities in order to our everlasting welfare
hereaster, but modest, prudent, and wife in our political Relations, in order
to our well being here, as we are formed into Bodies or Communities of men;
that they all of them tend mightily to the sweetning of Societies, and to the
preventing, or healing those differences which are apt to imbroil us. And upon
this prospect, partly, no doubt it is that we find those homiletic, or, if I
may so speak, conversable Graces of meekness, gentleness, forgiveness,
forbearance, etc. so frequently pressed upon us in the Sacred Writings, and are
particularly required in the Text, to let our Moderation be known unto all men.

In speaking to which words I shall do these three things.

First, I shall explain what I here understand by moderation in the Text.

Secondly, I shall lay down some Rules, or Instances of moderation so
explained. And

Thirdly and Lastly, Shall conclude with a Motive or two to the practice of it,

And first, What is here meant by moderation?

And this the rather, because, that, as some of late, out of design, and
others, from mistake, have declaimed against it, so there are really several
Vices, as temporizing, halting betwixt two Opinions, cowardice, and a fear of
disobliging, that usurp its name, and fraudulently hang out its Colors.

Now for the more distinct understanding of the the thing it will be necessary
to have recourse to the Original word, (...), an adjective, according to the
Greek idiom, put for the Substantive, (...), from the different Translations
and Usages whereof we may be able to pick out and frame to ourselves a
sufficient notion of the virtue recommended in the Text.

Some Versions render it in this place by the word Mansuetudo, Meekness: Others
by the word Humanitas, Humanity, a just sense of the dignity of humane Nature,
and a behavior suitable thereto: Others render it Modestia, Modesty, an
obliging sort of demeanor toward others proceeding from low apprehensions of
a man's self: Our Translation rendered it formerly by the word Patience, and so
I find some Interpreters would still have it, importing thereby an even and
equable disposition of mind under all events, at the 24 of the Acts, the 4 ver.
it is rendered Clemency, which is but another word for Mildness, the one in
private Persons, the other in Men of Power and Authority, as Felix was to whom
the words are there addressed. In the 2. Epist, of the Corinthians 10. chap. 1.
ver. it is joined as Synonimous, with the word (...), Mildness or Meekness, and
is there rendered Gentleness. Now I Paul my self beseech you by the meekness,
and (...), Gentleness of Christ, etc. by that facile and tractable disposition,
which was visible in our Lord and Savior. Aristotle (to omit several other
places of Scripture, where it is rendered to the same effect) uses the word in
a more narrow and confined sense than any we have yet mentioned; for that, to
wit, which we call Equity, a readiness to judge of things, not according to the
strict rigor and letter of the Law, but rather as occasion shall require, and
prudence suggest, according to the circumstances and exigences of particular
cases, as it may reasonably be supposed the Law giver himself would have judged
and acted had such emergent cases come before him. Now tho this acceptance of
the word is more particular, and furnishes us with a more distinct notion than
any of the other, yet, as Grotius observes, the word is not limited to this
forinsic sense here, but according to him, it imports, partly, a disposition of
mind, whereby a Man is inclined to recede from his own Right upon occasion,
and, partly, is studious of all fair opportunities of being useful and
advantageous to others; from all which I think, we may collect, that Moderation
in general will amount to the due observation of a mean betwixt all
unjustifiable excesses in matters of difference and contest amongst Men,
proceeding from a just amplitude and ingenuity of Spirit, and aiming always at
the advancement of the most public and extensive good; and then Moderation, as
it relates to religious differences (in which sense I shall principally
consider it here) will be that gentle and equable disposition of mind, whereby
a Christian, upon a clear sense of the main design of his Religion, and a due
consideration of the passions, preposessions, and other infirmities of Humane
Nature, is inclined to the most amicable and gentle methods of healing and
accommodating lesser differences about matters of Religion, in order to the
more general advancement of more important Truths, and the substantial
Interests of the Gospel,

We will take this general definition a pieces, and that will give further
light to what I mean.

First, then, The Moderation I recommend must proceed from an internal habit or
disposition of the mind; for if a man, by the uncertain and irrisistable swing
of humane affairs, is driven to relaxations of the rigor of things, contrary
to the bent and bias of his own, otherwise inflexible, inclinations, then his
moderation wants the influence of that internal principle, which gives life to
all moral actions, and chiefly, denominates them virtuous.

Secondly, The moderation we speak of must derive from a clear sense of the
main design of the Christian Religion, and always act in order to the
advancement of it. Now the great end of the Christian Institution being to
render every individual Christian good and holy here in order to his
everlasting happiness hereafter, and then, secondly, to plant in him those
Graces, which, as a Member of Civil Society, may most promote the general good
and quiet of Mankind, and the peace of the particular Community in which he
lives, our Man of temper and moderation must always have a special eye and
regard to the advancement of these in all his proceedings, and then howsoever
unsuccessful his endeavors may be with men that resolve to stand divided into
parties, yet the honesty and generosity of his intentions will justify him
before God, and at the Bar of the severest reason. And here take notice, that I
exclude all secular and narrow considerations from being justifiable motives to
the exercise of that moderation I would persuade to. Is a Man so inclined
purely because it is perhaps the humor of the Times wherein he lives? the
humor may be a virtue in others, but in him it is a sordid and ungenerous
compliance. Is he, again, so inclined only to purchase the favor and good will
of a Party, away with him and his Party together: The Moderation we speak of,
as it must be known unto all men, so must it aim, as far as possible, at the
general good, peace, and mutual advantage of all men concerned in the Contest:
The moderate Man must, with the great Apostle, an illustrious instance of this
virtue, endeavor, as far as may be, to give no offense neither to the Jews,
nor to the Gentiles, nor to the Church of God: pleasing all men in all things,
not seeking his own profit, or interest, the gratification of his own passion
or humor, but the profit of many, that they may be saved, 1 Cor. 10. 33.

Thirdly, I said a virtuous modera^ion must proceed from a due consideration of
the passions, prepossessions, and other infirmities incident to our common
humane Nature. i. e. in short, from this undeniable maxim, that these, and
other such like things render an entire harmony and a agreement in opinion an
impossibility in morality, and the object of our wishes rather than of our
hopes; whereupon our moderate Man, upon a principle of the most extensive
benificence, and compassion on the score of these unhappily dividing
infirmities of our Nature, is inclined to make use of such prudential
expedients, as may, in his judgment, most conduce to the conciliating a good
understanding amongst men, notwithstanding the variety of their apprehensions.

Fourthly, I said this Moderation must take place in the less and more minute
differences about Religious matters. For as for such as sap the foundations, or
doctrines, by direct and necessary consequence^, tending to the subversion of
them, there is room indeed for base servile Spirits to temporize and betray
their Religion, but there is no room, that I know of, for any virtuous
moderation, unless that of a fair and civilized handling the matters in debate,
without virulent and unmannerly reflections.

And after what has been said, if there be any vice, or unwarrantable artifice,
that pretends to the name and mine of this excellent Grace, Rectum est index
sui and obloqui, we may easily pull off its vizor, and discriminate it from the
virtue in the Text, by the description given of it.

And thus much of the first general, the true notion of a virtuous Moderation.

I proceed to the Second, which was to lay bebefore you some R^les, or
instances of Moderation thus stated and explained.

But before I do this, I must premise,

First, that I would not be understood to prescribe to any one denomination of
men, exclusively of all others, but in the extent and language of the Text,
Unto all men, that stand in need of it.

Secondly, That I entrench not here upon any thing that looks more properly
like the task of public wisdom, as what is by no means rudely to be touched
by private hands, no, all we have to do, is, if possible, by general arguments
to dispose Men to, and by general lines to chalk out the way that Leads to the
great end of peace, and a good understanding.

The first Rule of moderation then in general, shall be this, to attemperate
our concern for or against things with charity and discretion. For if Fury once
usurps the name of Zeal, and those drunken Pilots, our Passions, sit at the
Helm, (for Passion is a sort of ebriety of the mind) what can men expect but
that, like a Fleet of Ships, with spread Sails, no ballast, and in a mighty
Storm, we fall foul upon each other, and some suffer shipwreck in the Scuffle.
If our Zeal transports us beyond the bounds of civil decorum and discretion, we
offend against the Rules of our common humanity, and the fundamental
obligations we have to Mankind, as such, which give the prime and irriversable
Laws to all humane Societies, and oblige us to a fair and civilized demeanor
toward one another in all our transactions. If our Zeal push us on to
exasperating Language, harsh and severe censures, malicious misconstructions,
etc. beyond the measures that Charity prescribes, we violate the prime and
irrepealable Laws of our common Religion, and transgress both as Men and as
Christians. We must therefore in all our debates, especially in those of the
Nature we speak of, always appoint two Moderators of our Zeal and Concernment,
Prudence in our Political, and Charity in our Religious Capacity, without both,
or either of which, our ardency partakes no longer of the Nature of a regular
and vital heat, but of the Flame and burning of a Fever: Is no longer Health,
but Frenzy and Distemper; without which all our doings, how briskly and how
bravely soever we may think we lay about us, are most certainly nothing worth,
have no intrinsic value in them here, nor will ever avail us one jot hereafter.
O thou Divine Charity, the very bond of Peace and of Perfectness! we have often
heard of Thee by the hearing of the Ear, but when shall our Eyes see Thee!
Never? It may be so. Yet, Abba Father, all things are possible unto Thee.

Secondly, And in consequence of the former, another Rule of the Christian
Moderation we speak of, is, to refrain, as much as possible, from all scornful
and scandalous Reflections upon the persons of those with whom we differ. For as
they are a manifest indication of want of Temper in the Aggressors, so are
they, too fatally. apt to carry their Opponents into the same unjustifiable
excesses, especially if the Sparks chance to fall upon Men of as combustible
matter as those who sent them out; by which means the quarrel is gradually
transferred from causes to persons, which of all other things, sets men at the
most irreconcilable distance. Ill Words being naturally, so far from closing,
that they never fail to widen Men's differences, and Fester, and Gangrene those
Wounds, which without them, might probably have healed of themselves. They
alienate Men from entertaining any tolerable opinion of our persons, and then
we may bring them over to our persuasions, if we can; for we may endeavor to
persuade him to great purpose, who, by the rude treatment we give him, shall
have reason to think himself the Object of our Malice, or our Scorn. No, we may
be as Hot and Angry as we please, but Men, I tell you, reasonable Creatures,
expect other usage, and will not be scolded or railed out of their prejudices.
There is a natural sturdiness in all Men, that immediately sets it self to
oppose, and confront such contemptuous usage, and which therefore is so far
from informing Men's judgments, or bending their Wills, that it renders them
much more inflexible, and therefore it might possibly become our Christian
Prudence in such Cases, if we do really and in good earnest aim at an
Honorable Peace, and a good Understanding, (and God forgive them that do not)
to betake our selves to humane methods of persuasion, the bands of love, and
the cords of a man; to endeavor to catch one another, as the Apostle speaks of
himself in relation to the Corinthians, craftily and with guile, by all the
Christian methods of endearment, kindness, candor, meekness, good words; and if
there be any other obliging and conciliateing ways, any other pious
complaisance, which may recommend our persons at least, if not our persuasions,
to one another.

3ly. Another Rule of the Moderation we speak of is, carefully to distinguish
about the weight and importance of those things wherein we differ, and to
proportion our zeal for or against them accordingly; for certainly, he were a
very ridiculous person who should be equally concerned about the sitting of his
hair upon his head, as about the sitting of his head upon his shoulders. When
massy bulkie Errors, of the very first Magnitude, shall come to be crammed
into our Creeds, and be ready to be crammed down our Throats, upon our
inability to swallow them, away then with Modalities, Comprehensions,
compounding or comprimising the difference; here the rule is, on the contrary,
to contend earnestly for the faith, to be zealously affected, to withstand our
Adversaries to the face, to keep our Posts, maintain our ground, and not to
flinch or abate one jot of our pretensions, as we value the interests of Truth,
and of the Gospel. But now in less momentous and important differences, as ours
confessedly are on all hands, the same measure of zeal and stiffness is not, I
conceive, warrantable on either side, tho that of establishment and authority
must be owned to have the stronger plea. Here the Rules are a cautious and
prudential behavior one toward another, a walking by the same Canon, or Rule,
as far as we possibly can, whereunto we have already attained, an endeavor of
reducing our Brethren from their Errors in the spirit of meekness, and the
like. In a word therefore, our zeal ^or or against things should always bear
proportion to their just weight and importance, otherwise it becomes both
criminal and ridiculous.

4ly. Another Rule of the Christien Moderation we speak of is for a man to
carry always about him a fair and teachable disposition, and not to have his
ears servilely bored through to the dictates of any one Master, or party of
men, exclusively of all others; for by that means we really, and in effect,
lapse into the stupidity of an implicit faith, and follow such or such a
Teacher, as the phrase is, more like an herd of Cattle than a Congregation of
Christians. A man must not therefore, I say, be so over-consident and
dogmatical in the truth and rectitude of the things he is inclined to, as
resolvedly to bolt out all evidence to the contrary, and leave no room for a
further enquiry into the grounds and reasons of the things he is at present
persuaded of; for that is not to act in the middle way which alone is suitable
to the reasonable nature, that being in it self a sort of medium betwixt the
brute and the Divinity, and which, as it may be swayed and prejudiced by the
sensual appetite of the one, so is it capable still of receiving farther
degrees of the illumination of the other; and therefore he who is thus
resolvedly partial, and rigidly deaf to all Objections that may shake the
certainty of the things he is persuaded of, acts not like the reasonable humane
Creature he pretends to be, but either below himself, with the obstinacy and
sturdiness of a brute, or a above himself, in a manner fit only for the
infinite and inerrable knowledge of God. Our moderate man then is never
invincibly stiff and tenacious, but as his ears are always open, to the voice
of reason and truth, from whatsoever point of the Compass the sound comes, so
is his heart always equally open to entertain and embrace it. He is ready upon
occasion of enquiry into things, to divest himself, as far as possible, of his
former prejudices and prepossessions, sets up the Imperial Standard of Reason
instead of them, and will stick by Truth, bare naked Truth, wheresoever he
finds it, without regard to Parties, or invidious names fixed upon them, or the
Examples and Authorities of any one whatsoever; as well knowing, that he who
shall in the lump, without examination or distinction, maintain for truth
whatsoever one man, or denomination of men, shall advance, and for right and
good whatsoever they shall do, and deal just the quite contrary measure to all
others, must in all humane probability, often oblige himself to contradict
Truth, defend unjustifiable proceedings, and provoke God himself, to whose
actions and sentiments alone such unlimited deference of judgment and entire
obedience is due, for it is God only that can never do amiss, and never be in
the wrong. And yet such is the weakness of the generality of men, that they are
carried away sometimes by the names of Leaders and Parties, one is for Pa^l,
another for Apollo's, and a third for Cep^as, and yet possibly without due
examination, how far any of these is for Christ; sometimes again, by the names
which the wit or malice of men have fixed upon opinions, or designs, without any
farther enquiry into the nature of the things themselves, according to that
excellent and just observation, Pauci res ipsas sequuntur, plures nomina rerum,
plurimi nomina Magistrorum. And of this we have had late, but deplorable,
experience, from the cunning and subtilty of those whose business it was, still
is, and ever will be, to divide and inflame us. Thus have the great Christian
Virtues of the Moderation we are now upon, condescension, forbearance, and the
like suffered under the imputation of fanaticism, and thus again, on the other
hand, has conformity with the best constituted Church upon earth been
obstructed, only because some men were pleased, how justly, time since has
shown, to suspect it of Popery; and pray God our foolish passions, animosities,
and prejudices do not still give the same common enemy the same fatal
opportunity of practicing upon us. If therefore men would condescend to be
Disciples of the virtue in the Text, they must try all things, and hold fast
only that which is good, abet that alone in persons of their own persuasions
which is just and true, and disprove that alone in others which is
blameworthy; they must have no men in admiration through prejudice, education,
or passion, and not hold the Faith of Christ with respect of persons; and by
thus doing they will purchase to themselves the applause of their own
Consciences, a good report among all honest and understanding men, and it
matters not for others.

5ly. Another Rule, or instance, of the Moderation I persuade to, when men
stand divided in opinion, is what the Apostle prescribes, and that upon
occasion too, of such differences in the Church of Corinth, That no man seek
his own, but (...), every one the things of another, (1 Cor. 10. 21.) the
common public good of the whole Community concerned in the contect, not the
private separate advantage of any one single party; for whatsoever leads men to
an intemperate love of themselves, and their own ends, divides the unity that
ought to be amongst them. And certainly, says a late great Prelate of our own,
A. B. Laud himself, there is no keeping of unity either in Church or State,
unless men will be so temperate, (when it comes to a push at least) as to lay
down the private for the publicks sake, and persuade others to do the like. And
indeed it is too obvious to imagine what peril to the public good must derive
from an immoderate love of the private, to need a Comment; for how only, in a
word, should that body, whether Natural or Political, be preserved safe and
entire, if the hands, for instance, would assist no other part but themselves,
if the head would not direct the feet, nor the feet contribute to support the
head: Let us therefore, I say, (and I am sure it is high time so to do) divest
our selves of that littleness of spirit, and narrow selfish principle which
reigns so visibly amongst us, and is so unworthy the dignity of a man, and the
p^ety of a Christian, and so directly opposite to the peace and preservation of
all humane Societies; and reassume we, on the contrary, that just amplitude and
generosity of temper, that like charity seeks not its own, but the public
and most universal good.

6ly. Another Rule, or instance, of a virtuous Moderation is for men to put the
most charitable constructions they can upon one another's actions and
persuasions, ascribing them to the best causes, assigning them the best ends,
and deriving them from the best principles they fairly may. For, for men
immediately to fall foul upon one another's integrity, to charge the difference
of persuasions and practices observable amongst us, upon the corruption of our
minds, and the depravity of our hearts, is to assail one another in the most
quick and sensible parts, and to set us at an irreconcilable distance; the
heart and intention being that grand leading principle by which as the great
searcher of hearts will judge all men hereafter, so likewise that too, by which
they ought principally to stand or fall in the estimate of their
fellow servants here; and therefore not rudely to be assaulted without the
keenest resentments. Let us not therefore, if we have any sense of moderation
and temper, persist to dress up things in shapes, that for ought we know belong
not to them, in hideous and portentous forms to frighten and exasperate one
another, but let us rather ascribe the differences amongst us to error of
judgment, the prejudices of Education, infelicity of Constitution, or to any
other of those either innocent or excusable causes, which render an entire
unity of opinion an impossible thing: but do'nt we by any means set up for
searchers of hearts, and peremptorily judge of men in reference to their future
states; we know whose great attribute that is, and to him, their own master, as
to that particular, must every man stand or fall. Who art thou that invadest
this mighty Prerogative, and that thus arrogantly judge another man's servant?

7ly. Another Rule of the Christian moderation I speak of, I take to be this;
not to charge the faults or failures of particular persons, either upon whole
parties, or their persuasions. For as to to the first of these, it is an open
breach of Justice, Charity, and Logic, all at once, it being against the known
rules of reasoning to argue from a lame induction of particulars to universals,
for in that case there is more in the conclusion than was in the premises,
which is a fallacy, and not to be admitted. St. Jude's Rule therefore of making
a difference, must take place here, and that will set us right. Nor is it,
secondly, any more justifiable to load the several causes men may chance to
maintain with the exorbitancies or irregularities of their particular abetters,
in as much as there is no necessary connection betwixt truth and error in the
understanding, and rectitude and obliquity in the will; we must not then argue
from persons to causes; for as (to instance) we read of several Heretics of
old whose lives were as pure and unblameable, as their errors were gross and
pernicious, so, what is but a melancholy consideration, we need not go far for
instances of those, whose lives are as scandalous, as their communion is
orthodox.

8ly. Another rule of the Moderation I would persuade to, is, not to engage in
any needless contests and disputes about these lesser matters: according to the
advice of the great Apostle in his fourteenth Chapter to the Romans, at the
first verse. Him that is weak in the faith, (who is still scrupulous about his
Mosaic Rites, Meats, Days, etc.) receive ye, but not to doubtful disputations.
In as much as experience shows such conflicts are seldom attended with better
success than with heating both our selves and opponents into passion; and then
for ought I know the giving way to anger and resentment on both sides may be of
worse consequence than the error on either. And therefore possibly 'twere most
advisable for men in such cases, fairly and modestly to propound their reasons,
without endeavoring forcibly to bear down their Adversaries with the strength
of them, for the seeming insult and triumph of such a procedure does but more
impregnably steel men against that conviction, which the truth of our cause,
and the weight of our arguments might otherwise create: better therefore, I
say, leave men to the cool of their thoughts, and suffer private reflection to
work what bearing hard upon them would never produce, if God peradventure will
give them repentance to the acknowledging of the truth we shall have fairly
propounded.

9ly. and lastly, Another Rule of the Moderation I persuade to, is what the
same Apostle advises in the same Chapter to the Romans; above mentioned, at the
third verse. Let not him that eats (him, who, upon the abolition of the
Ceremonial dispensation by our Lord is satisfied, he may lawfully eat of such
meats as in the Levitical Law were reputed unclean) despise him that eats
not; (him, who on the other hand, through his former prejudices thinks himself
still obliged to abstain from them) and let not him which eats not, judge (or
condemn) him that eats. Where it is manifest each party rallied and reflected
on the other. The Eaters it is likely looked upon the noneaters as silly, weak,
and superstitious people, laughed at and ridiculed their childish scrupulosity;
and these he advises to abate of their intellectual pride, and supercilious
scornful humor; the non-eaters on the other side were sullen, sour, and
morose, full of censure, and ill nature, and probably condemned the Eaters as
persons irreligious, that made no conscience of their actions, and who were
ready, upon occasion, to comply with any thing; and these he persuades to
modesty and sobriety in passing their verdicts upon those who were otherwise
persuaded; and indeed the reasonableness and wisdom of the Apostle's advice is
demonstrable from the nature of the two extremes of which these parties were
guilty; contemning and undervaluing on the one hand, and judging and censuring
on the other. For as to the first of these, contempt, nothing in the world is
more exasperating and provoking than it. Men had rather be the objects of your
malice than your scorn; the former supposes them considerable, and every man is
willing to be thought so for something or other, but the latter speaks them
below your notice, and strikes directly at that value which every man is apt to
set upon himself. Nay indeed, all other provocations borrow a great part of
their sting from the contempt they imply, for no man injures or abuses another,
but who at the same time, tacitly, at least, dispises and contemns him. And
then again, for the excess on the other hand, the sour, censorious, judging
humor, that too extremely irritates and provokes, as what, in these lesser
matters especially, looks more like the product of peevishness and malice, than
of ignorance or mistake; and how far the continuance of our unhappy divisions
has been owing to these faults, and the want of putting this Apostolic Rule in
practice, is perhaps a fitter subject for our sorrow than our discussion. I
might detain you longer upon this head, but whilst I treat of Moderation, I
must remember that I am then more especially obliged to keep within bounds my
self, and proceed therefore, briefly, in the last place, to some motives, or
inducements to the practice of it.

And need there indeed any other motives besides the simple reasonableness of
the thing, to induce men to the practice of any one particular I have persuaded
to? need I yet advise men to be sober, modest, prudent, and temperate, when
heats, animosities, and excesses, have almost undone us? and do not the dangers
we have escaped, and the circumstances we are in, call louder upon us than a
thousand other Arguments, to lay aside faction in Religion, and to glorify God
with one heart and one mouth? Surely they do. And if you need any farther
motives consider,

1. That the moderation I recommend is the peculiar virtue and ornament of that
excellent Church you own your selves members of, the Church of England; I say
again, of the Church of England, which in her very fundamental Constitution, is
a mean betwixt the two extremities, Superstition on the one hand, and
Enthusiasm on the other; and as for those excesses her adversaries have been
pleased to charge her with, she is no way in her self, responsible for them,
unless they could, at the same time, prove that the personal failures,
indiscretions, passions, etc. of every particular member of her Communion are
adopted into her Constitution, which were no less an absurd than an
uncharitable Position.

2ly. Let me persuade you to the practice of this virtue, because it is the
truly Evangelical temper, and the practice of the Apostles themselves. The
great Doctor of the Gentiles has left us an undeniable precedent of this matter
in his own person; for though he tells us, He was Free from all men, yet he
made himself a servant unto all, that he might gain the more; He made himself
all things to all men, that by all means he might have some. And how was he to
all, as a Learned Bishop Hall of Exeter.
Prelate of our own asks the question, if he did not sometimes remit of his
right to some, and indeed had the Saint solicited the Christian cause with the
same zeal and stiffness, the Persecutor had pursued it with not long before, he
might have saved himself the labor of preaching the Gospel from Jerusalem
round about to Illiricum, his Gospel had been hid to all intents and purposes:
And in his own language, he had spoke all the while unto the air; in as much as
experience attests, that fierceness and violence are the most improper engines
imaginable to move the great weights of so strong prepossession, and such long
prescription. Nay, it is farther evident that the transactions of the whole
Apostolic Synod recorded in the 15th. of the Acts, are an eminent instance of
the temperate proceeding I at present recommend. For tho they might justly have
insisted upon their Apostolic authority, the extent and plenitude of their
Commission, and the unquestionable infallibility of their decisions, and
thereupon have peremptorily condemned the scrupulous Judaizing Converts by some
Canon, or Decree, to which they should be obliged to submit, without farther
debate, upon pain of Anathema, yet I say, notwithstanding all these
indisputable advantages on their side, it seemed good to the Holy Ghost, and to
the Apostles, to come rather to a Temperament; for they proceeded neither to an
absolute prohibition of the Mosaique Rites after conversion, wisely considering
that they might thereby have exasperated the Judaizing Zealots into an absolute
Apostasy from the faith; nor were they so regardless on the other hand, of the
liberty of the Gentile Converts, as to require any other observances of them
than such as they presumed were requisite, in that exigency of affairs, in
order to a perfect union and agreement amongst them, that they might thereby
prudentially remove such occasions of difference as might obstruct the growth
and progress of the common Christianity in the world.

3ly. Be persuaded to the practice of this virtue, because you thereby make the
nearest approaches that the infirmities of Men, and the circumstances of human
affairs will admit to the Divine O^conomy it self; for what, I beseech you, is
God's whole Government of the world, but a moderation of the rigor of his
justice, with a temperament of mercy? For if he should be extreme to mark what
is done amiss, as we are, should pursue things to their utmost rigor and
extent, take advantage of all the forfeitures we make him, and not recede one
jot from his just pretensions against us, Who could live if God should do this?
and it appears to me a very hard case, that we cannot be induced to treat one
another with the same temper that our common God treats us all with. And this
naturally leads me to shut up all with the sequel of the Text.

Let your Moderation be known unto all men, the Lord is at hand. He is not far
off in his final judgment of all flesh, and then I am sure the best of us all
will stand in need of that temper and moderation in him, which we deny to one
another. He is at hand, again, not far off, possibly, in the execution of some
temp^^ary and heavy judgments upon this sinful Land of our Nativity. Sure I am
that if an unnatural ingratitude, unchristian animosities, ill grounded
jealousies, unreasonable dissatisfactions, sinful murmurings, if, I say, in a
word, one of the worst abuses that ever was of one of the greatest of mercies
in possession, be a fatal forerunner of the forest of Judgments in reversion,
we of all Mankind bid the fairest for them. For if, after God has unexpectedly
dropped his mercies in our mouths, we shall u^gratefully throw them up again,
will not the Divine indignation have just reason to use the same passionate
expostulation with us that he did with the dull murmuring Israelites of old,
What could I have done more for my Vineyard that I have not done for it? and to
inflict likewise the same judgment upon us; Behold, your house is left unto you
desolate. If we will still persist to sacrifice our Holy Religion, the
interests of Truth and of the Gospel, all in a word, that is dear to us as m^n
or Christians, to our passions, animositi^s, s^lf-will, private interests,
notions; or to speak more properly, to we know not what; why then we fall as
ridiculous as unpitied victims, God our deliverer, with all the Nations round
about us, will justly laugh at our calamity; mo^k when our fear comes, and
give us up to that destruction wherein we seem to delight. In a word, the Lord
is at hand, I hope in the midst of this present Assembly, and when thou, Lord,
shall come to judge the World, 'twil^ not then, surely, be enquired, who has
most stiftly and vehemently asserted the little inferior opinions, persuasions,
and interests of his own particular party, but who in his life and conversation
has most promoted the true Spirit and Genius of thy holy Religion for its own
sake, and most labored the advancement of one of those great and glorious ends
thou came into the world for, of Peace on earth, and good will a among men.

FINIS.
Books lately Printed for Richard Chiswell.
THe Case of Allegiance in our present circumstances considered, in a Letter
from a Minister in the City, to a Minister in the Country.

A Sermon preached at Fulham, in the Chapel of the Palace upon Easter day
1689. at the Consecration of the Right Reverend Father in God Gilbert Lord
Bishop of Sarum: By Anthony Horneck, D. D.

The Judgments of God upon the Roman Catholic Church, from its first Rigid
Laws for Universal Conformity to it, unto its last End. With a prospect of
these ^ear approaching Revolutions, Viz. The Revival of the Protestant
profession in ^^ Eminent Kingdom, where it was totally suppressed. The last End
of all (...) Hostilities. The general ratification of the power of the Roman
(...) in all parts of its Dominions. In Explication of the Trumpets and Vials
of the Apocalypse, upon Principles generally acknowledged by Protestant
Interpreters. By Drue Cressener, D. D.

A Breviate of the State of Scotland in its Government, Supreme Courts, Of^^^^s
of State, Inferior Officers, Offices and Inferior Courts, Districts,
Jurisdictions, Buroughs Royal, and Free Corporations. Fol.

Some Considerations touching Succession and Allegiance.

A Discourse concerning the Worship of Images; preached before the University
^^ Oxford: By George Tully Sub-Dean of York, for which he was Suspen^ed

Reflections upon the late Great Revolution: Written by a Lay-Hand in the
C^^ntry, for the satisfaction of some Neighbors.

The History of the Dissertion; or an Account of all the public Affairs in
Eng^^^, from the beginning of September 1688. to the Twelfth of February
following. With an Answer to a Piece called The Dissertion discussed, in a
Letter to ^ Country Gentleman. By a Person of Quality.

^. William and K. Lewis, wherein is set forth the inevitable necessity these
Nations lie under of submitting wholly to one or other of these Kings; And that
^^^ matter in Controversy is not now between K. William and K. James, but
^^^een K. William and K Lewis of France for the Government of these Nations.

An Examination of the Scruples of those who refuse to take the Oath of
Allegiance, by a Divine of the Church of England.

A Dialogue betwixt two Friends, a Jacobite and a Williamite; occasioned by ^^
late Revolution of Affairs, and the Oath of Allegiance.

Two Sermons, one against Murmuring, the other against Censuring: By Sy^^^
Patrick. D. D.

An Account of the Reasons which induced Charles the Second, King of En^^^^, to
declare War against the States General of the United Provinces in 1672. And of
the Private League which he entered into at the same Time with the French ^^^^
to carry it on, and to ^stablish Popery in England, Scotland; and Ireland, as
(...) are set down in the History of the Dutch War, printed in French at Paris,
with ^^^ privilege of the French King, 1682. Which Book he caused to be in
mediate^^ ^^ppress'd at the Instance of the English Ambassador. Fol.

An Account of the Private League betwixt the late King James the Second, (...)
the Fren^h King. Fol.

The Case of Oaths Stated, 4to.

The Answer of a Protestant Gentleman in Ireland to a late Popish Letter of N.
N. upon a Discourse between them, concerning the present posture of that
Country, and the part fit for those concerned there to act in it. 4to.

An Apology for the Protestants of Ireland, in a brief Narrative of the late
Revolutions in that Kingdom; and an Account of the pr^s^^^ State thereof: By a
Gentleman of Quality: 4to.

A Letter from a French Lawyer to an English Gentleman, upon the present
Revolution. 4to.

Mr. Wake's Sermon before the King and Queen at Hampton Court.

-- His Fast-Sermon before the House of Commons, Jun. 5. 1689.

Dr. Tenison's Fast-Sermon before the House of Common^, Jun. 5. 1689.

Scriptorum Ecclesiasticorum Historia Literaria a Christo nato usque ad Se^^ium
XIV. Facili ethodo digesta. Qua de Vita illorum ac Rebus gestis, de Secta,
D^gmatibus, Elogio, Styl^; de Scriptis genuinis, dubiis, supposititiis,
ineditis-de^erdi^^s, Fragmentis; deque variis Operum Edi^ionil us perspicue
agitur. Accedunt Scr^^^res Gentiles, Christian ^ Religionis Oppugnatores; and
cujusvis Saecvli Breviarium. Irseruntur suis locis Veterum aliquot Opuscula and
Fragmenta, tum G^ae^a, tum Lati^^ bactenus inedita, Praemissa denique
Prolegomen^, quibus plurima ad Antiq^^^^^^ Ecclesiasticae st^dium spectantia
traduntur. Opus Indicibus necessariis instructum. Autore GVILIELMO CAVE, SS.
Theol. Profes. Canonico Windeso^iensi. Accedit a^ Alia Man^ Appendi^ ab ineunte
Saeculo XIV. ad Annum usque MDX VII. Fol. 1689.

ADVERTISEMENT.
Whereas a Book, Entitled, FASCICULUS RERUM EXPETENDARUM ET FUGIENDARUM, with
a large Additional APPENDIX, was promised by Richard Chiswell the Undertaker to
be finished in Michaelmas Term last; This is to give Notice. That by reason of
the Sickness of ^he Printer, and some necessary Avocations of the Publisher, it
has been re^arded. But, for the Satisfaction of Subscribers, the Book will be
forty or fifty Sheets more than was promised in the Proposals, which will cost
the Undertaker 100 l. extraordinary, yet, in Consideration thereof, he will not
expect one penny above the first Subscription price; only craves their patience
till the Book can be done, which is now going on with all possible speed, and
so so^^ as finished Notice shall be given in the Gazette. In the mean time
there being some few of the Impression not yet subscribed for, such Gentlemen
as please to take the Benefit thereof may be admitted Subscribers, and may have
Printed Proposals for sending for, at the Rose and Crown in St. Paul's
Churchyard, or at most Booksellers Shops in City or Country.


