AN ABSTRACT OF THE ARGUMENT IN Mr. TVRNER's PAPERS Concerning the MARRIAGE OF
AN UNCLE With the DAUGHTER OF HIS HALF-BROTHER BY THE Father's-side.

LONDON, Printed in the Year, 1686.

AN ABSTRACT OF THE ARGUMENT IN Mr. TVRNER's PAPERS Concerning The Marriage of
an Uncle with the Daughter of his Half-Brother by the Fathers side.
FIRST, The aforesaid Marriage is not expressly forbidden in any Act of
Parliament, wherein the Degrees prohibited are set down.

Secondly, It is not expressly mentioned in the Levitical Law, which the Law of
England follows as its Pattern.

Thirdly, The Law of England, especicially in its Penal Sanctions, has no
regard to Parity of Reason; and the Case is usually the same in Privileges or
Exemptions: This appears by several Proofs alleged to this purpose, page 25,
26, 27. of the First Discourse. And this is likewise proved more largely by
three other Considerations mentioned afterward, page 68, 69, 70. The First is
of a Privilege allowed by Act of Parliament to a Knights eldest Son, which
shall not extend to the eldest Son of a Baronet. The Second is a Matrimonial
Custom, concerning the Marriage of two Brothers to two Sisters, or of Brother
and Sister to Sister and Brother; or of the Sonin-law to the Mother-in-laws
Daughter, or Father-in-laws Daughter, which are not so much as pretended to be
disallowed by our Law, notwithstanding they are all of them so great and
manifest violations of the great and fundamental Reason; if all these
Prohibitions, which was to spread Friendships, and propagate Good Will and
Charity amongst Men, by not restraining the Matrimonial Affinities within too
narrow a a compass. The Third is taken from the express words of the Statute,
25 H. 8. c. 22. wherein the particular prohibited Degrees which are there
enumerated and set down are ushered in with a, that is to say; and afterward
there is reference made to the said Degrees by the words Before rehearsed, and
above expressed; by which it is manifest, that this Act sticks closely to its
own Letter, without admitting Parities or probable Interpretations, it being
absurd to suppose the words that is to say, to refer to those particulars, of
which no mention afterward is made; or that the words before rehearsed, or
above expressed, can refer to such pretended Instances of Prohibition as are no
where rehearsed or expressed; for certainly it is one thing to rehearse or to
express, and another to intimate, to infer, to argue by Parities, Consequences,
or Deductions, how natural, easy, and genuine soever they be: And this is
still farther made out against the exception of my Lord Chief Justice Vaughan,
page 13, 14, 15, 16. of the Addenda and Mutanda.

Fourthly, Learned Men are divided in their Opinions concerning the Nature of
these Laws, whether they be Natural or merely positive: Among the latter sort
are Paulus Burgensis, Cajetanus, C. a Lapide, Sanchez, and the Authors by him
cited, Tirinus, Lorinus, Menochius, and Magalianus. And among the Reformed,
three great Authorities, Drusius, Episcopius, and our Learned Bishop Tailor;
and they that with these Gentlemen are of this Opinion, that the obligation of
these Laws is positive and no more, they have no pretense for a dissolution of
this Marriage; because, in Laws merely positive, there is no such thing as
Parity to be admitted, such Laws being all of them a manifest restraint upon
the Natural Liberties of Mankind, and therefore ought not to be strained by
Parities and Interpretations, whether true or false, beyond the Letter of them.

Fifthly, Though we should allow the prohibitions of Leviticus, to proceed all
of them upon the Measures of Nature, yet though the Laws are Natural, the
Sanction of them is positive, and no more; for God might have assigned other
punishments if he had pleased, as Servitude, hard Labor, Ignominy, Fine,
Confiscation, Imprisonment, the loss of any Limb, or Member, or any other
Punishment short of life it self, without any manner of disparagement to his
Justice, or any violation of the Laws of Nature, wherefore in so great variety
of possible infliction, what punishment can we assign as an Act of Obedience to
the Levitical Law, when that Law it self has not assigned any?

Adultery by the Law of Moses, was punished with Death in both parties, but by
ours it is not so, which is a plain Argument, whatever may be said of unlawful
Marriages, or unlawful Lusts, in which we are governed by the Levitical
Measures; yet, as to the punishments consequent upon them, we have Measures of
our own; and therefore where no Punishment is expressly determined by our Law,
or at least expressly left to the Discretion of the Judge, or Court, or of any
other Person or Persons to whom the Cognizance of the Matter shall appertain;
in this Case no Punishment can lawfully be inflicted: How then can we with
Justice proceed to a Divorce in case of such a Marriage as to which the
Levitical Law is silent as well as ours?

So likewise in the Case of Buggery or Bestiality, it was Death without Mercy
by the Law of Moses; and so it is by ours made Felony without benefit of
Clergy; but this was not till the 25 H. 8. and if by that or some other
Statute, provision had not been made, we must either say, that that Act of
Parliament was altogether fruitless, or else, that it would not have been
Capital to this Moment. Wherefore there being no Punishment expressly assigned,
or expressly left to the Judgment and Discretion of any Ecclesiastical or other
Judge by our Law, though it had been expressly prohibited, and more than that
expressly punishable by the Law of Moses, for a Man to Marry his Niece; yet*
notwithstanding it could not have been so by ours.

Sixthly, If Cousin Germans in the common practice and usage of our Laws are
not prohibited to Marry with each other, notwithstanding the Dispensation
granted to the Daughters of Zelophehad, which Dispensation shows it undeniably
to have been prohibited in all ordinary Cases, and, as it was, it concerned
only the particular Economy of the Jewish State, and the preservation of the
Mosaic Platform of Inheritances among that People, I say, if they are
notwithstanding allowed to Intermarry, merely for this Reason, because they are
not expressly mentioned in that Act of Parliament, wherein the prohibited
Degrees are specified and set down, how shall not then the same privilege be
extended for the same, and for a greater Reason to the Uncle and the Niece, who
are not only not expressly mentioned as Persons prohibited and disallowed by our
Law, but are not so much as mentioned in the Law of Moses it self, where Cousin
Germans are undeniably forbidden?

Seventhly, In the Eighteenth of those Canons which are called Apostolical, and
are without question of great Antiquity and Authority in the Church, A Man that
Marries his Brothers Daughter is not by virtue of the said Canon divorced from
his said Marriage, or excluded from the Communion of the Church, or debarred
any other Privilege, or Immunity of a Christian Man, or of a Member of the
Body Politic, or Ecclesiastic whatsoever; only for Examples sake, he is not
permitted to enter into Holy Orders; which though it show sufficiently, that
the Compilers of these Canons were against all Marriages in this Degree, and
therefore the Clergy were prohibited for an Example to others; yet it is plain,
that at the same time they did not look upon it as a Marriage prohibited or
detested by the Law of God, and such as Christianity, which has a more tender
regard to the propagation of Friendship and Good Will, than the Law of Moses
had, lays an absolute and indispensable obligation upon us to avoid: And this
being, as it is, such a plain testimony of the Opinion of the Ancient Church
concerning Marriages of this Nature, carries great Weight and Authority along
with it, for the deciding this particular Case in favor of the parties that
are concerned in it.

Eighthly, Though this Marriage should be granted to be antecedently prohibited
and unlawful; yet it does not presently follow, that being actually Solemnized
and Consummated by fruition, it shall be made null and void.

Mr. T. in his First Paper has given several From. p. 2. ^o 18. Page 42, 43,
44, ib. and in addend. page ^.
instances of unlawful Acts, which yet notwithstanding, were valid ex post
facto; but what he says as to the Case of Polygamy comes still more home to
our purpose, which though it was forbidden by the Law of Moses, yet a Divorce
was not to ensue upon it; neither was the Christian Law less tender of a
Divorce in the Case of Polygamy with respect to such Parties as had engaged in
it, before they became Disciples and Converts to Christianity, than the Jewish
was, though after our having once embraced that holy Profession; it is now not
only unlawful ex Antecedenti, but a Divorce ought to ensue at least, besides
what other Punishments the Civil Laws shall think reasonable to inflict after
such Polygamy is actually engaged in, not only because of the general design of
Christianity, which aims much more earnestly at all the highest instances of
Charity and Good Will than the Jewish Dispensation did: And therefore the state
of Polygamy, which is a natural occasion of strife, can never be a lawful
Christian State; but also because this Union of the Husband to one Wife, as one
and the same Flesh is declared to be a Symbol of the inseparable Union of
Christ and his Church, and of the entire and incommunicable Love of the one to
the other: And on the other hand, Polygamy, by the Rule of Contraries, is a
Symbol of Polytheism, or of the Worship of many and false Gods, which is the
most directly opposite to Christianity that any thing can possibly be conceived
to be: Wherefore, if the Law of Moses, and if the Christian Dispensation it
self were so extremely tender of a Divorce in this Case, notwithstanding it was
a plain disobedience to an express Divine Prohibition; how much more tender
ought it to be in ours, where there is not only no Punishment assigned (which
we acknowledge to be true of Polygamy it self) but also no express Prohibition
to be found; and where the Breach of Charity, the Honor of Christianity, and
the incommunicable respect and service due to the True and Only God, are the
two first of them not so much, and the latter not at all concerned.

Ninthly, It is very strange, that there should be so express and careful a
Prohibition of the Marriage of the Aunt with the Nephew as there is, Levit. 18.
Verse. 12, 13, 14. by which the Nephew is forbidden to Marry with his Fathers or
Mothers Sister, or Uncles Wife, which is all the possibility of Auntship that
can be supposed: And that all these Cases should be so expressly and so severely
punished as they are Levit. 20. verse. 19, 20. and yet no mention in the least
made of the Uncles Marriage with the Niece, whither of half or whole Blood, or
whether by Consanguity or Affinity in any wise whatsoever; so great solicitude
on the one hand seems utterly inconsistent with so great carelessness and
silence on the other, if the Law of Moses had intended to prohibit both these
sorts of Marriages alike.

Tenthly, What Opinion our best Lawyers have had of Marriages of this kind, may
be seen by these following Precedents, and Reports to be met with in their
Books.

Richard Pearson in the time of King Vaughan' s Reports, page 248.
James the First, Married his Wives Sisters Daughter, for which a Process was
commenced against him in the Spiritual Court, and upon the Suit of the said
Richard Pearson a Prohibition was granted out of the Common Pleas; And it was
resolved by that Court, upon consideration of the Statute 32 Hen. 8. Cap. 38.
that the Marriage was not to be impeached, because declared by the said Act to
be good, in as much as it was not prohibited by the Levitical Degrees; and
since Consanguinities and Affinities, as well by the Levitical as the Civil Law
are the same, and prohibited to the same Degrees; it follows, that this
Marriage must be valid also, if this determination of those Reverend Judges be
good, it being a Consanguinity at the same remove with the allowed and ratified
Affinity of this Instance. Much the same with this was the Case of Harrison
versus Burwell: Harrison had Married his great Aunt, the Widow of Abbot his
Grandfathers Brother, and my Lord Vaughan declares this Marriage to be valid,
page 207. And not only so, but this Case by the Kings Command being referred to
the Opinion of all the Judges of England, the Chief Justice delivered their
Opinions, and accordingly Judgment was given, that a Prohibition ought to go to
the Spiritual Court for the Plantiff.

Now there is nothing more clear, than that the Aunt is expressly forbidden to
the Nephew in Marriage, and for this Reason, which the Law of Moses assigns,
S^e i^ thine Aunt, thy Senior, thy Superior, and in Construction of Law,
Parentis loco, which holds as well, though not so immediately, and indeed the
two first much more strongly in the great Aunt, than in the Aunt at the first
remove; but yet in the Judgment of these Learned Gentlemen, the Law of England
proceeding only by the Letter without any regard, or at least, very little to
Parity of Reason, would not disannul the Marriage of the great Aunt, though the
immediate were so expressly forbidden. Besides this, my Lord Vaughan gives it in
general terms, as his Opinion, page 216. The Marriages particularly declared by
the Acts to be against Gods Law, cannot be dispensed with; but other Marriages,
not by the Acts declared in particular to be against Gods Law are left in Statu
quo prius, as to Dispensations with them, that is, so far as concerns the
Levitical Degrees, they may be, and are actually dispensed with, as many as are
not particularly and actually forbidden; not by the Pope, whose Power of
Dispensation was now abolished and abrogated for ever; nor by any Priestly
Absolution, which accounts only for what is past, but cannot make any thing
lawful de futuro, which either the Law of God or Man makes null and void; but by
the Law it self, which by not prohibiting such Marriages has made them lawful,
which is exactly our Case, and therefore it must be lawful if my Lord Vaughan's
Judgment be of any value. It is true indeed, in Hill and Good's Case, he seems
to vary one while from this determination, but within a very little while, he
returns to his former mind, and confirms this Opinion by a fiction of a Case of
a Man that had Married his Wives Sisters Daughter, before the third of
November, 26 Hen. 8. by dispensation from Rome; and notwithstanding, that all
dispensations from Rome were afterward made void, yet he declares this
Marriage, being not prohibited by Gods Law, limited and declared in the Act of
28. Hen. 8. Cap. 7. to be by the express words of the revived Act, 28 H. 8.
Cap. 16. a Marriage to continue good without separation, as having a validity
of its own to stand upon, extrinsick to any thing of Dispensation from Rome.

Lastly, When in the Act of 32 Hen. 8. Cap. 38. it is enacted, that, No
Prohibition, Gods Law excepted, shall trouble or impeach any Marriage without
the Levitical Degrees. My Lord Cook declares it, as his Judgment, that if it
had not been for those words ( Gods Law except) this Act had excluded the
Impeaching Marriages for plurality of Wives and Husbands at a time, for
Impotency, and for Adultery, because if the Levitical Degrees by our Law had
been made the sole and only measure of Prohibition, and if no Marriage could
have been vacated but for offending against these, our Law which keeps it self
strictly to the Letter in these Cases, would have taken no Cognizance of any
such impediment or obstruction, as did not properly belong to one of these,
which cannot be pretended in any of these three Cases.

Eleventhly, The Law of Moses in the Twentieth of Leviticus has assigned no
Punishment, but that of present Death, in case of any incestuous or prohibited
Conjunction, as will appear to any Man that shall look over that Chapter. The
Law knew no other Punishment for illegitimate Marriages, but Death; and
therefore the Marriage which was not Capital was no offense at all against it,
but was as Legitimate to all intents and purposes as any other Marriage in the
World could be; and not only by the Law of Moses, but by the Theodosian
Rescript concerning Cousin Germans, the next Degree to that which was Capital,
was no Crime at all: For it does not appear, that he forbad Second Cousins to
Marry. If then this Marriage of the Uncle to his Niece be so far from being
expressly punished by the Law of Moses, that it is not any where so much as
mentioned among the Levitical Restraints and Prohibitions; if it be the hardest
Case in Nature to put a Man and Woman to Death for a Consequence, a real or
pretended Parity of Reason, which either he, or she, or both of them might very
well not foresee or understand; and if, at last, there be no Consequence, no
Parity in the Case, as will be undeniably manifested by and by; then it follows
plainly, that the Marriage of the Uncle to the Niece, is so far at least
Legitimate, that it was not at all punishable by the Levitical Law, and that it
cannot be dissolved by virtue of any Act of Parliament now extant among us, or
by any other Power that will proceed either in Punishment or Prohibition upon
the Levitical Measures.

Twelfthly, As there was no legal violent separation among the Jews, but by
Death, unless, when an Husband for Reasons of his own had written a Bill of
Divorce against his Wife; so the reason why Death was inflicted, seems to have
been to prevent any Issue from such Incestuous Conjunctions; or in the Language
of the Law it self, that they might die Childless* the Woman for endeavoring
to bear, and the Man to beget at once a Spurious and Incestuous Offspring. For
a Bastard, as it is every where a Name full of reproach, so among the Jews, he
that was descended of an unlawful Bed, was looked upon as an accursed,
abominable thing, and branded with peculiar and particular marks of Ignominy
and Detestation, and the Descendents from him as far as to the Tenth
Generation, were not to enter into the Congregation of the Lord, Deuteronomy. 23. 2.
And this, though it should happen, as it did for the most part, to be the
effect of no more than Simple Fornication. And how much more detestable must
such a Bastard needs be, who was the Offspring of Incest and Whoredom (for
such sort of Marriages were esteemed no better) in a most execrable Conjunction
and Combination together.

But now it is certainly a very hard Case to make any Man a Bastard by Parity
of Reason, because his Father and Mother happened to do some thing which it was
impossible for him to hinder, which is like another thing which is forbidden,
much less is there any Bastardy in such a Case, where the Parity of Reason does
not hold; and wherever the Offspring is not Spurious the Marriage is
Legitimate: For a Legitimate Son or Daughter cannot possibly be descended but
of Legitimate Parents. And the better to remove all obstacles as to this
matter, out of the way, it is to be observed, that, as to the Phrase of Dying
Childless, the Interpretation just now given, is confirmed by the Authority of
the Learned Jesuit Stephanus Menochius, who in his Comment upon that place
has these remarkable words to the very same Sense with mine, Hi incestuosi non
sinentur in hoc scelere permanere donec liberos babere possint, sed occidantur;
and this, when all is done, is the true meaning of the Text; though the Jews,
who are horribly unskilful in the remote Antiquities of their own Nation, have
devised other fanciful Glosses which will not abide the test of a Judicious
Enquiry: And that we may not wonder at this severity of punishing all
Incestuous Conjunctions with Death, Paulutius Forojuliensis refers it, as he
very well might, besides the Reason given, to the Arbitrary disposal of
Almighty God, who may annex what Sanction he pleases to his Laws; or, which is
all one, to some Impulsive Cause or Motive which he has not thought fit to
reveal, so that with respect to us it is Arbitrary, let it be what it will in
it self; where speaking of Congress with a Menstruous Woman being punished with
Death, he says, Multa alia quae non sunt peccata Mortalia puniebantur poena
mortis ex aliqua causa legislatorem movente, ut esus Sanguinis.

Thirteenthly, It is certain, that Amram took to Wife Jochebed his Fathers
Sister; and this could not be long before the Giving of the Law, for of that
Match Moses, and Aaron, and Miriam were descended. The thing is mentioned in
more places than one of the Scripture, without any manner of blame or
reprehension; and we are not rashly to suppose Persons that were so highly
honored by God with a Prophetic Spirit, a Gift of Miracles, a Priestly
Character annexed for ever to the Family of the one, and a Legislative Power
invested by God himself in the Person of the other, to have been spurious or
illegitimate: From whence it follows, that whatever Reasons of Convenience or
Interest there may be to hinder such Marriages from being entered into, yet it
was not a Matter of absolute and indispensible Obligation, till after the
giving of the Law by Moses; and that if it had not been for the giving of that
Law, it would have remained still in the same prudential indifference which it
had before; for what is once Lawful, must always continue so, till a
supervening Law forbids it, and makes it unlawful. But if the Marriage of the
Nephew to his Aunt were a Marriage good and valid before the giving of the Law
by Moses, that of the Uncle to his Niece was much more, it being in many
repects a more favorable Case, as shall be hereafter declared; and therefore
not being any where expressly forbidden, it must continue still as it was,
Prudential and Indifferent, and consequently Lawful: For when Restraints are
laid upon lawful things, there is no Inference from the Prohibition of one
thing to the Prohibition of another, by parity of Reason, whether pretended or
real; but the Prohibition stops within it self, and extends no further than the
Letter: As if part of a Common Field should be enclosed, and this Enclosure
established and warranted by Law; there lies here no Inference by parity of
Reason for the Enclosure of the rest, but what is not actually and legally
enclosed, is Common, and must remain open, as it did before.

Besides, That Moses, by God's appointment, should so severely forbid the
Marriage of an Aunt with her Nephew, a sort of Marriage of which he himself and
his Brother Aaron were descended, bringing by that means a sort of Aspersion,
and something that is, at least, very like a Reproach, upon himself and his
Family, upon his Brother Aaron and the Family of Priests that were for ever
after descended from his Loins, and yet take no notice in the least of the
Marriage of an Uncle with his Niece, in which he was not concerned, but might
have forbidden it without any manner of Reflection upon himself or his
Relations, if God had intended to prohibit them both alike, is a thing to me so
incredible, that nothing can be more; and, I presume, it will appear so to
every indifferent Person that shall reflect upon it.

Fourteenthly, There is also the Case of Achsah and Othniel, in the Books of
Josuah and Judges; in which if we understand the Text so as that Othniel, who
was the Son of Kenaz, shall be the Half-brother of Caleb by the Mohters Side,
for Caleb was not the Son of Kenaz, but Jephunneh) then here is another
Instance, after the Law, of the Uncle marrying his Niece, the Daughter of his
Half-Brother by the Mothers Side. The words of the Text are these, Jos. 15. 17.
Othniel the Son of Kenaz, the Brother of Caleb, took it (Kirjath-sepher) and he
gave him Achsah his Daughter to Wise. And again, Judges 1. 13. Othniel the Son
of Kenaz, Caleb's younger Brother, took it (Kirjath-sepher): Which words in
both places may either be so interpreted, that Othniel had this double
Relation, he was the Son of Kenaz, and he was likewise Caleb's younger Brother
by the Mothers Side; and then Achsah the Daughter of Caleb will be Othniel's
Niece, and his Niece by a nearer Consanguinity than that in the Case before us:
Or else, that Othniel was the Son of Kenaz, which Kenaz was younger Brother to
Caleb; and so Othniel and Achsah will be Cousin-Germans. Both of these
Interpretations, if there were nothing else but these words to be considered,
are very natural and easy; but when we consider, that after the Death of Caleb
and Josuah the Children of Israel were made Captive by Cushan-rishathaim for
the space of Eight years, Judge. 3. 8. that God raised up this Othniel to be
their Savior and Deliverer out of the Hands of their Oppressor, ver. 9, 10.
and that the Land had rest afterward under the Government of this Othniel for
the space of Forty years; no Man will ever think, that Caleb and Othniel in
that Age of the World could probably be the Sons of the same Mother, when it is
so plainly demonstrable, that there was at least Forty nine or Fifty years
difference between their Ages; for to this Forty eight we must add One or Two
more, because before this Period began they were both Cotemporary, and Caleb,
if he were Brother to Othniel, was then the Elder by a Year or two at the least.

But this is not all: Chap. 2. 8. we have an Account that Josuah died, and ver.
10. that all that Generation, of which Caleb was one, were gathered to their
Fathers; and then before this Revolution of Cushanrishathaim, we have an
account of several other Oppressions which the Jews for their many Sins and
Provocations labored under. So that the distance between the Age of Caleb and
Othniel is still considerably greater than what has been represented. It
remains therefore, that Achsah and Othniel were Cousin-germans, that is,
Brothers Children, who in their Circumstance might lawfully marry; for it
appears, that Achsah was an Heiress, otherwise her Father could not have given
her the Southland, as he did, and added afterward to it the Upper and the
Nether Springs; all which, by the Mosaic Platform of Inheritance, would
otherwise have devolved upon the Male Issue.

If you ask, how any Woman can be called an Heiress, while her Father is yet
living; I answer, That in strictness she could not yet be called by that Name,
there being no Inheritance necessarily devolved upon her; but her Father was
now so old, that he was past the hope or expectation of any more Children: For
at the first entrance of the Children of Israel into the Wilderness, he was one
of the Heads of the Tribes, Numb. 13. 6. and one of those who together with
Josuah and others, v. 17. were sent by Moses to spy out the Land of Canaan.
After this they remained in the Wilderness Forty years; and Josuah, who seems
to have been much of the same Age with Caleb, soon after his entrance upon the
Land of Canaan died, being at his death of the Age of an hundred and ten years,
Jos. 24. 29. Judge. 2. 8. And if we allow Ten or Twenty years, by which Josuah,
without any Reason that appears, shall be supposed to be older than Caleb, the
Age of Caleb at the Marriage of his Daughter Achsah will be an Hundred, or
Ninety at least: Wherefore being so old, and unfit in Person to be at the Head
of a vigorous Assault, he propounds the taking of Kirjath-sepher to some other,
with a Reward: He that smites Kirjath-sepher, and takes it, says he, to him
will I give Achsah my Daughter to Wife. Not that any One Man could take a City
or Town by himself, or that every Man was fit to command a Party, or that the
Inheritance which was to go along with Achsah could be legally diverted from
Othniel, who was the next Heir-male of that Family; only by these general Words
he propounds the Conduct of the Expedition to Othniel, with promise upon
Success that he should be immediately married to his Daughter, which the Old
Man during his Lifetime was not obliged to permit, and have part of the
Inheritance beforehand. And this is the true State of this Case; which though in
it self it be nothing to our purpose, yet there is an use that may be made of
it, and that is this.

That it would be very strange, if God had intended equally to prohibit the
Marriage of an Uncle with his Niece, with that of an Aunt with her Nephew, not
only that he should no where expressly prohibit the former of these, as he has
done the latter; but that the Holy Spirit in this particular Case of Achsah and
Othniel, should speak of the Marriage of Cousin-Germans after such a manner,
that many, and those very Learned Men too, have been induced to believe, it was
the Marriage of the Uncle with his Niece; for of this Opinion were most of
those, whom I have already cited, as Assertors of the merely positive
Obligation of the Mosaic Law.

Fifteenthly, As to the Pretense of Parity of Reason by which a Niece and her
Uncle are debarred from Marriage, because the Aunt and her Nephew are expressly
forbidden, there are these following things to be said in answer to it.

First, That the Rabbinical or Talmudical Jews did allow of the Marriage of an
Uncle with his Niece; which though the Karraites or Scripturary Jews did not, yet
this is so far from doing any prejudice to this Cause, that, on the contrary,
it is a manifest advantage to it; because this is a plain Sign, that the
Talmudists, who could not be ignorant of this disagreement of the Karraitish
Faction, did not err through Inadvertency, as too frequently they do; but their
Opinion was partly founded upon the Tradition of their Church, and partly upon
one of these two Reasons, either that Parity of Reason was not to be admitted
in any of these Matrimonial Affairs, or that indeed there was no such Parity as
is pretended, as will be shown immediately that there is not. And though the
Traditions of the Jewish Masters are in many Cases very uncertain, and in
others plainly false; yet where Tradition and Reason do conspire together, they
give a mutual Strength and Reputation to each other.

For, in the second place, it is plain, that this Parity will not hold, and
that upon these several accounts.

First, In the Marriage of an Aunt with her Nephew, the natural Subordination
of Relations is destroyed, and the true Dependence of Things upon one another.
A Superior, as the Aunt unquestionably was, and one that was loco Parentis, as
well by the Jewish as the Civil Law, as Mr. T. has proved in his Resolutiou of
Three Matrimonial Cases, was forced to submit not only to all the Familiarities
of a Wife, but also to all the Slaveries of a Servant; for Wives were no better
according to the Law of Moses. Whereas in the other Case, of an Uncle marrying
with his Niece, the natural Dependence was preserved, she being already his
Inferior and his Servant. The Impiety of this sort of Marriage of a Man to his
Superior, and to her that in Legal Construction was Parentis loco, is thus
detested by Papinius Statius:

-- illum illum sacris adhibete Nefastis,
Qui laeto dedit ense patrem, qui semet in ortus
Vertit and indignae regerit sua pignora Matri.
And by Lucan,

-- Cui fas implere Parentem,
Quid rear esse Nefas --
Which Places though they be indeed meant of the Mother in the most proper sense,
yet they may be extended without immoderate straining to all that are Parentum
loco. And to this purpose the manner of Expression is remarkable, Lev. 18. 14.
Thou shall not uncover the nakedness of thy Fathers Brother; thou shall not
approach to his Wife: she is thine Aunt: as much as to say, that though she be
of kin to thee only by affinity, being only thy Fathers Brothers Wife, and
coming from abroad out of a Foreign Stock, yet she is thine Aunt, she is
Parentis loco notwithstanding: And therefore it is a great Irreverence, and a
very high and heinous Breach of Duty and Good Manners in thee, to uncover her
nakedness. And Phaedra in Seneca being deeply enamourd of her Son-in-Law
Hippolytus, and yet knowing the Disgrace and Infamy of a Mother-in-Law lying
down to her Son, though this were only a Relation of Affinity, and not really so
near a kin as the Aunt by the Father or Mothers Side, was desirous to forget
that Name for good and all: For thus she says;

Matris superbum est nomen and nimium potens,
Nostros humilius nomen affectus decet,
Me vel Sororem, Hippolyte, vel famulam voca.
Secondly, In the Marriage of the Uncle to the Niece there is greater fitness
for Propagation, which is the great and declared end of Marriage, than in that
of the Aunt to the Nephew. And this Argument is never the less cogent, because
Albericus Gentilis knew three or four Bonny, Brisk Aunts, that were younger
than their Nephews, and his own Aunt, it seems, was one of the number: For a
Law is a general Rule, which regards only the generality of Instances, without
regard to those that are so rare, and so seldom to be met with; besides that
there are other Reasons upon which the Marriage of an Aunt with her Nephew is
prohibited; and where this does not hold, the others do. It is enough, that
generally speaking, Aunts are much Older than their Nephews, and that Women do
not continue fit for Generation so long as Men, by which means it comes to
pass, though the Aunt at the time of Marriage may not in many Instances be
effaete and barren, yet she will not continue Prolifick so long as a Niece: So
that there is a double natural Obstruction against the Marriage of an Aunt with
her Nephew, which does not hold in that of an Uncle with his Niece.

Thirdly, If we consider the same Man as an Uncle with respect to his Niece,
and as a Nephew with respect to his Aunt, here are three Terms at a distance
from each other, and the two Extremes are probably very far asunder: There is,
in all probability, Youth, Beauty, and Virginity, on the one hand; and on the
other, Old Age, Widowhood, and an imparturient Estate. So that, generally
speaking, there is manifestly a greater Temptation to the Marriage of the Uncle
with the Niece, than to that of the Nephew with his Aunt; therefore if the Law
of Moses had intended to forbid the former, as well as the latter, this is that
which ought to have been prohibited in the first place, because there is the
greater Temptation to it; and therefore the Instances of Transgression must of
necessity be more frequent. Neither can any thing be a greater disparagement to
the Wisdom of God, than to say, that he intended both of these sorts of
Marriages should be equally void; and yet at the same time to inculcate that
with so much seeming industry and solicitude, of which there was scarce any
danger; and to omit that wholly, without the least word of notice, whose Danger
was so apparent, whose Temptation is so strong, and whose Instances, without a
very severe and peremptory Prohibition, could not, in all probability, be
unfrequent.

Fourthly, When it is said, Levit. 18. 6. None of you shall approach to any
that is near of kin to him to uncover their nakedness; it is to be observed,
that this Nearness of Kin is to be measured not from our selves, but from the
Fountain of Kindred, that is, from a Common Father or Parent; as when it is
said in the Prohibition of the Aunt by the Father's Side, ver. 12. Thou shall
not uncover the Nakedness of thy Father's Sister, she is thy Father's near
Kinswoman: And again, ver. 13. of the Aunt by the Mothers Side, Thou shall not
uncover the Nakedness of thy Mothers Sister, for she is thy Mothers near
Kinswoman: It is plain, that though my Niece be at the same distance from me in
the descending Line, that mine Aunt is in the ascending; yet when the express
Reason assigned in the Law, why I may not marry mine Aunt, is not because she
is mine, but my Fathers or Mothers near Kinswoman, this is so far from darting
any Prohibition upon my Niece, that it is, on the contrary, plainly favorable
and propitious to a Marriage in that Relation; because my Niece, who is my
Father's Grandchild, is plainly at a further distance from him, than mine Aunt,
who is his Sister; and that for two Reasons. First, Because the one is an
Immediate Relation; but the other, by the Interposition of a Son or Daughter
betwixt, is a Relation at the Second remove: And because no Man or Woman can
get or bear Children by themselves, without the Conjunction of another, it is
therefore only a Relation by the Half Blood; and if it be the Niece by the
Brother, there is not only the Half Blood to be considered, but that that Half
Blood it self is the more weak and uncertain Consanguinity of the two, as will
be seen hereafter. So that if the Nearness to my Father or Mother be the
express Reason assigned in the Law of Moses, why I may not marry mine Aunt, no
Man can with any show of Reason infer from thence, that I am forbid likewise to
marry my Niece, because the Distance is manifestly greater from the Fountain of
Kindred, and the Relation unquestionably more imperfect. So also, when it is
said, ver. 14. Thou shall not uncover the Nakedness of thy Father's Brother,
thou shall not approach to his Wife, she is thine Aunt, here there are three
things manifestly implied.

First, That in the Levitical Prohibitions Consangninities and Affinities are
considered as the same, and are prohibited to the same Degrees. Secondly, That
the Reason of her being forbidden in Marriage, is because she is my Fathers
Brothers Wife; that is, in construction of Law, my Fathers Sister or near
Kinswoman. And thirdly, as in the two former Cases, That this is done out of
Respect and Honor to my Father, with whom she stands upon the same Level or
Horizontal Plane in the Scheme of Consanguinity, or Affinity; so that to marry
mine Aunt, is to make my Father's Equal my Inferior, and to subject her to the
mean and servile Condition of a Wife, to whom I own the Service and Honor of a
Parent. And this is the true Interpretation of those words in this last place,
She is thine Aunt; for every Man knows, without the help of Revelation, that
his Fathers Brothers Wife is his Aunt; but there is manifestly included in them
an intimation of her Superiority over us, by reason of her standing equal in
the Table of Affinity with our Father or Mother; and therefore she ought not to
submit to have her Nakedness uncovered by her Inferior and D^pendent, or put
her self into a Condition of Subjection to him, from whom she may expect and
challenge the Duty, Service, and Allegiance of a Son. And therefore the Greeks
called the Uncle and Aunt by the Names of (...) and (...), alluding, as I
suppose, in the use of these words, to the Ancient, Absolute, and Arbitrary
Power, which all Parents had over their Children; so that as to all the
Instances to which their Power or possibility of Action could extend it self,
they were as absolute and unaccountable as God himself, and were his
Vicegerents upon Earth in their respective Families; and the Uncle and Aunt
were (...) and (...), that is, they has as it were aliquid divini juris in
liberos liberasque fratrum and sororum, they had a Right of Reverence, and a
natural Claim of Duty and Respect from their Nephews and Nieces, which were
accounted but a Remove from Children, and laid so great a weight upon all their
Advices, Admonitions, and Commands, that to disobey them in any thing not very
unreasonable, was accounted an heinous Crime, although their Power of Coercion
were not all out so great as that of their natural and proper Parents.

And now from what has been just now said it is plain, that the Reason of that
Law by which the Nephew is prohibited to marry his Aunt, being founded in these
two things; First, in Nearness of Kin, which is greater to the Father in his
Sister than in his Grandchild: Secondly, in the Superiority and Preeminence of
the Aunt over the Nephew; I say, it is plain, that it cannot from either of
these Considerations be inferred by any Parity of Reason, that the Marriage of
an Uncle with his Niece is forbidden; and with respect to the latter
Consideration, the Superiority is not violated by such a Marriage, but rather
pleased and gratified by it, because it still continues where it was, that is,
in the Uncle; only by Marriage it is rendered more absolute and perfect: So that
unless Contraries may by Parity of Reason be inferred from Contraries, there
can be no Inference from the Prohibition of an Aunt, which shall debar or
obstruct the Marriage of a Niece.

Wherefore it being so clear as it is, that there is no Parity of Reason
between the Marriage of an Uncle with his Niece, and that of a Nephew with his
Aunt, it is now manifest, if we proceed upon the Levitical Measures, that the
Divorce of the Uncle from his Niece is not only indefesible after they are once
married, but that, considering the Levitical as a Positive Law, it is lawful ex
antecedenti, since it is neither forbidden in express words, neither can it be
inferred to be unlawful by parity of Reason; and since the Measures of the
Levitical Law are in this Case of Matrimony the declared Measures of ours, it
follows unavoidably, that what is left indifferent in the Law of Moses,
preserves the same Liberty and Indifference in ours.

In the sixteenth place, it is still further to be considered, That
Cohabitation it self, if it have been of long continuance, is in Law a powerful
Remedy against other Defects; for so we have it upon the Authority of Servius,
Tribus modis apud veteres nuptiae fiebant, (usu Far and Coemptione) usu si
verbi gratia Mulier anno uno cum viro licet sine legibus fuisset, etc. So that
if the Parties married together, and standing in this Relation, have cohabited
for any considerable time, this is one great Argument, and has been all along
so taken in the Civil Law against a Divorce, notwithstanding there be a Fault
admitted in their first coming together.

Seventeenthly, This Case being only the Niece by the Half Blood on the Fathers
Side, which is the more weak and imperfect, this is still a farther
Circumstance very much conducing to favor, and defends it, as appears by the
Case of Abraham, who married his Half Sister by the Fathers Side: For had she
been his Whole Sister, she could not have been his Wife. And this is that which
he urges in his own Defense to Abimelech the King of Gerar, She is the Daughter
of my Father, but not the Daughter of my Mother; and she became my Wife. And
Deuteronomy. 13. 6. it is provided in Case of Idolatry, If thy Brother, the Son of thy
Mother, or thy Son, or thy Daughter, or the Wife of thy Bosom, or thy Friend
which is as thine own Soul, entice thee secretly, saying, Let us go and serve
other Gods, etc. ver. 8. Thou shall not consent unto him, nor hearken unto him,
neither shall thine Eye pity him, neither shall thou spare, neither shall thou
conceal him: ver. 9. But thou shall surely kill him: thine hand shall be first
upon him to put him to death, and afterward the hand of all the People.

The meaning of which Law is, That Idolatry should certainly be punished with
Death, let the Relation be never so nigh, or the Endearment and Friendship
never so great, as appears by those words, or the Wife of thy Bosom, or thy
Friend which is as thine own Soul: And when it is said, Thy Brother the Son of
thy Mother, without mention of the Brother by the Father, it is implied, that
the one is nearer of Kin than the other in the Interpretation of the Levitical
Law; this best answering the Intention of the Law of Moses, which did oblige
them not to conceal even their nearest Relations: And in this Prohibition the
Brother being the Son or supposed Son of the Father, is included a fortiori.

Lastly, The whole stress of our Adversaries Cause is grounded upon Archbishop
Parker's Matrimonial Table; and though we are far from presuming to dispute the
King's Power in dispensing with a Statute in Cases of Necessity, of which He is
the Judge; yet in all Ordinary Cases He is never supposed to intend it: And it
is certain, that when, among other Articles presented to Him by the
Convocation, he gave the Royal Assent to the Matrimonial Table, in which the
Uncle is prohibited to marry his Niece, the Convocation themselves were of
opinion, that this Degree was some way or other prohibited by the Law of Moses;
and the King agreed to this Prohibition, among others, upon that Supposition:
But now, since it appears so plainly, that this sort of Marriage was never
actually forbidden by the Law of Moses, nor so much as intended to be
forbidden; either nothing but God's Law can impeach any Marriage, and by
consequence this cannot be impeached; or else an Act of Parliament may be
repealed by an Act of Convocation, which yet has no power to make any Laws or
Ordinances whatsoever; but what the Parliament it self has given it; and the
Parliament can never be supposed to put a Power destructive of their very
Constitution, into the Hands of the Clergy met together in a Convocation: nay,
they have expressly provided, with the King's Royal Assent, who without
Necessity, which cannot here be pretended, will never break his Word with his
People, (and then the Breach of it is the truest Justice) that no Convocation
shall exercise any such Power.

FINIS.

