DIEV ET MON DROIT.
HONI ^ SOIT ^ QVI ^ MAL ^ Y ^ PENSE
royal blazon or coat of arms

DOAS OLIAIOS,

A Supplement TO THE ENIAYTOS, Or Course of Sermons for the whole year: BEING
SEVEN SERMONS Explaining the Nature of Faith, and Obedience; in relation to
God, and the Ecclesiastical and Secular Powers respectively.

All that have been Preached and Published (since the Restoration)

By the Right Reverend Father in God, JEREMY, Lord Bishop of Down and Connor.

To which is adjoined, His Advice to the Clergy of his Diocese.

LONDON: Printed for Richard Royston, Bookseller to the Kings most Sacred
Majesty, 1663.

THE Righteousness Evangelical DESCRIBED. THE CHRISTIANS CONQUEST Over the Body
of Sin. FIDES FORMATA, OR FAITH working by LOVE.

IN THREE SERMONS PREACHED AT CHRIST -- CHURCH, DVBLIN.

By the Right Reverend Father in God JEREMIAH, Lord Bishop of Down and Connor.

The second Edition.

London, Printed for R. Royston, Bookseller to the Kings, most Excellent
Majesty, 1663.

Imprimatur.

M. Franck. S. T. P. R. in Christ. Pat. ac D. D. Archiep. Cant. a Sac. Dom.
Sept. 21. 1663.
TO THE Most Noble and Virtuous Princess, The Lady Duchess OF ORMONDE HER
GRACE.
Madam,
I Present your Grace here with a Testimony of my Obedience, and of your own
Zeal for the good of Souls. You were in your great Charity, not only pleased to
pardon the weakness of this discourse, but to hope it might serve as a memorial
to th^se that need it, of the great necessity of living virtuously, and by the
measures of Christianity. Madam, you are too Great and too good to have any
ambition for the things of this World; but I cannot but observe that in your
designs for the other World, you, by your Charity and Zeal, adopt your self
into the portion of those Ecclesiastics, who humbly hope and truly labor for
the reward that is promised to those wise persons who convert souls. If our
prayers and your desires that every one should be profited in their eternal
concerns cast in a Symbol toward this great work, and will give you a title to
that great reward; But, Madam, when I received your commands for dispersing
some Copies of this Sermon, I perceived it was too little to be presented to
your Eminence; and if it were accompanied with something else of the like
nature, it might with more profit advance that end which your Grace so piously
designed; and therefore I have taken this opportunity to satisfy the desire of
some very Honorable and very Reverend Personages, who required that the two
following Sermons should also be made fit for the use of those who hoped to
receive profit by them. I humbly lay them all at your Graces Feet, begging of
God, that even as many may receive advantages by the perusing of them as either
your Grace will desire, or He that preached them did intend. And if your Grace
will accept of this first Testimony of my concurrence with all the World that
know you, in paying those great regards, which your piety so highly merits, I
will endeavor hereafter in some greater instance to pursue the intentions of
Your zeal of souls, and by such a service endeavor to do more benefit to
others, and by it, as by that which is most acceptable to your Grace, endear
the Obedience and Services, of

Madam, Your Graces most humble and Obedient Servant. J. D.

The Titles and Texts of the several Sermons.
SERMON. I. The Righteousness Evangelical. Matthew. 5.20. For I say unto you, that
except your righteousness exceed the righteousness of the Scribes and
Pharisees, ye shall in no wise enter into the kingdom of heaven.

SERMON. II. The Christians Conquest over the Body of Sin. Romans 7.19. For the
good that I would, I do not; but the evil which I would not, that I do.

SERMON. III. Faith working by Love. James 2.4. You see then how that by works a
man is justified, and not by faith alone.

SERMON. IV. Preached at an Episcopal Consecration. Luke 12.42. And the Lord
said, Who then is that faithful and wise steward, whom his Lord shall make
ruler over his household to give them their portion of meat in due season?

43. Blessed is that servant whom his Lord when he comes shall find so doing.

SERMON. V. Preached at the Opening the Parliament of Ireland. 1 Samuel 15.22.
Behold, to obey is better then sacrifice, and to hearken then the fat of rams:

23. For rebellion is as the sin of witchcraft, and stubbornness is as iniquity
and idolatry.

SERMON. VI. Via Intelligentiae. John 7.17. If any man will do his will, he shall
know of the doctrine whether it be of God, or whether I speak of my self.

SERMON. VII. Preached at the Funeral of the L. Primate of Ireland. 1 Cor. 15.23.
But every man in his own order; Christ the first fruits, and after they that
are Christ's at his coming.

Rules and Advices to the Clergy of the Diocese of Down and Connor.

THE Righteousness Evangelical DESCRIBED.
MATTHEW. V. 20. For I say unto you, that except your Righteousness exceed the
Righteousness of the Scribes and Pharisees, ye shall in no case enter into the
Kingdom of Heaven.


REwards and Punishments are the best Sanction of Laws; and although the
Guardians of Laws strike sometimes with the softest part of the hand in their
Executions of sad Sentences, yet in the Sanction they make no abatements, but
so proportion the Duty to the Reward, and the Punishment to the Crime, that by
these we can best tell what Value the Lawgiver puts upon the Obedience.
Joshuah put a great rate upon the taking of Kiriath-Sepher, when the Reward of
the Service was his Daughter and a Dower. But when the Young men ventured to
fetch David the waters of Bethlehem, they had nothing but the praise of their
Boldness, because their Service was no more than the satisfaction of a
Curiosity. But as Lawgivers by their Rewards declare the value of the
Obedience, so do Subjects also by the grandeur of what they expect set a value
on the Law and the Lawgiver, and do their Services accordingly.

And therefore the Law of Moses, whose endearment was nothing but temporal
goods and transient evils, Heb. 7.19.
could never make the comers thereunto perfect: but the (...), the
Superinduction of a better Hope has endeared a more perfect Obedience. When
Christ brought Life and Immortality to light through the Gospel, and has
promised to us things greater than all our explicit Desires, bigger than the
thoughts of our heart, then (...), says the Apostle, then we draw near to God;
and by these we are enabled to do all that God requires, and then he requires
all that we can do; more Love, and more Obedi^nce than he did of those who for
want of these Helps, and these Revelations, and these Promises, which we have,
but they had not, were but imperfect persons, and could do but little more than
humane Services. Christ has taught us more, and given us more, and promised to
us more than ever was in the world known or believed before him; and by the
strengths and confidence of these, thrusts us forward in a holy and wise
Economy, and plainly declares that we must serve him by the measures of a new
Love, do him Honor by wise and material Glorifications, be united to God by a
new Nature, and made alive by a new Birth, and fulfill all Righteousness; to be
humble and meek as Christ, to be merciful as our Heavenly Father is, to be pure
as God is pure, to be partakers of the Divine Nature, to be wholly renewed in
the frame and temper of our mind, to become people of a new heart, a direct new
Creation, new Principles and a new Being, to do better than all the world
before us ever did, to love God more perfectly, to despise the world more
generously, to contend for the Faith more earnestly; for all this is but a
proper and a just consequent of the great Promises which our Blessed Lawgiver
came to publish and effect for all the world of Believers and Disciples.

The matter which is here required is certainly very great; for it is to be
more righteous than the Scribes and Pharisees; more holy than the Doctors of
the Law, than the Leaders of the Synagogue, than the wise Princes of the
Sanhedrim: more righteous than some that were Prophets and High Priests, than
some that kept the Ordinances of the Law without blame: men that lay in
Sackcloth, and fasted much, and prayed more, and made Religion and the Study of
the Law the work of their lives. This was very much; but Christians must do
more.

Nunc te marmoreum pro tempore fecimus; at tu,
Si foetura gregem suppleverit, aureus esto.
They did well, and we must do better; their houses were Marble, but our roofs
must be gilded and fuller of Glory. * But as the matter is very great, so the
necessity of it is the greatest in the world. It must be so, or it will be much
worse: unless it be thus, we shall never see the glorious Face of God. Here it
concerns us to be wise and fearful; for the matter is not a question of an
Oaken Garland, or a Circle of Bays, and a Yellow Ribband: it is not a question
of Money or Land, nor of the vainer rewards of popular noises, and the
undiscerning Suffrages of the people, who are contingent Judges of good and
evil: but it is the great stake of Life Eternal. We cannot be Christians,
unless we be righteous by the new measures: the Righteousness of the Kingdom is
now the only way to enter into it, for the Sentence is fixed, and the Judgment
is decretory, and the Judge infallible, and the Decree irreversible: For I say
unto you, said Christ, unless your righteousness exceed the righteousness of
the Scribes and Pharisees, ye shall in no wise enter into the Kingdom of Heaven.

Here then we have two things to consider. 1. What was the righteousness of the
Scribes and Pharisees. 2. How far that is to be exceeded by the Righteousness
of Christians.

1. Concerning the First. I will not be so nice in the Observation of these
words, as to take notice that Christ does not name the Sadduces, but the
Scribes and Pharisees, though there may be something in it: the Sadduces were
called Caraim from Cara, to read; for they thought it Religion to spend one
third part of their day in reading their Scriptures, whose fullness they so
admired they would admit of no suppletory Traditions. But the Pharisees were
called Thannaim, that is (...), they added to the Word of God words of their
own, as the Church of Rome does at this day, they and these fell into an equal
fate; while they taught far Doctrines the Commandments of men, they
prevaricated the righteousness of God. What the Church of Rome to evil purposes
has done in this particular, may be demonstrated in due time and place; but
what false and corrupt glosses under the specious title of the Tradition of
their Fathers the Pharisees had introducedour, Blessed Savior reproves, and
are now to be represented as the (...), that you may see that Righteousness
beyond which all they must go that intend that Heaven should be their Journeys
end.

1. The Pharisees obeyed the Commandments in the Letter, not in the Spirit.
They minded what God spoke, but not what he intended: they were busy in the
outward work of the hand, but incurious of the affections and choice of the
heart. (...), said Justin Martyr to Tryphon the Jew, Ye understand all things
carnally; that is, they rested (...), as Nazianzen calls it, in the outward
work of Piety, which not only Justin Martyr, Gal. 3.3. and Gal. 6.12.13.

Philip. 3.34.


but St. Paul calls Carnality, not meaning a carnal Appetite, but a carnal
Service. Their error was plainly this; they never distinguished Duties natural
from Duties relative; that is, whether it were commanded for it self, or in
order to something that was better; whether it were a principal Grace, or an
instrumental Action. So God was served in the Letter, they did not much inquire
into his Purpose. And therefore they were curious to wash their hands, but
cared not so much to purify the hearts; They would give Alms, but hate him
that received it; they would go to the Temple, but did not revere the Glory of
God that dwelt there between the Cherubins: they would fast, but not mortify
their Lusts; they would say good Prayers, but not labor for the Grace they
prayed for. This was just as if a man should run on his Masters errand, and do
no business when he came there. They might easily have thought that by the Soul
only a man approaches to God, and draws the Body after it, but that no washings
or corporal Services could unite them and the Shechinah together, no such thing
could make them like to God, who is the Prince of Spirits.* They did as the
Dunces in Pythagoras School, who when their Master had said, Fabis abstineto,
by which he intended they should not ambitiously seek for Magistracy, they
thought themselves good Pythagoreans if they did not eat Beans; and they would
be sure to put their Right foot first into the shoe, and their Left foot into
the water, and supposed they had done enough, though if they had not been Fools
they would have understood their Masters meaning to have been, that they should
put more affections to labor and travel, and less to their pleasure and
recreation; and so it was with the Pharisee. For as the Chaldees taught their
Morality by mystic words, and the Egyptians by Hieroglyphics, and the Greeks
by Fables; so did God by Rites and Ceremonies external; leading them by the
Hand to the Purities of the Heart; and by the Services of the Body to the
Obedience of the Spirit; which because they would not understand, they thought
they had done enough in the observation of the Letter.

2. In moral Duties, where God expressed Himself more plainly, they made no
Commentary of kindness; but regarded the Prohibition so nakedly, and divested
of all Antecedents, Consequents, Similitudes and Proportions, that if they
stood clear of that hated name which was set down in Moses Tables, they gave
themselves liberty in many instances of the same kindred and alliance. If they
abstained from murder, they thought it very well, though they made no scruple
of murdering their Brothers fame; they would not cut his throat, but they would
call him Fool, or invent lies in secret, and publish his disgrace openly; they
would not dash out his brains, but they would be extremely and unreasonably
angry with him; they would not steal their brothers money, but they would
oppress him in crafty and cruel bargains. The Commandment forbade them to
commit Adultery, but because Fornication was not named, they made no scruple of
that; and being commanded to Honor their Father and their Mother, they would
give them good words and fair observances, but because it was not named that
they should maintain them in their need, they thought they did well enough to
pretend Corban and let their Father starve.

3. The Scribes and Pharisees placed their Righteousness in Negatives; they
would not commit what was forbidden; but they cared but little for the included
positive, and the omissions of good Actions did not much trouble them; they
would not hurt their Brother in a forbidden instance, but neither would they do
him good according to the intention of the Commandment; It was a great
Innocence if they did not rob the Poor, then they were righteous men; but
thought themselves not much concerned to acquire that god-like excellency, a
Philanthropy and love to all mankind. Whosoever blasphemed God was to be put to
death; but he that did not glorify God as he ought, they were unconcerned for
him, and let him alone; he that spoke against Moses was to die without mercy;
but against the ambitious and the covetous, against the proud man and the
unmerciful they made no provisions.

Virtus est vitium fugere, and sapientia prima
Stultitia caruisse.
They accounted themselves good, not for doing good, but for doing no evil;
that was the sum of their Theology.

4. They had one thing more as bad as all this. They broke Moses Tables into
pieces, and gathering up the fragments took to themselves what part of Duty
they pleased, and let the rest alone. For it was a Proverb amongst the Jews,
Qui operam dat praecepto, liber est a praecepto; that is, If he chooses one
positive Commandment for his business, he may be less careful in any of the
rest. Indeed they said also, Qui multiplicat legem, multiplicat vitam; he that
multiplies the Law, increases Life; that is, if he did attend to more good
things, it was so much the better; but the other was well enough: but as for
Universal Obedience, that was not the measure of their Righteousness; for they
taught that God would put our good works and bad into the balance, and
according to the heavier scale give a portion in the world to come: so that
some evil they would allow to themselves and their Disciples; always provided
it was less than the good they did. They would devour Widows houses, and make
it up by long Prayers; they would love their Nation and hate their Prince,
offer Sacrifice and curse Caesar in their heart, advance Judaism and destroy
Humanity.

Lastly, St. Austin summed up the difference between the Pharisaical and
Evangelical righteousness, in two words; Brevis differentia inter Legem and
Evangelium; timor and amor. They served the God of their Fathers in the spirit
of Fear, and we worship the Father of our Lord Jesus in the spirit of Love, and
by the spirit of Adoption; and as this Slavish principle of theirs was the
cause of all their former Imperfections, so it finally and chiefly expressed it
self in these two particulars. 1. They would do all that they thought they
lawfully could do. 2. They would do nothing but what was expressly commanded.

This was the Righteousness of the Scribes and Pharisees, Sed Belzebulis
callida Commenta Christus destruit.
and their Disciples the Jews, which because our B. Savior reproves, not only
as imperfect then, but as criminal now, calling us on to a new Righteousness,
the Righteousness of God, to the Law of the Spirit of Life, to the Kingdom of
God and the proper Righteousness thereof, it concerns us in the next place to
look after the measures of this, ever remembering that it is infinitely
necessary that we should do so; and men do not generally know, or not consider
what it is to be a Christian; they understand not what the Christian Law
forbids or commands. But as for this in my Text, it is indeed our great
measure: but it is not a question of good and better, but of Good and Evil,
Life and Death, Salvation and Damnation; for unless our Righteousness be
weighed by new weights, we shall be found too light, when God comes to weigh
the actions of all the world: and unless we be more righteous than they, we
shall in no wise, that is, upon no other terms in the world enter into the
Kingdom of Heaven.

Now concerning this, we shall do very much amiss, if we take our measures by
the manners and practices of the many who call themselves Christians; for there
are, as Nazianzen expresses it, the (...), the old and the new Pharisees. I
wish it were no worse amongst us; and that all Christians were indeed Righteous
as they were; est aliquid prodire tenus; it would not be just nothing. But I am
sure that to bid defiance to the Laws of Christ, to laugh at Religion, to make
a merriment at the debauchery and damnation of our Brother, is a state of evil
worse than that of the Scribes and Pharisees: and yet even among such men how
impatient would they be, and how unreasonable would they think you to be, if
you should tell them, that there is no present hopes or possibility that in
this state they are in they can be saved.

Omnes videmur nobis esse belluli
Et festivi, Saperdae cum simus, (...)
But the world is too full of Christians whose Righteousness is very little,
and their Iniquities very great; and now adays, a Christian is a man that comes
to Church on Sundays, and on the week following will do shameful things; Passim
corvos sequitur, testaque lutoque
Securus quo pes ferat, at que ex tempore vivit,
being according to the Jewish proverbial reproof, as so many Mephibosheths:
discipuli sapientum qui incessu pudefaciunt praeceptorem suum; their Master
teaches them to go uprightly; but they still show their lame leg, and shame
their Master; as if a man might be a Christian, and yet be the vilest person in
the world, doing such things for which the Laws of men have provided smart and
shame, and the Laws of God have threatened the intolerable pains of an
unsufferable and never ending damnation. Example here cannot be our rule unless
men were much better, and as long as men live at the rate they do, it will be
to little purpose to talk of exceeding the Righteousness of the Scribes and
Pharisees: but because it must be much better with us all, or it will be very
much worse with us at the latter end, I shall leave complaining and go to the
Rule, and describe the necessary and unavoidable measures of the righteousness
Evangelical, without which we can never be saved.

1. Therefore when it is said our Righteousness must exceed that of the Scribes
and Pharisees, let us first take notice by way of praecognition, that it must
at least be so much: we must keep the Letter of the whole Moral Law; we must do
all that lies before us, all that is in our hand: and therefore (...), which
signifies to be religious, the Grammarians derive (...), from reaching forth
the hand: the outward work must be done; and it is not enough to say, My heart
is right, but my hand went aside. Prudentius says, that St. Peter wept so
bitterly, because he did not confess Christ openly, whom he loved secretly.
Flevit negator denique
Ex ore prolapsum nefas,
Cum men's maneret innocens,
Animusque servarit fidem.
A right heart alone will not do it; or rather the heart is not right when the
hand is wrong. If a man strikes his Neighbor, and says, Am not I in jest? It is
folly and shame to him, said Solomon. For, once for all; Let us remember this,
that Christianity is the most profitable, the most useful, and the most
bountiful institution in the whole world, and the best definition I can give of
it is this; It is the Wisdom of God brought down among us to do good to men;
and therefore we must not do less than the Pharisees, who did the outward work;
at least let us be sure to do all the work that is laid before us in the
Commandments. And it is strange that this should be needful to be pressed
amongst Christians whose Religion requires so very much more. But so it is,
upon a pretense that we must serve God with the mind. Some are such fools as to
think that it is enough to have a good meaning. Iniquum perpol verbum est, been
vult, nisi qui been facit. And because we must serve God in the Spirit,
therefore they will not serve God with their Bodies; and because they are
called upon to have the power and the life of Godliness, they abominate all
external works as mere forms; and because the true fast is to abstain from Sin,
therefore they will not abstain from meat and drink, even when they are
commanded; which is just as if a Pharisee being taught the Circumcision of the
heart should refuse to Circumcise his Flesh; and as if a Christian, being
instructed in the Excellencies of Spiritual Communion, should wholly neglect
the Sacramental; that is, because the Soul is the life of man, therefore it is
fitting to die in a humor, and lay aside the Body. * This is a taking away the
Subject of the Question; for our iniquiry is, How we should keep the
Commandments; how we are to do the work that lies before us, by what
Principles, with what Intention, in what Degrees, after what manner, ut bonum
been fiat, that the good thing be done well. This therefore must be
presupposed; we must take care that even our Bodies bear a part in our
Spiritual Services. Our voice and tongue, our hands and our Feet, and our very
bowels must be servants of God, and do the work of the Commandments.

This being ever supposed, our Question is, how much more we must do; and the
first measure is this; Whatsoever can be signified and ministered to by the
Body, the Heart and the Spirit of a man must be the principal Actor. We must
not give Alms without a charitable Soul, nor suffer Martyrdom but in Love and
in Obedience; and when we say our Prayers, we do but mispend our time unless
our mind ascend up to God upon the wings of desire.

Desire is the life of prayer; and if you indeed desire what you pray for, you
will also labor for what you desire; and if you find it otherwise with your
selves, your coming to Church is but like the Pharisees going up to the Temple
to pray. If your heart be not present, neither will God; and then there is a
found of men and women between a pair of dead walls, from whence because
neither God nor your Souls are present, you must needs go home without a
Blessing.

But this measure of Evangelical righteousness is of principal remark in all
the rites and solemnities of Religion; and intends to say this, that Christian
Religion is something that is not seen, it is the hidden man of the heart;
(...), it is God that dwells within; and true Christians are men, who, as the
Chaldee Oracle said, are (...), clothed with a great deal of mind. And
therefore those words of the Prophet Hosea, Et loquar ad cor ejus, Hos. 2.14.
I will speak unto their heart; is a proverbial expression, signifying to speak
spiritual comforts, and in the mystical sense signifies (...), to preach the
Gospel; where the Spirit is the Preacher, and the Heart is the Disciple, and
the Sermon is of Righteousness and Peace, and Joy in the Holy Ghost. Our
Service to God must not be in outward works and Scenes of Religion, it must be
something by which we become like to God; the Divine Prerogative must extend
beyond the outward man; nay, even beyond the mortification of Corporal vices;
the Spirit of God must go in trabis crassitudinem, and mollify all our secret
pride, and ingenerate in us a true humility, and a Christian meekness of
Spirit, and a Divine Charity. For in the Gospel, when God enjoins any external
Rite or Ceremony, the outward work is always the less principal. For there is
a bodily and a carnal part, an outside and a Cabinet of Religion in
Christianity it self. When we are baptized, the purpose of God is that we
cleanse our selves from all pollution of the Flesh and Spirit, and then we are
indeed (...), clean all over. And when we communicate, the Commandment means
that we should be made one Spirit with Christ, and should live on him,
believing his Word, praying for his Spirit, supported with his Hope, refreshed
by his promises, recreated by his Comforts, and wholly and in all things
conformable to his Life; that is the true Communion. The Sacraments are not
made for Sinners until they do repent; they are the food of our Souls, but our
Souls must be alive unto God, or else they cannot eat; It is good to confess
our sins, as St. James says, and to open our wounds to the Ministers of
Religion, but they absolve none but such as are truly penitent.

Solemn Prayers, and the Sacraments, and the Assemblies of the Faithful, and
fasting days, and acts of external worship, are the solemnities and rites of
Religion; but the Religion of a Christian is in the Heart and Spirit. And this
is that by which Clemens Alexand^inus defined the Righteousness of a Christian,
(...): all the parts and faculties that make up a man, must make up our
Religion; but the heart is Domus principalis, it is the Court of the great
King; and he is properly served with interior graces and moral Virtues, with a
humble and a good mind, with a bountiful heart, and a willing Soul, and these
will command the eye, and give laws to the hand, and make the shoulders stoop,
but anima cujusque est quisque; a man's soul is the man, and so is his Religion;
and so you are bound to understand it.

True it is, God works in us his Graces by the Sacrament; but we must dispose
our selves to a reception of the Divine blessing by Moral instruments. The Soul
is (...), it must work together with God, and the body works together with the
soul: But no external action can purify the soul, because its Nature and
Operations being Spiritual, it can no more be changed by a Ceremony or an
external Solemnity, than an Angel can be caressed with sweet Meats, or a Man's
belly can be filled with Music or long Orations. The sum is this: No Christian
does his Duty to God but he that serves him with all his heart: And although it
becomes comes us to fulfill all righteousness, even the external also; yet that
which makes us gracious in his Eyes is not the external, it is the love of the
heart and the real change of the mind and obedience of the spirit; that is the
first great measure of the Righteousness Evangelical.

2. The Righteousness Evangelical must exceed that of the Scribes and Pharisees
by extension of our Obedience to things of the same signification; De legibus
l. scire.
Leges non ex verbis, sed ex mente intelligendas, says the Law. There must be
a Commentary of kindness in the understanding the Laws of Christ. We must
understand all Gods meaning; we must secure his service, we must be far removed
from the dangers of his displeasure. And therefore our Rigteousness must be the
purification and the perfection of the Spirit. So that it will be nothing for
us not to commit Adultery, unless our Eyes and Hands be chaste, and the desires
be clean. A Christian must not look upon a woman to lust after her. He must
hate Sin in all dimensions, and in all distance, and in every angle of its
reception. A Christian must not sin, and he must not be willing to sin if he
durst. He must not be lustful, and therefore he must not feed high, nor drink
deep, for these make provisions for lust: and amongst Christians, great eatings
and drinkings are acts of uncleanness as well as of intemperance, and whatever
ministers to sin, and is the way of it; it partakes of its nature and its curse.

For it is remarkable that in good and evil the case is greatly different.
Mortification ( e. g.) is a duty of Christianity; but there is no Law
concerning the Instruments of it. We are not commanded to roll our selves on
thorns, as St. Benedict did; or to burn our flesh, like St. Martinian; or to
tumble in Snows with S. Francis; or in pools of water with S Bernard. A man may
chew Aloes, or ly upon the ground, or wear sackcloth if he have a mind to it,
and if he finds it good in his circumstances and to his purposes of
mortification; but it may be he may do it alone by the Instrumentalities of
Fear and Love; and so the thing be done, no special Instrument is under a
command. * But although the Instruments of virtue are free, yet the Instruments
and ministeries of vice are not. Not only the sin is forbidden, but all the
ways that lead to it. The Instruments of virtue are of themselves indifferent,
that is, not naturally, but good only for their relation sake, and in order to
their end. But the Instruments of vice are of themselves vicious; they are part
of the sin, they have a share in the fantastic pleasure, and they begin to
estrange a man's heart from God, and are directly in the prohibition. For we are
commanded to fly from temptation, to pray against it, to abstain from all
appearances of evil, to make a covenant with our eyes, to pluck them out if
there be need. And if Christians do not understand the Commandments to this
extension of signification, they will be innocent only by the measures of
humane laws, but not by the righteousness of God.

3. Of the same consideration it is also that we understand Christ's
Commandments to extend our Duty, not only to what is named, and what is not
named of the same nature and design; but that we abstain from all such things
as are like to sins. * Of this nature there are many. All violences of Passion,
Irregularities in Gaming, Prodigality of our time, Undecency of action, doing
things unworthy of our Birth or our Profession, aptness to go to Law, Ambitus,
or a fierce prosecution even of honorable employments; misconstruction of the
words and actions of our brother; easiness to believe evil of others,
willingness to report the evil which we hear; curiosity of Diet, peevishness
toward servants, indiscreet and importune standing for place, and all excess in
ornaments; for even this little instance is directly prohibited by the
Christian and royal Law of Charity. For (...), says St. Paul; the word is a
word hard to be understood; we render it well enough; Charity vaunteth not it
self; and upon this Saint Basil says, that an Ecclesiastic person (and so
every Christian in his proportion) ought not to go in splendid and vain
Ornaments; (...): Every thing that is not wisely useful or proportioned to the
state of the Christian, but ministers only to vanity, is a part of this (...),
it is a vaunting, which the Charity and the Grace of a Christian, does not well
endure. * These things are like to sins, they are of a suspicious nature, and
not easily to be reconciled to the righteousness Evangelical. It is no wonder
if Christianity be nice and curious; it is the cleanness and the purification
of the Soul, and Christ intends to present his Church to God (...), without
spot or wrinkle, or any such thing. N. B. or any such thing. If there be any
irregularity that is less than a wrinkle, the Evangelical righteousness does
not allow it. * These are such things which if men will stand to defend,
possibly a modest Reprover will be more ashamed than an impudent Offender. *If
I see a person apt to quarrel, to take every thing in an ill sense, to resent
an error deeply, to reprove it bitterly, to remember it tenaciously, to repeat
it frequently, to upbraid it unhandsomly, I think I have great reason to say,
that this person does not do what becomes the sweetness of a Christian Spirit.
If it be replied, It is no where forbidden to chide an offending person, and
that it cannot be a fault to understand when a thing is said or done amiss. I
cannot return an answer, but by saying, That suppose nothing of it were a sin,
yet that every thing of it is so like a sin, that it is the worse for it; and
that it were better not to do so; at least I think so, and so ought you too, if
you be curious of your eternal interest: a little more tenderness here would do
well, I cannot say that this dress, or this garment, or this standing for place
is the direct sin of pride; but I am sure it looks like it in some persons; at
least the letting it alone is much better, and is very like humility. And
certain it is, that he is dull of hearing who understands not the voice of God,
unless it be clamorous in an express and a loud Commandment, proclaimed with
Trumpets and Clarions upon mount Sinai; but a willing and an obedient ear
understands the still voice of Christ, and is ready to obey his meaning at half
a word; and that is the righteousness Evangelical. It not only abstains from
Sins named, and sins implied, but from the beginnings and instruments of sin;
and from whatsoever is like it. The Jews were so great haters of Swine upon
pretensions of the Mosaic rites, that they would not so much as name a Swine,
but called it (...) Daber Acher another thing. And thus the Romans in their
Auguries used alterum for non bonum. The simile of this St. Paul translates to
a Christian duty. Let not fornication be so much as named amongst you, (...),
as is comely amongst Christians, that is, come not near a foul thing; speak not
of it, let it be wholly banished from all your conversation; for this niceness
and curiosity of duty becomes Saints, and is an instance of the righteousness
Evangelical.

I have now done with the first sort of measures of the Christian
righteousness; these which are the matter of our negative duty; these are the
measures of our caution and our first innocence. But there are greater things
behind, which although I must crowd up into a narrow room, yet I must not
wholly omit them: therefore

4. The fourth thing I shall note to you is, that whereas the righteousness of
the Pharisees was but a fragment of the broken Tables of Moses; the pursuance
of some one Grace, lacinia sanctitatis, a piece of the robe of righteousness;
the righteousness Evangelical must be like Christ's seamless Coat, all of a
piece from the top to the bottom; it must invest the whole Soul: Misma, Dumah,
Massah, said the Proverb of the Rabbis, It is this, and it is the other, and
it must be all, it must be an universal righteousness; not a little knot of
holy actions scattered in our lives, and drawn into a sum at the day of
Judgment, but it must be a state of holiness. It was said of the Paphlagonian
Pigeons (...), every one of them had two hearts; but that in our mystical
Theology signifies a wicked man. Prove. 28.14.
So said Solomon, The perverse or wicked man derachaim he is a man of two ways;
(...), so S. James expresses an unbeliever; a man that will and will not;
something he does for God, and something for the world; he has two minds, and
in a good fit, in his well days he is full of Repentance, and overflows in
piety; but the paroxysm will return in the day of temptation, and then he is
gone infallibly. But know this, that in the righteousness Evangelical, one duty
cannot be exchanged for another, and three virtues will not make amends for one
remaining vice. He that oppresses the poor cannot make amends by giving good
counsel; and if a Priest be Simonaical, he cannot be esteemed righteous before
God by preaching well, and taking care of his charge. To be zealous for God and
for Religion is good, but that will not legitimate cruelty to our Brother. It
is not enough for a man to be a good Citizen, unless he be also a good man. But
some men build their houses with half a dozen cross sticks, and turfe is the
foundation, and straw is the covering, and they think they dwell securely;
their Religion is made up but of two or three virtues, and they think to
commute with God, some good for some bad, (...), as if one deadly wound were
not enough to destroy the most healthful constitution in the world. Deceive not
your selves. It is all one on which hand we fall: Vnum operantur
Et calor and frigus, sic hoc, sic illud adurit;
Sic tenebrae visum, sic sol contrarius aufert.
The Moon may burn us by night as well as the Sun by day: and a man may be made
blind by the light of the Sun as well as by the darkness of the evening, and
any one great mischief is enough to destroy one man. Some men are very meek and
gentle naturally, and that they serve God withal; they pursue the virtue of
their nature: that is, they tie a stone at the bottom of the well, and that is
more than needs; the stone will stay there without that trouble; and this good
inclination will of it self easily proceed to issue; and therefore our care and
caution should be more carefully employed in mortification of our natures, and
acquist of such virtues to which we are more refractory, and then cherish the
other too, even as much as we please: but at the same time we are busy in
this, it may be we are secret Adulterers, and that will spoil our confidences
in the goodness of the other instance: others are greatly bountiful to the
poor, and love all mankind, and hurt no body but themselves; but it is a
thousand pities to see such loving good natured persons to perish infinitely by
one crime, and to see such excellent good things thrown away to please an
uncontrolled and a stubborn lust; but so do some escape out of a pit, and are
taken in a trap at their going forth; and stepping aside to avoid the hoar
frost, fall into a valley full of Snow. The Righteousness Evangelical is
another kind of thing: it is a holy conversation, a God-like life, an universal
obedience, a keeping nothing back from God, a Sanctification of the whole man,
and keeps not the body only, but the soul and the spirit unblameable to the
coming of the Lord Jesus.

5. And lastly; The Pharisaical righteousness was the product of fear, and
therefore what they must, needs do, that they would do; but no more. But the
righteousness Evangelical is produced by Love, it is managed by Choice, and
cherished by Delight and fair Experiences. Christians are a willing people;
homines bonae voluntatis, men of good will; arbores Domini. So they are
mystically represented in Scripture; the Trees of the Lord are full of Sap:
among the Hebrews the trees of the Lord did signify such trees as grew of
themselves; and all that are of Gods planting, are such as have a vital
principle within, and grow without constraint, (...), one said it of
Christians: they obey the Laws, and by the goodness of their lives exceed the
Laws; and certain it is, no man has the righteousness Evangelical if he
resolves always to take all his liberty in every thing that is merely lawful;
or if he purpose to do no more than he must needs, that is, no more than he is
just commanded. For the Reasons are plain.

1. The Christian that resolves to do every thing that is lawful, will many
times run into danger and inconvenience; because the utmost extremity of lawful
is so near to that which is unlawful, that he will often pass into unlawful
undiscernably. Virtues and Vices have not in all their instances a great
landmark set between them, like warlike nations separate by prodigious walls,
vast seas and portentous hills; but they are oftentimes like the bounds of a
Parish; men are fain to cut a cross upon the turf, and make little marks and
annual perambulations for memorials: so it is in lawful and unlawful, by a
little mistake a man may be greatly ruined. He that drinks till his tongue is
full as a sponge, and his speech a little stammering and tripping, hasty and
disorderly, though he be not gone as far as drunkenness, yet he is gone beyond
the severity of a Christian; and when he is just past into unlawful, if he
disputes too curiously, he will certainly deceive himself for want of a wiser
curiosity.

But 2. He that will do all that he thinks he may lawfully, had need have an
infallible guide always by him, who should without error be able to answer all
cases of Conscience, which will happen every day in a life so careless and
insecure; for if he should be mistaken, his error is his crime, and not his
excuse. A man in this case had need be very sure of his Proportion; which
because he cannot be, in charity to himself, he will quickly find that he is
bound to abstain from all things that are uncertainly good, and from all
disputable evils, from things which although they may be in themselves lawful,
yet accidentally, and that from a thousand cause may become unlawful, Pavidus
quippe and formidolosus est Ch^istianus, says Salvian, -- atque in tantum
peccare metuens, ut interdum and non timenda formidet. A Christian is afraid of
every little thing: and he sometimes greatly fears that he has sinned, even
then when he has no other reason to be afraid, but because he would not do so
for all the world.

3. He that resolves to use all his liberty cannot be innocent, so long as
there are in the world so many bold temptations, and presumptuous actions, so
many scandals, and so much ignorance in the things of God, so many things that
are suspicious, and so many things that are of evil report; so many ill customs
and disguises in the world, with which if we resolve to comply in all that is
supposed lawful, a man may be in the regions of death, before he perceive his
head to ache; and instead of a staff in his hand, may have a splinter in his
Elbow.

4. Besides all this; he that thus stands on his terms with God, and so
carefully husbands his duty, and thinks to make so good a market of obedience,
that he will quit nothing which he thinks he may lawfully keep, shall never be
exemplar in his life, and shall never grow in grace, and therefore shall never
enter into glory. He therefore that will be righteous by the measures
Evangelical, must consider not only what is lawful, but what is expedient; not
only what is barely safe, but what is worthy, that which may secure, and that
which may do advantage to that concern that is the greatest in the world.

And 2. The case is very like with them that resolve to do no more good than is
commanded them. For 1. it is infinitely unprofitable as to our eternal
interest, because no man does do all that is commanded at all times; and
therefore he that will not sometimes do more, besides that he has no love, no
zeal of duty, no holy fires in his soul; besides this, I say, he can never make
any amends toward the reparation of his Conscience. Let him that stole steal
no more; that is well; but that is not well enough, for he must, if he can, make
restitution of what he stole, or he shall never be pardoned; and so it is in
all our intercourse with God. To do what is commanded is the duty of the
present; we are tied to this in every present, in every period of our lives;
but therefore if we never do any more than just the present duty, who shall
supply the deficiences, and fill up the gaps, and redeem what is past? This is
a material consideration in the righteousness Evangelical.

But then 2. we must know that in keeping of Gods Commandments every degree or
internal duty is under the Commandments; and therefore whatever we do, we must
do it as well as we can. Now he that does his Duty with the biggest affection
he can, will also do all that he can; and he can never know that he has done
what is commanded, unless he does all that is in his power. For God has put no
limit but love and possibility, and therefore whoever says, Hither will I go
and no further, This I will do and no more, Thus much will I serve God, but
that shall be all, he has the affections of a Slave, and the religion of a
Pharisee, the craft of a Merchant, and the falseness of a Broker; but he has
not the proper measures of the righteousness Evangelical. But so it happens in
the mud and slime of the River Borborus, when the eye of the Sun has long
dwelt upon it, and produces Frogs and Mice which begin to move a little under a
thin cover of its own parental matter, and if they can get loose to live half a
life, that is all; but the hinder parts, which are not formed before the
setting of the Sun, stick fast in their beds of mud, and the little moiety of a
creature dies before it could be well said to live; so it is with those
Christians, who will do all that they think lawful, and will do no more than
what they suppose necessary; they do but peep into the light of the Sun of
righteousness; they have the beginnings of life; but their hinder parts, their
passions and affections, and the desires of the lower man are still unformed;
and he that dwells in this state is just so much of a Christian as a Sponge is
of a plant, and a mushrom of a shrub: they may be as sensible as an oyster, and
discourse at the rate of a child, but are greatly short of the righteousness
Evangelical.

I have now done with those parts of the Christian righteousness, which were
not only an (...) or excess, but an (...) to the Pharisaical: but because I
ought not to conceal any thing from you that must integrate our duty, and
secure our title to the kingdom of Heaven; there is this to be added, that this
precept of our blessed Savior is to be extended to the direct degrees of our
duty. We must do more duties, and we must do them better. And in this, although
we can have no positive measures, because they are potentially infinite, yet
therefore we ought to take the best, because we are sure the greatest is not
too big; and we are not sure that God will accept a worse, when we can do a
better. Now although this is to be understood of the internal affection only;
because that must never be abated, but God is at all times to be loved and
served with all our heart, yet concerning the degrees of external duty, as
Prayers, and Alms, and the like, we are certainly tied to a greater excellency
in the degree, than was that of the Scribes and Pharisees. I am obliged to
speak one word for the determination of this inquiry, viz. to how much more of
external duty Christians are obliged, than was in the righteousness of the
Scribes and Pharisees. In order to this, briefly thus.

I remember that Salvian speaking of old men summing up their Repentances, and
making amends for the sins of their whole life, exhorts them to Alms and works
of Piety. But inquiring how much they should do toward the redeeming of their
Souls, answers with a little Sarcasm, but plainly enough to give a wise man an
answer. A man, says he, is not bound to give away all his goods, unless
peradventure he ows all to God; but in that case I cannot tell what to say; for
then the case is altered. A man is not bound to part with all his estate; that
is, unless his sins be greater than his estate; but if they be, then he may
consider of it again, and consider better. And he need not part with it all,
unless pardon be more precious to him than his money, and unless heaven be
worth it all, and unless he knows justly how much less will do it. If he does,
let him try his skill, and pay just so much and no more than he owes to God:
but if he does not know, let him be sure to do enough. His meaning is this. Not
that a man is bound to give all he has, and leave his children beggars; he is
bound from that by another obligation. But as when we are tied to pray
continually, the meaning is, we should consecrate all our time by taking good
portions out of all our time for that duty; the devoutest person being like the
waters of Siloam, S. Hier. in comment. Isai. 8. Isidor, l. 13. Orig. cap. 13.
a perpetual spring, but not a perpetual current; that is always in readiness,
but actually thrusting forth his waters at certain periods every day. So out of
all our estate we must take for Religion and Repentance such portions as the
whole estate can allow; so much as will consecrate the rest; so much as is fit
to bring when we pray for a great pardon, and deprecate a mighty anger, and
turn aside an intolerable fear, and will purchase an excellent peace, and will
reconcile a sinner: Now in this case a Christian is to take his measures
according to the rate of his contrition and his love, his Religion and his
fear, his danger and his expectation, and let him measure his amends wisely;
his sorrow pouring in, and his fear thrusting it down, and it were very well,
if his love also would make it run over. For deceive not your selves, there is
no other measure but this. So much good as a man does, or so much as he would
do, if he could, so much of Religion and so much of repentance he has, and no
more: and a Man cannot ordinarily know that he is in a saveable condition, but
by the Testimony which a Divine Philanthropy and a good mind always gives,
which is to omit no opportunity of doing good in our several proportions and
possibilities.

There was an Alms which the Scribes and Pharisees were obliged by the Law to
give the tenth of every third years increase; this they always paid, and this
sort of Alms is called (...), Righteousness or Justice, but the Alms which
Christians ought to give is (...), and it is (...), it is grace, and it is
love, and it is abundance, and so the old Rabbis told: Justitia proprie
dicitur in iis quae jure facimus; benignitas in iis quae praeter jus. It is
more than righteousness, it is bounty and benignity, for that is the Christian
measure. And so it is in the other parts and instances of the righteousness
Evangelical. And therefore it is remarkable, that the Saints in the Old
Testament were called (...), right men, and the book of Genesis, as we find it
twice attested by S. Hierome, was called by the Ancient Hellenists, Commen. in
12. Isai. and l. 6. in Ezekiel. cap. 18.
(...), the book of right or just men, the book of Abraham, Isaac and Jacob.
But the word for Christians is (...), good men, harmless and profitable. Men
that are good, and men that do good. In pursuance of which it is further
observed by learned men, that the word (...), or virtue, is not in the four
Gospels; for the actions of Christ's Disciples should not be in gradu virtutis
only, virtuous and laudable, such as these Aristotle presses in his Magna
Moralia; they must pass on to a further excellency than so: the same which he
calls (...); they must be sometimes, and as often as we can in gradu heroico,
or, that I may use the Christian style, they must be actions of perfection.
Righteousness was the (...) for alms in the Old Testament, and (...), or
perfection was the word for Alms in the New; as appears by comparing the fifth
of S. Matthew, and the sixth of S. Luke together; and that is the full state of
this difference in the inquiries of the righteousness Pharisaical and
Evangelical.

I have many more things to say, but ye cannot hear them now, because the time
is past. One thing indeed were fit to be spoken of, if I had any time left; but
I can only name it, and desire your consideration to make it up. This great
Rule that Christ gives us, does also, and that principally too, concern
Churches and Commonwealths, as well as every single Christian. Christian
Parliaments must exceed the Religion and Government of the Sanhedrim. Your Laws
must be more holy, the condition of the Subjects be made more tolerable, the
Laws of Christ must be strictly enforced, you must not suffer your great Master
to be dishonored, nor his Religion dismembered by Sects, or disgraced by
impiety: you must give no impunity to vicious persons, and you must take care
that no great example be greatly corrupted; you must make better provisions for
your poor than they did, and take more care even of the external advantages of
Christ's Religion and his Ministers, than they did of the Priests and Levites;
that is, in all things you must be more zealous to promote the kingdom of
Christ, than they were for the Ministeries of Moses.

The sum of all is this; The righteousness Evangelical is the same with that
which the Ancients called (...), to live an Apostolical life, that was the
measure of Christians, the (...), men that desired to please God; that is,
(...).
as Apostolius most admirably describes it, men who are curious of their very
eyes, temperate in their tongue, of a mortified body, and a humble spirit, pure
in their intentions, masters of their passions. Men who when they are injured
return honorable words; when they are lessened in their estates, increase in
their charity; when they are abused, they yet are courteous and give
entreaties; when they are hated, they pay love; men that are dull in
contentions, and quick in loving kindnesses, swift as the feet of Asahel, and
ready as the chariots of Amminadib. True Christians are such as are crucified
with Christ, and dead unto all sin; and finally place their whole love on God,
and for his sake upon all mankind: this is the description of a Christian, and
the true state of the righteousness Evangelical; so that it was well said of
Athenagoras, (...), Legate. pro Christianis.
no Christian is a wicked man, unless his life be a continual lie, unless he be
false to God and his Religion. For the righteousness of the Gospel is in short,
nothing else but a transcript of the life of Christ; de matthana nahaliel; de
nahaliel Bamoth, said R. Joshua; Christ is the image of God, and every
Christian is the image of Christ, whose example is imitable, but it is the
best, and his laws are the most perfect, but the most easy, and the promises
by which he invites our greater services are most excellent, but most true; and
the rewards shall be hereafter, but they shall abide for ever, and (that I may
take notice of the last words of my Text) the threatenings to them that fall
short of this righteousness are most terrible, but most certainly shall come to
pass; they shall never enter into the kingdom of heaven; that is, their portion
shall be shame and an eternal prison, (...), a flood of brimstone, and a
cohabitation with Devils to eternal ages: and if this consideration will not
prevail, there is no place left for persuasion, and there is no use of reason;
and the greatest hopes and the greatest fears can be no argument or sanction of
laws; and the greatest good in the world is not considerable, and the greatest
evil is not formidable; but if they be, there is no more to be said; if you
would have your portion with Christ, you must be righteous by his measures; and
these are they that I have told you.

THE CHRISTIANS CONQUEST Over the Body of Sin.
Romans VII. 19. For the good that I would, I do not: but the evil which I would
not, that I do.


WHat the Eunuch said to Philip, when he read the book of the Prophet Isaiah;
Of whom speaks the Prophet this, of himself, or some other man? The same
question I am to ask concerning the words of my Text: Does S. Paul mean this of
himself, or of some other? It is hoped that he speaks it of himself; and means
that though his understanding is convinced that he ou^ht to serve God; and that
he has some imperfect desires to do so; yet the Law of God without is opposed
by a law of Sin wit^in.

We have a corrupted nature, and a body of infirmity, and our reason dwells in
the dark, and we must go out of the world before we leave our sin. For besides
that some sins are esteemed brave and honorable, and he is a baffled person
that dares not kill his brother like a Gentleman; our very Tables are made a
snare, and our civilities are direct treasons to the soul. You cannot entertain
your friend but excess is the measure; and that you may be very kind to your
Guest, you step aside and lay away the Christian; your love cannot be expressed
unless you do him an ill turn, and civilly invite him to a Fever. Justice is
too often taught to bow to great interests, and men cannot live without
flattery; and there are some Trades that minister to sin, so that without a sin
we cannot maintain our Families; and if you mean to live, you must do as others
do. Now so long as men see they are like to be undone by innocence, and that
they can no way live but by compliance with the evil customs of the world, men
conclude practically, because they must live they must sin; they must live
handsomely, and therefore must do some things unhandsomely, and so upon the
whole matter sin is unavoidable. Fain they would but cannot tell how to help
it. But since it is no better, it is well it is no worse. For it is S. Paul's
case, no worse man; he would and he would not, he did and he did not; he was
willing, but he was not able; and therefore the case is clear, that if a man
strives against sin, and falls unwillingly, it shall not be imputed to him; he
may be a regenerate man for all that. A man must indeed wrangle against sin
when it comes, and like a peevish lover resist and consent at the same time,
and then all is well; for this not only consists with, but is a sign of the
state of regeneration.

If this be true, God will be very ill served. If it be not true, most men will
have but small hopes of being saved, because this is the condition of most men.
What then is to be done? Truth can do us no hurt, and therefore be willing to
let this matter pass under examination; for if it trouble us now, it will bring
comfort hereafter. And therefore before I enter into the main inquiry, I shall
by describing the state of the man, of whom S. Paul speaks here, tell you
plainly, who it is that is in this state of sad things, and then do ye make
your resolutions according as you shall find it necessary for the saving of
your souls; which I am sure ought to be the end of all preaching.

1. The man S. Paul speaks of is one that is dead, v. 9. one that was deceived
and slain, v. 11. one in whom sin was exceeding sinful, v. 13. that is, highly
imputed, greatly malicious, infinitely destructive: he is one who is carnal,
and sold under sin, v. 14. he is one that sins against his conscience and his
reason, v. 16. he is one in whom sin dwells but the Spirit of God does not
dwell; for no good thing dwells in him, v. 18. he is one who is brought into
captivity to the law of sin, he is a servant of uncleanness, with his flesh and
members serving the law of sin, v. 25. Now if this be a state of regeneration,
I wonder what is, or can be a state of reprobation! for though this be the
state of Nature, yet it cannot be the state of one redeemed by the Spirit of
Christ; and therefore flatter not your selves any more, that it is enough for
you to have good desires, and bad performances: never think that any sin can
reign in you, and yet you be servants of God: that sin can dwell in you, and at
the same time the Spirit of God can dwell in you too; or that life and death
can abide together. The sum of affairs is this. Romans 8.13.
If ye live after the flesh, ye shall die; but if ye through the Spirit do
mortify the deeds of the body, ye shall live, but not else upon any terms
whatsoever.

My Text is one of the hard places of S. Paul; which, as S. Peter says, the
ignorant and the unstable wrest to their own damnation. But because in this
case the danger is so imminent, and the deception would be so intolerable, S.
Paul immediately after this Chapter (in which under his own person, as was
usual with him to do, he describes the state of a natural man advanced no
further than Moses Law, and not redeemed by the blood of Christ, or enlightened
by the Spirit of God, and taught by the wiser Lessons and Sermons of the
Gospel) immediately spends the next Chapter in opposing the Evangelical state
to the Legal, the Spiritual to the Carnal, the Christian to the Natural; and
tells us plainly, he that is redeemed by the blood of Christ, is redeemed from
the power of sin: he that is Christ's freed man, is not a slave of sin, not
captive to the Devil at his will: he that is in the flesh cannot please God,
but that every servant of Christ is freed from sin, and is a servant of
righteousness, and redeemed from all his vain conversation: for this is the end
of Christ's coming, and cannot be in vain unless we make it so. He came to bless
us by turning every one of us from our iniquities. Now concerning this, besides
the evidence of the thing itself, that S. Paul does not speak these words of
himself, but by a (...), under his own borrowed person he describes the state
of a carnal, unredeemed, unregenerate person, is expressly affirmed by S.
Irenaeus and Origin, by Tertullian and S. Basil, by Theodoret and S.
Chrysostom, by S. Jerome, and sometimes by S. Austin, by S. Ambrose, and S.
Cyril, by Macarius and Theophylact; and is indeed that true sense and meaning
of these words of S. Paul, which words none can abuse or misunderstand, but to
the great prejudice of a holy life, and the Patronage of all iniquity.

But for the stating of this great case of conscience, I shall first in short
describe to you what are the proper causes which place men, and keep them in
this state of a necessity of sinning; and 2. I shall prove the absolute
necessity of coming out of this condition, and quitting all our sin. 3. In what
degree this is to be affected. 4. By what Instruments this is to be done; and
all these being practical will of themselves be sufficient use to the
Doctrines, and need no other applicatory but a plain exhortation.

1. What are the causes of this evil, by which we are first placed, and so long
kept in a necessity of sinning, so that we cannot do what good we would, nor
avoid the evil that we hate?

The first is the evil state of our Nature. And indeed he that considers the
daily experiment of his own weak Nature, the ignorance and inconstancy of his
soul being like a sick man's legs, or the knees of Infants, reeling and unstable
by disease or by infirmity, and the perpetual leaven and germinations, the
thrustings forth, and swelling of his senses, running out like new wine into
vapors and intoxicating activities, will readily confess, that though even in
nature there may be many good inclinations to many instances of the Divine
Commandments; yet it can go no further than this velleity, this desiring to do
good, but is not able. And upon this account it is that Lactantius brings in
the Pagan or natural man complaining, Volo equidem non peccare, sed vincor,
indutus enim sum carne fragili and imbecilla. This is very true; and I add
only this caution. There is not in the corruption of our nature so much as will
save us harmless, or make us excusable if we sin against God. Natural
corruption can make us criminal, but not innocent; for though by him that
willingly abides in the state of mere nature, sin cannot be avoided, yet no man
is in that state longer than he loves to be so; for the Grace of God came to
rescue us from this evil portion, and is always present to give us a new
nature, and create us over again: and therefore though sin is made necessary to
the natural man by his impotency and fond loves, that is by his unregenerate
nature, yet in the whole constitution of affairs, God has more then made it up
by his Grace, if we will make use of it. In pueris elucet spes plurimorum, quae
ubi emoritur aetate, manifestum est non defecisse naturam, sed curam, said
Quintilian. We cannot tell what we are, or what we think in our infancy; and
when we can know our thoughts we can easily observe that we have learned evil
things by evil examples, and the corrupt manners of an evil conversation: and
ubi per socordiam vires, tempus, ingenium defluxere, naturae infirmitas
accusatur; that indeed is too true; we grow lazy, and wanton, and we lose our
time, and abuse our parts, and do ugly things, and lay the fault wholly upon
our natural infirmities; but we must remember that by this time it is a state
of Nature, a state of flesh and blood, which cannot enter into Heaven. The
natural man and the natural child are not the same thing in true Divinity. The
natural child indeed can do no good; but the natural man cannot choose but do
evil; but it is because he will do so; he is not born in the second bir^h, and
renewed in the Baptism of the Spirit.

2. We have brought our selves into an accidental necessity of sinning by the
evil principles which are sucked in by great parts of mankind. We are taught
ways of going to Heaven without forsaking our sins; of repentance without
restitution; of being in charity without hearty forgiveness, and without love;
of believing our sins to be pardoned before they are mortified; of trusting in
Christ's death without conformity to his life; of being in Gods fav^ur upon the
only account of being of such an opinion; and that when we are once in, we can
never be out. We are taught to believe that the events of things do not depend
upon our crucifying our evil and corrupt affections, but upon eternal and
unalterable Counsels; that the promises are not the rewards of obedience, but
graces pertaining only to a few praedestinates, and yet men are Saints for all
that; and that the Laws of God are of the race of the Giants, not to be
observed by any grace or by any industry, this is the Catechism of the ignorant
and the profane: but without all peradventure the contrary propositions are
the way to make the world better: but certainly they that believe these things
do not believe it necessary that we should eschew all evil: and no wonder then
if when men upon these accounts slacken their industry and their care, they
find sin still prevailing, still dwelling within them, and still unconquerable
by so slight and disheartened labors. For (...): every fool and every ignorant
person is a child still; and it is no wonder that he who talks foolishly should
do childishly and weakly.

3. To our weak and corrupted nature, and our foolish discourses, men do daily
superinduce evil habits and customs of sinning. Consuetudo mala tanquam hamus
infixus animae, said the Father; an evil custom is a hook in the soul, and
draws it whither the Devil pleases. When it comes to the (...), as S. Peter's
word is, a heart exercised with covetous practices, then it is also (...), it
is weak and unable to do the good it fain would, or to avoid the evil which in
a good fit it pretends to hate. This is so known I shall not insist upon it;
but add this only, that wherever a habit is contracted, it is all one what the
instance be; it is as easy as delicious, as unalterable in virtue as in vice;
for what helps nature brings to a vicious habit, the same and much more the
Spirit of God, by his power and by his comforts can do in a virtuous; and then
we are well again. You see by this who are, and why they are in this evil
condition. The evil natures, and the evil principles, and the evil manners of
the world, these are the causes of our imperfect willings, and weaker actings
in the things of God; and as long as men stay here, sin will be unavoidable.
For even meat it self is loathsome to a sick stomach; and it is impossible for
him that is heart-sick to eat the most wholesome diet; and yet he that shall say
eating is impossible, will be best confuted by seeing all the healthful men in
the world eat heartily every day.

2. But what then? Cannot sin be avoided? Cannot a Christian mortify the deeds
of the body? Cannot Christ redeem us, and cleanse us from all our sins? Cannot
the works of the Devil be destroyed? That Is the next particular to be inquired
of. Whether or no it be not necessary, and therefore very possible for a
servant of God to pass from this evil state of things, and not only hate evil,
but avoid it also?

He that says he has not sinned is a liar; but what then? Because a Man has
sinned, it does not follow he must do so always. Have thou sinned? do so no
more (said the wise Bensirach) and so said Christ to the poor Paralytick, Go
and sin no more. They were excellent words spoken by a holy Prophet [ Let not
the sinner say he has not sinned; For God shall burn coals of fire upon his
head, that says before the Lord God and his glory, I have not sinned.] Well!
that case is confessed. All men have sinned, and come short of the glory of
God. But is there no remedy for this? Must it always be so, and sin for ever
must have the upper hand, and for ever baffle our resolutions, and all our
fierce and earnest promises of amendment? God forbid; there was a time then to
come, and, blessed be God, it has been long come [ Yet a little while (says
that Prophet) and iniquity shall be taken out of the earth, and righteousness
shall reign among you.] For, that is in the day, of Christ's kingdom, the
manifestation of the Gospel: when Christ reigns in our hearts by his Spirit,
Dagon and the Ark cannot stand together; we cannot serve Christ and Belial. And
as in the state of nature no good thing dwells within us, so when Christ rules
in us, no evil thing can abide. For every plant that my heavenly Father has
not planted shall be rooted up, and cast away into the fires of consumption or
purification. But how shall this come to pass, since we all find our selves so
infinitely weak and foolish? I shall tell you. It is easier for a camel to go
through the eye of a needle, than for a rich man to enter into the Kingdom of
heaven, said Christ. It is impossible to nature, it is impossible to them that
are given to vanity; it is impossible for them that delight in the evil snare.
But Christ adds; With men this is impossible, but with God all things are
possible. What we cannot do for our selves, God can do for us and with us. What
Nature cannot do, the Grace of God can. So that the thing may be done, not
indeed by our selves, but gratia Dei mecum, says S. Paul; God and man together
can do it. But if it can be done any way that God has put into our powers, the
consequent is this; No man's good will shall be taken in exchange for the real
and actual mortification of his sins. He that sins, and would fain not sin, but
sin is present with him whether he will or no, let him take heed; for the same
is the Law of sin, and the Law of death (says the Apostle) and that man's heart
is not right with God. For it is impossible men should pray for deliverance and
not be heard, that they should labor and not be prosperous, unless they pray
amiss, and labor falsely. Let no man therefore please himself with talking of
great things, with perpetual conversation in pious discourses, or with
ineffective desires of serving God. He that does not practice as well as he
talks, and do what he desires, and what he ought to do, confesses himself to
sin greatly against his conscience; and it is a prodigious folly to think that
he is a good man, because though he does sin, yet it was against his mind to do
so. A man's conscience can never condemn him, if that be his excuse, to say that
his conscience checked him; and that will be but a sad apology at the day of
Judgment. Some men talk like Angels, and pray with great fervor, and meditate
with deep recesses, and speak to God with loving affections, and words of
union, and adhere to him in silent devotion, and when they go abroad are as
passionate as ever, peevish as a frighted Fly, vexing themselves with their own
reflections. They are cruel in their bargains, unmerciful to their tenants, and
proud as a Barbarian Prince. They are for all their fine words impatient of
reproof, scornful to their Neighbors, lovers of money, supreme in their own
thoughts, and submit to none; all their spiritual life they talk of, is nothing
but spiritual fancy and illusion: they are still under the power of their
passions, and their sin rules them imperiously, and carries them away
infallibly. Let these men consider; there are some men think it impossible to
do as much as they do. The common swearer cannot leave that vice and talk well;
and these men that talk thus well, think they cannot do as well as they talk;
but both of them are equally under the power of their respective sins, and are
equally deceived, and equally not the servants of God. * This is true; but it
is equally as true; that there is no necessity for all this; for it ought, and
it may be otherwise if we please. For I pray be pleased to hear S. Paul. Walk
in the Spirit, Gal. 5.16.
and ye shall not fulfill the lusts of the flesh. There Is your remedy. For the
Spirit lusts against the flesh, and the flesh against the Spirit, there is the
cause of it, (...), so that ye may not, or cannot do the things ye would.
That Is the blessed consequent and product of that cause. That is plainly, As
there is a state of carnality (of which S. Paul speaks in my Text) so that in
that state a man cannot but obey the flesh: so there is also a state of
spirituality, when sin is dead, and righteousness is alive; and in this state
the flesh can no more prevail, than the Spirit could do in the other. Romans 8.7.
Some men cannot choose but sin; for the carnal mind is not subject to God,
neither indeed can be (says S. Paul;) but there are also some men, that cannot
endure any thing that is not good. It is a great pain for a temperate man to
suffer the disorders of Drunkenness, and the shames of Lust are intolerable to
a chaste and modest person. This also is affirmed by S. John, 1 John 3.9.
Whosoever is born of God does not commit sin, for his seed remains in him.
So that you see it is possible for a good man not to commit the sin to which he
is tempted; but the Apostle says more, He does not commit sin, neither indeed
can he, because he is born of God.

And this is agreeable to the words of our Blessed Savior; Matthew. 7.18.
A corrupt tree cannot bring forth good fruit; and a good tree cannot bring
forth evil fruit, that is, as the child of Hell is carried to Sin pleno impetu,
he does not check at it; he does it and is not troubled; so on the other side,
a child of God is as fully convinced of righteousness, and that which is
unrighteous is as hateful to him, as Colocynths to the taste, or the sharpest
punctures to the Pupil of the eye. We may see something of this in common
experiences. What man of ordinary prudence and reputation can be tempted to
steal, or for what price would he be tempted to murder his friend? If we did
hate all sins as we hate these, would it not be as easy to be as innocent in
other instances, as most men are in these; and we should have as few Drunkards
as we have thieves. In such as these, we do not complain in the words of my
Text; What I would not, that I do; and what I would, I do not. Does not every
good man overcome all the power of great sins? And can he by the Spirit of God
and right reason, by fear and hope conquer Goliath, and beat the sons of the
Giant, and can he not overcome the little Children of Gath? or is it harder to
overcome a little sin than a great one? Are not the temptations to little sins
very little, and yet are they greater and stronger than a mighty grace? Could
the poor Demoniack that lived in the graves, by the power of the Devil break
his iron chains in pieces, and cannot he who has the Spirit of God dissolve
the chains of sin? Through Christ that strengthens me, I can do all things,
says S. Paul. Satis sibi copiarum cum Publio Decio, and nunquam nimium hostium
fore, said one in Livie; which is best rendered by S. Paul; If God be with us,
who can be against us? Nay there is an (...) in S. Paul, We are more than
Conquerers; for even amongst an army of Conquerours there are degrees of
exaltation; and some serve God like the Centurion, and some like S. Peter; some
like Martha, and some like Mary; (...), all good men conquer their temptation,
but some with more ease, and some with a clearer victory; and more than thus,
Non Solum viperam terimus, sed ex ea antidotum conficimus, we kill the Viper,
and make treacle of him, that is, not only escape from, but get advantages by
temptations. But we commonly are more afraid than hurt. Heb. 12.1.
Let us therefore lay aside every weight and the sin that does so easily beset
us; so we read the words of the Apostle: but S. Chrysostoms reddition of them
is better; for the word (...) is a perfect passive, and cannot signify the
strength and irresistibility of sin upon us; but the quite contrary: (...)
signifies the sin that is so easily avoided, as they that understand that
language know very well. And if we were so wise and valiant as not to affright
our selves with our own terrors, we should quickly find, that by the help of
the Spirit of God, we can do more then we thought we could. It was said of
Alexander, Been ausus est vana contemnere, he did no great matter in conquering
the Persian, because they were a pitiful and a soft people; only he understood
them to be so, and was wise and bold enough not to fear such images, and men of
clouts. But men in the matter of great sins and little, do as the Magicians of
Egypt; when Moses turned his rod into a Serpent it moved them not; but when
they saw the Lice and the Flies, then they were afraid. We see that by the
Grace of God we can escape great sins, but we start at Flies, and a bird out of
a Bush disorders us: the Lion in the way troubles us not; but a Frog and a Worm
affrights us. Remember the saying of S. Paul, Christ came to redeem to himself
a Church, and to present it pure and spotless before the Throne of Grace; and
if you mean to be of this number, you must endeavor to be under this
qualification, that is, (as Paul labored to be) void of offense both toward
God, and toward Man. And so I have done with the second Proposition; It is
necessary that all sin great and little should be mortified and dead in us, and
that we no longer abide in that state of slavery as to say, The good that I
would, I do not; but the evil that I would not, that I do.

3. In the next place we are to inquire in what degree this is to be effected;
for though in negatives properly there are no degrees, yet unless there be some
allays in this Doctrine, it will not be so well, and it may be your experiences
will for ever confute my Arguments. For who can say that he is clean from his
sin? (said the Wiseman) and as our Blessed Savior said, He that is innocent
amongst you all, let him throw the first stone at the sinner and spare not.

To this I answer in the words of S. Gregory. All man's righteousness will be
found to be unrighteous, if God should severely enter into judgment; but
therefore even after our innocence we must pray for pardon, ut quae succumbere
discussa poterat, ex judicis pietate convalescat, that our innocence which in
strictness of Divine judgment would be found spotted and stained, by the mercy
of our Savior may be accepted. S. Bernard expresses this well. Nostra siqua
est humilis justitia, recta forsitan sed non pura. Our humble righteousness is
perhaps right in the eyes of God, but not pure, that is, accepted by his mercy,
but it is such as dares not contend in judgment. For as no man is so much a
sinner, but he sometimes speaks a good word, or does some things not ill; and
yet that little good interrupts not that state of evil: so it is amongst very
good men, from whom sometimes may pass something that is not commendable; and
yet their heart is so habitually right toward God, that they will do nothing
but (I do not say which God in justice cannot, but) which in mercy he will not
impute to eternal condemnation, It was the case of David; He was a man after
Gods own heart; nay it is said, he was blameless save in the matter of Uriah;
and yet we know he numbered the people, and God was angry with him and punished
him for it: but because he was a good man and served God heartily, that other
fault of his was imputed to him no further: God set a fine upon his head for
it, but it was salvo contenemento, the main stake was safe.

For concerning good men the question is not whether or no God could not in the
rigor of justice blame their indiscretion, or impute a foolish word, or chide
them for a hasty answer; or a careless action, for a less devout prayer, or
weak hands, for a fearful heart, or a trembling faith. These are not the
measures by which God judges his children; for he knows whereof we are made,
and he remembers that we are but dust. But the question is, whether any man
that is covetous or proud, false to his trust, or a Drunkard, can at the same
time be a child of God? No certainly he cannot. But then we know that God
judges us by Jesus Christ, that is, with the allays of mercy, with an eye of
pardon, with the sentences of a Father, by the measures of a man, and by
analogy to all our unavoidable abatements. God could enter with us into a more
severe judgment, but he would not; and no justice tied him from exercising that
mercy. But according to the measures of the Gospel, he will judge every man
according to his works. Now what these measures are is now the question. To
which I answer first in general, and then more particularly.

1. In general thus. A Christians innocence is always to be measured by the
plain lines and measures of the Commandments; but are not to be taken into
account by uncertain and fond opinions, and the scruples of zealous and
timorous persons. My meaning is this. Some men tell us that every natural
inclination to a forbidden object is a sin; which they that believe, finding
them to be natural, do also confess that such sins are unavoidable. But if
these natural and first motions be sins, then a man sins whether he resist
them, or resists them not, whether he prevails, or prevails not; and there is
no other difference but this; he that fights not against, but always yields to
his desires, sins greatest; and he that never yields but fights always, sins
oftenest. But then, by this reckoning it will indeed be impossible to avoid
millions of sins; because the very doing of our duty does suppose a sin. If God
should impute such first desires to us as sins, we were all very miserable; but
if he does not impute them, let us trouble our selves no further about them,
but to take care that they never prevail upon us. Thus men are taught that they
never say their prayers, but they commit a sin. Indeed that is true but too
often; but yet it is possible for us by the Grace of God to please him in
saying our prayers, and to be accepted of him. But indeed if God did proceed
against us as we do against one another, no man could abide innocent for so
much as one hour. But Gods judgment is otherwise: He inquires if the heart be
right, if our labor be true, if we love no sin, if we use prudent and
efficacious instruments to mortify our sin, if we go about our Religion as we
go about the biggest concerns of our life; if we be sincere and real in our
actions and intentions. For this is the (...) that God requires of us all; this
is that sinless state, in which if God does not find us, we shall never see his
glorious face, and if he does find us, we shall certainly be saved by the blood
of Jesus. For in the style of Scripture to be (...) is the same thing; to be
sincere, and to be without offense is all one. Thus David spoke heartily, I am
utterly purposed that my mouth shall not offend; and thou shall find no
wickedness in me. He that endeavors this, and hopes this, and does actions,
and uses means accordingly, not being deceived by his own false heart, nor
abused by evil propositions, this man will stand upright in the Congregations
of the Just; and though he cannot challenge Heaven by merit, yet he shall
receive it as a gift, by promise and by grace. Lex nos innocents esse jubet,
non curiosos, said Seneca. For God takes no judgment of us by any measures; but
of the Commandment without, and the heart and the conscience within; but he
never intended his Laws to be a snare to us, or to entrap us with consequences
and dark interpretations, by large deductions and witty similitudes of faults;
but he requires of us a sincere heart and a hearty labor in the work of his
Commandments: he calls upon us to avoid all that which his Law plainly forbids,
and which our consciences do condemn. This is the general measure. The
particulars are briefly these.

1. Every Christian is bound to arrive at that state, that he have remaining in
him no habit of any sin whatsoever. Our old man must be crucified; the body of
sin must be destroyed; he must no longer serve sin; sin shall not have the
dominion over you. All these are the Apostles words; that is plainly, as I have
already declared, you must not be at that pass, that though ye would avoid sin
ye cannot. For he that is so, is a most perfect slave, and Christ's freed man
cannot be so. Nay, he that loves sin, and delights in it, has no liberty
indeed, but he has more show of it, than he that obeys it against his will. --
Libertatis servaveris umbram,
Si quicquid jubeare velis --.
He that loves to be in the place, is a less prisoner, than he that is confined
against his will.

2. He that commits any one sin by choice and deliberation is an enemy to God,
and is under the dominion of the flesh. In the case of deliberate sins one act
does give the denomination; he is an Adulterer that so much as once foully
breaks the holy Laws of Marriage. He that offends in one is guilty of all,
says S. James, S. Peter's Denial, and David's Adultery had passed on to a fatal
issue, if the mercy of God, and a great repentance had not interceded. But they
did so no more, and so God restored them to Grace and Pardon. And in this sense
are the words of S. John, (...), he that does a sin is of the Devil, 1 John 3.8.
and he that is born of God (...), he does not commit a sin; he chooses none,
he loves none, he endures none, talia quae non faciet bonae fidei and spei
Christianus; they do no great sin, and love no little one. A sin chosen and
deliberately done, is, as Tertullians expression is, crimen devoratorium
salutis; it devours salvation. For as there are some sins which can be done but
once; as a man can kill his Father but once, or himself but once; so in those
things which can be repeated, a perfect choice is equivalent to a habit, it is
the same in principle, that a habit is in the product. In short he is not a
child of God, that knowingly and deliberately chooses anything that God hates.

3. Every Christian ought to attain to such a state of life, as that he never
sin, not only by a long deliberation, but also not by passion. I do not say
that he is not a good Christian, who by passion is suddenly surpised and falls
into folly; but this I say, that no passion ought to make him choose a sin. For
let the sin enter by anger or by desire, it is all one, if the consent be
gained. It is an ill sign if a man, though on the sudden, consents to a base
action. Thus far every good man is tied, not only to endeavor, but to prevail
against his Sin.

4. There is one step more; which if it be not actually effected, it must at
least be greatly endeavored; and the event be left to God: and that is, that
we strive for so great a dominion over our sins and lust, as that we be not
surpised on a sudden. This indeed is a work of time, and it is well if it be
ever done; but it must always be endeavored. But in this particular, even
good men are sometimes unprosperous. S. Epiphanius and S. Chrysostom grew once
into choler, and they past too far, and lost more then their argument, they
lost their reason, and they lost their patience: and Epiphanius wished that S.
Chrysostom might not die a Bishop; and he in a peevish exchange wished that
Epiphanius might never return to his Bishopric; when they had forgotten their
foolish anger, God remembered it, and said Amen to both their cursed speakings.
Nay, there is yet a greater example of humane frailty. S. Paul and Barnabas
were very holy persons, but once in a heat they were both to blame, they were
peevish and parted company. This was not very much: but God was so displeased,
even for this little Fly in their Box of Ointment, that their story says, they
never saw one another face again. These earnest emissions and transportations
of passion do sometime declare the weakness of good men; but that even here we
ought at least to endeavor to be more than Conquerors appears in this, because
God allows it not, and by punishing such follies does manifest that he intends
that we should get victory over our sudden passions, as well as our natural
lusts. And so I have done with the third inquiry, in what degree God expects
our innocence; and now I briefly come to the last particular, which will make
all the rest practicable; I am now to tell you how all this can be effected,
and how we shall get free from the power and dominion of our sins.

4. The first great instrument is Faith. He that has Faith like a grain of
Mustard seed can remove mountains; the mountains of sin shall fall flat at the
feet of the Faithful man, and shall be removed into the sea, the Sea of Christ's
blood and penitential waters. Faith overcomes the world, says S. John; and
walk in the Spirit, and ye shall not fulfill the lusts of the flesh: there are
two of our enemies gone; the world and the flesh, by Faith and the Spirit, by
the Spirit of Faith; and as for the Devil, put on the shield of Faith, and
resist the Devil, and he will flee from you, says the Apostle; and the powers
of sin seem insuperable to none, but to them that have not Faith; we do not
believe that God intends we should do what he seems to require of us; or else
we think that though Gods grace abounds, yet sin must superabound expressly
against the saying of S. Paul, or else we think that the evil spirit is
stronger than the good Spirit of God. Hear what S. John says, My little
children, ye are of God, 3 John 4.4.
and have overcome the evil one; for the Spirit that is in you is greater than
that which is in the world. Believe thou this? If you do, I shall tell you
what may be the event of it. When the father of the boy, possessed with the
Devil, told his sad story to Christ; Mark 9.23.
he said; Master if thou can do any thing, I pray help me. Christ answered
him, If thou can believe, all things are possible to him that believes. N.
B. And therefore if you do believe this, go to your prayers, and go to your
guards, and go to your labor; and try what God will do for you. For whatsoever
things ye desire, when ye pray, believe that ye shall receive them, and ye
shall have them. Now consider; Do not we every day pray in the Divine Hymn
called Te Deum, Vouchsafe, O Lord, to keep us this day without sin? And in the
Collect at morning prayer, [ and grant that this day we fall into no sin,
neither run into any kind of danger, but that all our doings may be ordered by
thy governance, to do always that which is righteous in thy sight?] Have you
any hope, or any faith when you say that Prayer? And if you do your duty as you
can, do you think the failure will be on Gods part? Fear not that; if you can
trust in God, and do accordingly; though your sins were as scarlet, yet they
shall be as white as snow, and pure as the feet of the holy Lamb. Only let us
forsake all those weak propositions which cut the nerves of faith, and make it
impossible for us to actuate all our good desires, or to come out from the
power of sin.

2. He that would be free from the slavery of Sin, and the necessity of sinning
must always watch. I, that is the point; but who can watch always? Why every
good man can watch always: and that we may not be deceived in this, let us
know, that the running away from a temptation is a part of our watchfulness,
and every good employment is another great part of it, and a laying in
provisions of Reason and Religion before hand, is yet a third part of this
watchfulness; and the conversation of a Christian is a perpetual watchfulness;
not a continual thinking of that one, or those many things which may endanger
us; but it is a continual doing something directly or indirectly against sin.
He either prays to God for his Spirit, or relies upon the promises, or
receives the Sacrament, or goes to his Bishop for Counsel and a Blessing, or to
his Priest for Religious offices, or places himself at the feet of good men to
hear their wise sayings, or calls for the Churches prayers, or does the duty of
his calling, or actually resists Temptation, or frequently renews his holy
Purposes, or fortifies himself by Vows, or searches into his Danger by a daily
examination; so that in the whole he is for ever upon his guards.

* This duty and caution of a Christian is like watching lest a man cut his
finger. Wise men do not often cut their fingers, and yet every day they use a
knife; and a man's eye is a tender thing, and every thing can do it wrong, and
every thing can put it out; yet because we love our eyes so well, in the midst
of so many dangers, by Gods providence and a prudent natural care, by winking
when any thing comes against them, and by turning aside when a blow is offered,
they are preserved so certainly, that not one man in ten thousand does by a
stroke lose one of his eyes in all his life time. If we would transplant our
natural care to a spiritual caution, we might by Gods grace be kept from losing
our souls, as we are from losing our eyes; and because a perpetual watchfulness
is our great defense, and the perpetual presence of Gods grace is our great
security, and that this Grace never leaves us, unless we leave it, and the
precept of a daily watchfulness is a thing not only so reasonable, but so many
easy ways to be performed, we see upon what terms we may be quit of our sins,
and more than Conquerors over all the enemies and impediments of Salvation.

3. If you would be in the state of the Liberty of the Sons of God, that is,
that you may not be servants of sin in any instance; be sure in the
mortifications of sin, willingly or carelessly to leave no remains of it, no
nest-egg, no principles of it, no affections to it; if any thing remains, it
will prove to us as Manna to the sons of Israel on the second day, it will
breed worms and stink. Therefore labor against every part of it, reject every
proposition that gives it countenance; pray to God against it all; and what
then? Why then, Ask and you shall have (said Christ.) Nay, say some; it is
true; you shall be heard; but in part only; for God will leave some remains of
sin within us, lest we should become proud by being innocent. So vainly do men
argue against Gods goodness and their own blessings and Salvation, (...), (as
S. Basil says) they contrive witty arts to undo themselves, being entangled in
the periods of ignorant disputations. But as to the thing it self, if by the
remains of sin they mean the propensities and natural inclinations to forbidden
objects; there is no question but they will remain in us so long as we bear our
flesh about us; and surely that is a great argument to make us humble. But
these are not the sins which God charges on his people. But if by remains we
mean any part of the habit of sin, any affection, any malice or perverseness of
the Will; then it is a contradiction to say that God leaves in us such remains
of Sin, lest by innocence we become Proud. For how should Pride spring in a
man's heart, if there be no remains of Sin left? And is it not the best, the
surest way to cure the Pride of our hearts by taking out every root of
bitterness, even the root of Pride it self? Will a Physician purposely leave
the Relics of a disease. and pretend he does it to prevent a relapse? And is
it not more likely he will relapse, if the sickness be not wholly cured? * But
besides this; If God leaves any remains of Sin in us, what remains are they,
and of what sins? Does he leave the remains of Pride? If so; that were a
strange cure to leave the remains of Pride in us to keep us from being proud.
But if not so; but that all the remains of Pride be taken away by the grace of
God blessing our endeavors; what danger is there of being proud, the remains
of which Sin are by the grace of God wholly taken away? But then, if the Pride
of the heart be cured, which is the hardest to be removed, and commonly is done
last of all, who can distrust the power of the Spirit of God, or his goodness,
or his promises, and say that God does not intend to cleanse his Sons and
Servants from all unrighteousness; and according to S. Paul's prayer, keep their
bodies and souls, and spirits, unblameable to the coming of the Lord Jesus. But
however, let God leave what remains he please; all will be well enough on that
side, but let us be careful, as far as we can, that we leave none: lest it be
severely imputed to us, and the fire break out and consume us.

4. Let us without any further question, put this argument to a material issue;
let us do all that we can do, toward the destruction of the whole body of sin;
but let us never say we cannot be quit of our Sin till we have done all that we
can do toward the mortification of it. For till that be done, how can any man
tell where the fault lies, or whether it can be done or no. If any man can say
that he has done all that he could do, and yet has failed of his duty; if he
can say truly, that he has endured as much as is possible to be endured, that
he has watched always, and never nodded, when he could avoid it, that he has
loved as much as he could love, that he has waited till he can wait no longer;
then indeed, if he says true, we must confess that it is not to be understood.
But is there any man in the World that does all that he can do? If there be,
that man is blameless; if there be not, then he cannot say but it is his own
fault that his sin prevails against him. It is true that no man is free from
sin; but it is as true, that no man does as much as he can against it: and
therefore no man must go about to excuse himself by saying, no man is free from
his sin; and therefore no man can be; no not by the powers of grace: for he may
as well argue thus, No man does do all that he can do against it; and therefore
it is impossible he should do what he can do. The argument is apparently
foolish, and the excuse is weak, and the deception visible, and sin prevails
upon our weak arguings; but the consequence is plainly this. When any man
commits a sin, he is guilty before God; and he cannot say he could not help it,
and God is just in punishing every sin, and very merciful when he forgives us
any: but he that says he cannot avoid it, that he cannot overcome his lust,
confesses himself a servant of Sin, and that he is not yet redeemed by the
blood of the Holy Lamb.

5. He that would be advanced beyond the power and necessity of sinning must
take great caution concerning his thoughts and secret desires. For lust when it
is conceived brings forth sin; but if it be suppressed in the conception, it
comes to nothing: but we find it hard to destroy the Serpent when the egg is
ha^ched into a Cockatrice. The thought is (...); no man takes notice of it, but
lets it alone till the sin be too strong, and then we complain we cannot help
it. Ille laudatur, qui ut caeperint statim interficit cogitata, and allidit ad
petram.
Nolo sinas cogitationem crescere. Suffer not your thoughts to grow up. For
they usually come (...), (as S. Basil says) suddenly, and easily, and without
business; but take heed taht you nurse them not; but if you chance to stumble,
mend your pace; and if you nod, let it awaken you; for he only can be a good
man, that raises himself up at the first trip, that strangles his sin in the
birth. (...), Good men rise up again, even before they fall, says S.
Chrysostom. Now I pray consider, that when sin is but in the thought, it is
easily suppressed; and if it be stopped there, it can go no further; and what
great mountain of labor is it then to abstain from our sin? Is not the
Adultery of the eye easily cured by shutting the eyelid? and cannot the
thoughts of the heart be turned aside by doing business, by going into company,
by reading or by sleeping? A man may divert his thoughts by shaking of his
head, by thinking any thing else, by thinking nothing. Da mihi Christianum
(says S. Austin) and intelligit quod dico. Every man that loves God
understands this, and more than this to be true. Now if things be thus, and
that we may be safe in that which is supposed to be the hardest of all; we must
needs condemn our selves, and lay our faces in the dust when we give up our
selves to any sin; we cannot be justified by saying we could not help it. For
as it was decreed by the Fathers of the Arausican Council ad. Hoc etiam
secundum fidem Catholicam credimus, etc. This we believe according to the
Catholic Faith, that have received Baptismal Grace, all that are baptized by
the aid and cooperation of Christ, must and can (if they will labor
faithfully) perform and fulfill those things which belong unto salvation.

6. And lastly. If sin has gotten the power of any one of us, consider in what
degree the sin has prevailed. If but a little, the battle will be more easy,
and the victory more certain; but then be sure to do it thoroughly, because
there is not much to be done. But if sin has prevailed greatly, than indeed
you have very much to do, therefore begin betimes, and defer nor this ^ork till
old age shall make it extremely difficult, or death shall make it impossible.
Nam quamvis prope te, quamvis temone sub uno
Vertentem sese frustra sectabere canthum,
Cum rota posterior curras, and in axe secundo.
If thou be cast behind; if thou have neglected the duties of thy vigorous
age, thou shall never overtake that strength; the hinder wheel, though bigger
than the former, and measures more ground at every revolution: yet shall never
overtake it: and all the second counsels of thy old age, though undertaken with
greater resolution, and acted with the strengths of fear and need, and pursued
with more pertinacious purposes than the early repentances of young men, yet
shall never overtake those advantages which you lost when you gave your youth
to folly, and the causes of a sad repentance.

However if you find it so hard a thing to get from the power of one
master-sin, if an old Adulterer does dote, if an old Drunkard be further from
remedy than a young sinner, if Covetousness grows with old age, if ambition be
still more Hydropick and grows more thirsty for every draught of honor, you
may easily resolve that old age, or your last sickness is not so likely to be
prosperous in the mortification of our long prevailing sins. Do not all men
desire to end their days in Religion, to dye in the arms of the Church, to
expire under the conduct of a religious man? when ye are sick or dying, then
nothing but prayers And sad complaints, and the groans of a tremulous
repentance, and the faint labors of an almost impossible mortification: then
the despised Priest is sent for, then he is a good man, and his words are
Oracles, and Religion is truth, and sin is a load, and the sinner is a fool:
then we watch for a word of comfort from his mouth, as the fearful Prisoner for
his fate upon the Judges answer. That which is true then, is true now; and
therefore to prevent so intolerable a danger, mortify your sins betime, for
el^e you will hardly mortify it at all. Remember that the snail outwent the
Eagle and won the goal, because she set out betimes.

To sum up all, every good man is a new Creature, and Christianity is not so
much a Divine institution, as a Divine frame and temper of Spirit, which if we
heartily pray for, and endeavor to obtain, we shall find it as hard and as
uneasy to sin against God, as now we think it impossible to abstain from our
most pleasing sins. For as it is in the Spermatick virtue of the heavens, which
diffuses it self Universally upon all sublunary bodies, and subtly
insinuating it self into the most dull and unactive Element produces Gold and
Pearls; Life and motion, and brisk activities in all things that can receive
the influence and heavenly blessing; so it is in the Holy Spirit of God, and
the word of God and the grace of God, which S. John calls the seed of God, it
is a law of righteousness, and it is a law of the Spirit of Life, and changes
nature into Grace, and dullness into zeal, and fear into love, and sinful habits
into innocence, and passes on from grace to grace, till we arrive at the full
measures of the stature of Christ, and into the perfect liberty of the sons of
God; so that we shall no more say, The evil that I would not that I do; but we
shall hate what God hates, and the evil that is forbidden we shall not do, not
because we are strong of our selves, but because Christ is our strength, and he
is in us, and Christ's strength shall be perfected in our weakness, and his
grace will be sufficient for us: and he will of his own good pleasure work in
us, not only to will, but also to do, velle and perficere says the Apostle, to
will and to do it thoroughly, and fully, being sanctified throughout, to the
glory of his Holy name, and the eternal salvation of our Souls, through Jesus
Christ our Lord, to whom with the Father, etc.

FIDES FORMATA, OR, Faith working by Love.
James II. 24. You see then, how that by works a Man is justified, and not by
Faith only.


THat we are justified by Faith, S. Paul Romans 3.28.4.5.5.1.10.10. Gal. 2.16.
tells us, that we are also justified by works, we are told in my Text, and
both may be true. But that this justification is wrought by Faith without
works, to him that works not but believes, (says S. Paul;) that this is not
wrought without works; S. James is as express for his negative, as S. Paul was
for his affirmative, and how both these should be true, is something harder to
unriddle. But affirmanti incumbit probatio, he that affirms must prove; and
therefore S. Paul proves his Doctrine by the example of Abraham, to whom faith
was imputed for righteousness; and therefore not by works. And what can be
answered to this? Nothing but this, that S. James uses the very same argument,
to prove that our justification is by works also. James 2.21.
[ For our Father Abraham was justified by works, when he offered up his son
Isaac.] Now which of these says true? Certainly both of them; but neither of
them have been well understood; insomuch that they have not only made divisions
of heart among the faithful, but one party relies on faith to the disparagement
of good life; and the other makes works to be the main ground of our hope and
confidence, and consequently to exclude the efficacy of faith. The one makes
Christian Religion a lazy and unactive institution; and the other, a bold
presumption on our selves; while the first tempts us to live like Heathens, and
the other recals us to live the life of Jews, while one says I am of Paul, and
another, I am of S. James, and both of them put it in danger of evacuating the
institution and the death of Christ; one looking on Christ only as a lawgiver,
and the other only as a Savior. The effects of these are very sad, and by all
means to be diverted by all the wise considerations of the Spirit.

My purpose is not with subtle arts to reconcile them that never disagreed;
the two Apostles spoke by the same Spirit, and to the same last design, though
to differing intermedial purposes; but because the great end of Faith, the
design, the definition, the State, the Economy of it, is that all believers
should not live according to the flesh, but according to the Spirit; before I
fall to the close handling of the Text, I shall premise some preliminary
considerations to prepare the way of holiness, to explicate the differing
senses of the Apostles, to understand the question and the duty, by removing
the causes of the vulgar mistakes of most men in this Article, and then proceed
to the main inquiry.

1. That no man may abuse himself or others by mistaking of hard words, spoken
in mystery, with allegorical expressions to secret senses, wrapped up in a cloud;
such as are [Faith, and Justification, and Imputation, and Righ^eousness, and
Works] be pleased to consider that the very word Faith is in Scripture
infinitely ambiguous, in so much that in the Latin Concordances of S. Hieroms
Bible published by Robert Stephens, you may see no less than twenty two several
senses and acceptations of the word Faith, set down with the several places of
Scripture referring to them. To which if out of my own observation I could add
no more, yet these are an abundant demonstration, that whatsoever is said of
the efficacy of Faith for Justification, is not to be taken in such a sense as
will weaken the necessity, and our carefulness of good life, when the word may
in so many other senses be taken to verify the affirmation of S. Paul, of
Justification by Faith, so as to reconcile it to the necessity of Obedience.

2. As it is in the word Faith, so it is in works; for by works is meant
sometimes the thing done, sometimes the labor of doing, sometimes the good
will; it is sometimes taken for a state of good life, sometimes for the
Covenant of works; it sometimes means the works of the Law, sometimes the works
of the Gospel; sometimes it is taken for a perfect, actual, unsinning
obedience, sometimes for a sincere endeavor to please God; sometimes they are
meant to be such which can challenge the reward as of Debt, sometimes they mean
only a disposition of the person to recieve the favor and the grace of God.
Now since our good works can be but of one kind, for ours cannot be
meritorious, ours cannot be without sin all our life, they cannot be such as to
need no repentance, it is no wonder if we must be justified without works in
this sense; for by such works no man living can be justified. And these S. Paul
calls the works of the Law, and sometimes he calls them our righteousness, and
these are the Covenant of works. But because we came into the world to serve
God, and God will be obeyed, and Jesus Christ came into the world to save us
from sin, and to redeem to himself a people zealous of good works, and has to
this purpose revealed to us all his Fathers will, and destroyed the works of
the Devil, and gives us his holy Spirit; and by him we shall be justified in
this obedience; therefore when works, signify a sincere, hearty endeavor to
keep all Gods commands out of a belief in Christ, that if we endeavor to do
so, we shall be helped by his grace, and if we really do so we shall be
pardoned for what is past, and if we continue to do so, we shall receive a
Crown of Glory, therefore it is no wonder that it is said we are to be
justified by works; always meaning, not the works of the law, that is, works
that are meritorious; works that can challenge the reward; works that need no
mercy, no repentance, no humiliation, and no appeal to grace and favor, but
always meaning, works that are an obedience to God by the measures of good
will, and a sincere endeavor, and the faith of the Lord Jesus.

3. But thus also it is in the word [Justification.] For God is justified, and
wisdom is justified, and man is justified, and a sinner is not justified as
long as he continues in sin, and a sinner is justified when he repents, and
when he is pardoned; and an innocent person is justified when he is declared to
be no criminal, and a righteous man is justified when he is saved, and a weak
Christian is justified when his imperfect services are accepted for the
present, and himself thrust forward to more grace; and he that is justified may
be justified more; and every man that is justified to one purpose is not so to
all, and faith in diverse senses gives justification in as many; and therefore
though to every sense of Faith there is not always a degree of justification
in any; yet when the faith is such, that justification is the product and
correspondent, as that Faith may be imperfect, so the justification is but
begun, and either must proceed further, or else as the faith will die, so the
justification will come to nothing. The like observation might be made
concerning imputation and all the words used in this question, but these may
suffice till I pass to other particulars.

4. Not only the word Faith, but also charity and godliness, and religion
signify sometimes particular graces, and sometimes they suppose Universally,
and mean conjugations and Unions of graces, as is evident to them that read the
Scriptures with observation. Now when justification is attributed to Faith, or
Salvation to godliness, they are to be understood in the aggregate sense: for
that I may give but one instance of this; when S. Paul speaks of faith as it is
a particular grace and separate from the rest, he also does separate it from
all possibility of bringing us to Heaven; Though I have all Faith, so that I
could remove Mountains, 1 Cor. 13:2:
and have no charity, I am nothing. When Faith includes charity, it will bring
us to Heaven; when it is alone, when it is without charity, it will do nothing
at all.

5. Neither can this (...) be salved by saying, that though Faith alone does
justify, yet when she does justify she is not alone; but good works must
follow: for this is said to no purpose. 1. Because if we be justified by faith
alone, the work is done, whether charity does follow or no, and therefore that
want of charity cannot hurt us. 2. There can be no imaginable cause why charity
and obedience should be at all necessary, if the whole work can be done without
it. 3. If obedience and charity be not a condition of our Salvation, than it is
not necessary to follow faith; but if it be, it does as much as faith, for that
is but a part of the condition. 4. If we can be saved without charity and
keeping the Commandments, what need we trouble our selves for them: if we
cannot be saved without them, then either faith without them does not justify,
or if it does, we are never the better, for we may be damned for all that
justification.

The Consequent of the these observations is briefly this.

1. That no man should fool himself by disputing about the Philosophy of
Justification, and what causality faith has in it; and whether it be the act
of faith that justifies, or the habit? Whether faith as a good work, or faith
as an instrument? Whether Faith as it is Obedience, or faith as it is an access
to Christ? Whether as a hand, or as a heart? Whether by its own innate virtue,
or by efficacy of the object? Whether as a sign, or as a thing signified?
Whether by introduction, or by perfection? Whether in the first beginnings, or
in its last and best productions? Whether by inherent worthiness, or
adventitious imputation? Vberius ista quaeso, Tuscul. 1.
etc. (that I may use the words of Cicero) haec enim spinosiora prius, ut
confiteor, me cogunt quam ut assentiar. These things are knotty and too
intricate to do any good; they may amuse us, but never instruct us; and they
have already made men careless and confident, disputative and troublesome, proud
and uncharitable, but neither wiser nor better. Let us therefore leave these
weak ways of troubling our selves or others, and directly look to the Theology
of it, the direct duty, the end of Faith, and the work of Faith, the conditions
and the instruments of our Salvation, the just foundation of our hopes, how our
faith can destroy our sin, and how it can unite us unto God; how by it we can
be made Partakers of Christ's death, and imitators of his life. For since it is
evident by the premises, that this article is not to be determined or relied
upon by arguing from words of many significations; we must walk by a clearer
light, by such plain sayings and Dogmatical Propositions of Scripture which
evidently teach us our duty, and place our hopes upon that which cannot deceive
us, that is, which require Obedience, which call upon us to glorify God, and
to do good to men, and to keep all Gods Commandments, with diligence and
sincerity.

For since the end of our faith is that we may be Disciples and Servants of the
Lord Jesus, advancing his Kingdom here, and partaking of it hereafter, since we
are commanded to believe what Christ taught, that it may appear as reasonable
as it is necessary to do what he has commanded, since Faith and works are in
order one to the other, it is impossible that Evangelical Faith, and
Evangelical works should be opposed one to the other in the effecting of our
Salvation. So that as it is to no purpose for Christians to dispute whether we
are justified by Faith or the works of the law, that is the Covenant of works
without the help of Faith and the auxiliaries and allowances of mercy on Gods
part, and repentance on ours; because no Christian can pretend to this: so it
is perfectly foolish to dispute whether Christians are to be justified by
Faith, or the works of the Gospel; for I shall make it appear that they are
both the same thing. No man disparages faith but he that says, Faith does not
work righteousness; for he that says so, says indeed it cannot justify: for
he says that faith is alone; it is faith only, and the words of my Text are
plain; you see (says S. James) that is, it is evident to your sense, it is as
clear as an ocular demonstration, that a man is justified by works and not by
Faith only.

My Text has it in these two Propositions; a negative and an affirmative. The
negative is this, 1. By Faith only a man is not justified. The affirmative, 2.
By works also a man is justified.

When I have briefly discoursed of these; I shall only add such practical
considerations as shall make the Doctrines useful, and tangible, and material.

1. By faith only a man is not justified. By faith only, here is meant, faith
without Obedience. For what do we think of those that detain the faith in
Unrighteousness? they have faith, they could not else keep it in so ill a
Cabinet, but yet the Apostle reckons them amongst the Reprobates; for the
abominable, the Reprobates and the disobedient are all one; and therefore such
persons for all their faith shall have no part with faithful Abraham: for none
are his Children but they that do the works of Abraham. Abraham's faith without
Abraham's works is nothing: for of him that has faith, and has not works. S.
James asks, Can Faith save him? James 2.14.
Meaning that it is impossible. For what think we of those that did miracles in
Christ's name, and in his name cast out Devils? Have not they Faith? Yes, omnem
fidem, all faith, that is alone, for they could remove Mountains: but yet to
many of them Christ will say, Depart from me ye workers of iniquity, I know you
not. Nay at last, what think we of the Devils themselves? have not they faith?
yes, and this faith is not fides miraculorum neither, but it is an Operative
faith, it works a little; for it makes them tremble; and it may be that is more
than thy faith does to thee: and yet do thou hope to be saved by a faith that
does less to thee, than the Devils faith does to him? That Is impossible. For
Faith without works is dead, says S. James. It is manus arida says S. Austin,
it is a withered hand, and that which is dead cannot work the l^fe of grace in
us, much less obtain eternal life for us. In short, a man may have faith, and
yet do the works of unrighteousness; he may have faith and be a Devil, and then
what can such a faith do to him or for him? It can do him no good in the
present constitution of affairs. S. Paul, from whose mistaken words much noise
has been made in this question, is clear in this particular. Nothing in Christ
Jesus can avail, Gal. 5.6.
but Faith working by Charity; that is, as he expounds himself once and again;
Gal. 6.15. 1 Cor. 7.19.
nothing but a new creature, nothing but keeping the Commandments of God. If
faith be defined to be any thing that does not change our natures, and make us
to be a new Creation unto God; if keeping the Commandments be not in the
definition of faith, it avails nothing at all. Therefore deceive not your
selves; they are the words of our Blessed Lord himself; Not every one that
says unto me Lord, Lord, that is, not every one that confesses Christ, and
believes in him, calling Christ Master and Lord shall be saved, but he that
does the will of my Father which is in Heaven. These things are so plain, that
they need no Commentary; so evident, that they cannot be denyied: and to these
I add but this one truth: that faith alone without a good life is so far from
justifying a sinner, that it is one of the greatest aggravations of his
condemnation in the whole World. For no man can be so greatly damned as he that
has faith; for unless he knows his masters will, that is, by faith be
convinced, and assents to the revelations of the will of God, he can be beaten
but with few stripes: but he that believes has no excuse, he is (...),
condemned by the sentence of his own heart, and therefore (...), many stripes,
the greater condemnation shall be his portion. Natural reason is a light to the
Conscience, but faith is a greater, and therefore if it be not followed, it
damns deeper than the Hell of the Infidels and uninstructed. And so I have done
with the Negative Proposition of my Text; a man is not justified by faith
alone, that is, by faith which has not in it Charity and Obedience.

2. If faith alone will not do it, what will? The affirmative part of the Text
answers; not faith alone; but works must be an ingredient: a man is justified
by works; and that is now to be explicated and proved. It will be absolutely to
no purpose to say that faith alone does justify, if when a man is justified,
he is never the nearer to be saved. Now that without Obedience no man can go to
Heaven, is so evident in holy Scripture, that he that denies it, has no faith,
There is no peace says my God unto the wicked; Isa. 57.21: Exodus 23.7.
and I will not justify a sinner, says God; unless faith purges away our sins
it can never justify. Let a man believe all the revelations of God, if that
belief ends in its self and goes no further, it is like physic taken to purge
the stomach; if it do not work, it is so far from bringing health, that it self
is a new sickness. Faith is a great purger and purifier of the soul, purifying
your hearts by Faith, faith the Apostle. It is the best physic in the World
for a sinful soul, but if it does not work, it corrupts in the stomach, it
makes us to rely upon weak Propositions and trifling confidences, it is but a
dreaming (...), a Fantastic dream, and introduces Pride or superstition,
swelling thoughts and presumptions of the Divine favor. But what says the
Apostle? Follow Peace with all men, Heb. 12.14.
and holiness, without which no man can see God. Mark that. If faith does not
make you charitable and holy, talk no more of justification by it, for you
shall never see the glorious face of God. Faith indeed is a title and relation
to Christ; it is a naming of his names, but what then? Why than says the
Apostle, Let every one that names the name of Christ depart from iniquity.

For let any man consider, can the Faith of Christ, and the hatred of God stand
together? Can any man be justified that does not love God? Or can any man love
God and sin at the same time? And does not he love sin that falls under its
temptation, and obeyes it in the lusts thereof, and delights in the vanity, and
makes excuses for it, and returns to it with passion, and abides with pleasure?
This will not do it; such a man cannot be justified for all his believing. But
therefore the Apostle shows us a more excellent way: Titus 3.8.
This is a true saying, and I will that thou affirm constantly, that they who
have believed in God, be careful to maintain good works. The Apostle puts great
force on this Doctrine, he arms it with a double Preface; the saying is true,
and it is to be constantly affirmed; that is, it is not only true, but
necessary; it is like Pharaoh's dream doubled, because it is bound upon us by
the decree of God, and it is unalterably certain, that every believer must do
good works, or his believing will signify little; nay more than so, every man
must be careful to do good works, and more yet; he must carefully maintain
them, that is, not do them by fits and interrupted returns, but (...) to be
incumbent upon them, to dwell upon them, to maintain good works, that is, to
persevere in them. But I am yet but in the general; be pleased to go along with
me in these particular considerations.

1. No man's sins are pardoned, but in the same measure, in which they are
mortified, destroyed and taken away; so that if faith does not cure our sinful
Natures it never can justify, it never can procure our pardon. And therefore
it is, that as soon as ever faith in the Lord Jesus was preached, at the same
time also they preached repentance from dead works: in so much that S. Paul
reckons it among the fundamentals and first Principles of Christianity; nay,
Heb. 6.1.
the Baptist preached repentance and amendment of life as a preparation to the
faith of Christ. And I pray consider; can there be any forgiveness of sins
without repentance? But if an Apostle should preach forgivene^s to all that
believe, and this belief did not also mean that they should repent and forsake
their sin, the Sermons of the Apostle would make Christianity nothing else but
the Sanctuary of Romulus, a device to get togeth^r all the wicked people of the
world, and to make them happy without any change of manners. Christ came to
other purposes; he came to sanctify us and to cleanse us by his Word; 1 John
3.8.
the word of faith was not for it self, but was a design of holiness, and the
very grace of God did appear, Ephesians. 5.25. Tit. 2.11.
for this end; that teaching us to deny all ungodliness and worldly lusts, we
should live holily, justly, and soberly in this present World; he came to
gather a People together; not like David's army, when Saul pursued him, but the
armies of the Lord, a faithful people, a chosen generation; and what is that?
The Spirit of God adds, a People zealous of good works. Now as Christ proved
his power to forgive sins by curing the poor man's palsy; because a man is
never pardoned but when the punishment is removed, so the great act of
justification of a sinner, the pardoning of his sins, is then only effected,
when the spiritual evil is taken away: that is the best indication of a real and
an eternal pardon; when God takes away the hardness of the heart, the love of
sin, the accursed habit, the evil inclination, the sin that does so easily
beset us: and when that is gone, what remains within us that God can hate?
Nothing stays behind, but Gods creation, the work of his own hands, the issues
of his holy Spirit. The faith of a Christian is (...), it destroys the whole
body of sin; and to suppose that Christ pardons a sinner, whom he does not also
purge and r^scue from the dominion of sin, is to affirm that he justifies the
wicked, that he calls good evil, and evil good, that he delights in a wicked
person, that he makes a wicked man all one with himself; that he makes the
members of a harlot at the same time also the members of Christ. But all this
is impossible, and therefore ought not to be pretended to by any Christian.
Severe are those words of our Blessed Savior, Every plant in me that bears
not fruit he takes away. John 15.2:
Faith ingrafts us into Christ; by faith we are inserted into the vine; but the
plant that is ingrafted, must also be parturient and fruitful, or else it shall
be quite cut off from the root, and thrown into the everlasting burning. And
this is the full and plain meaning of those words so often used in Scripture
for the magnification of faith. The just shall live by Faith. No man shall live
by faith but the just man, he indeed is justified by faith, but no man else;
the unjust and the unrighteous man has no portion in this matter. That Is the
first great consideration in this affair; no man is justified in the least
sense of justification, that is, when it means nothing but the pardon of sins,
but when his sin is mortified and destroyed.

2. No man is actually justified, but he that is in some measure sanctified.
For the understanding and clearing of which Proposition we must know, that
justification when it is attributed to any cause, does not always signify
justification actual. Thus when it is said in Scripture, We are justified by
the death of Christ, it is but the same thing as to say, Christ dyed for us;
and he rose again for us too, that we might indeed be justified in due time,
and by just measures and dispositions; he dyed for our sins, and ros^ again for
our justification; that is, by his death and Resurrection he has obtained this
power, and effected this mercy, that if we believe him and obey, we shall be
justified and made capable of all the blessings of the Kingdom. But that this
is no more but a capacity of pardon, of grace and of salvation, appears not
only by Gods requiring Obedience as a condition on our parts; but by his
expressly attributing this mercy to us at such times and in such circumstances,
in which it is certain and evident that we could not actually be justified. For
so says the Scripture; We when we were enemies, Romans 5. v. 8.10.
were reconciled to God by the death of his Son; and while we were yet sinners,
Christ died for us; that is, then was our Justification wrought on Gods part,
that is, then he intended this mercy to us, then he resolved to show us favor,
to give us Promises, and Laws, and Conditions, and hopes, and an infallible
Economy of Salvation; and when faith lays hold on this Grace, and this
Justification, then we are to do the other part of it; that is, as God made it
potential by the death and resurrection of Christ, so we laying hold on these
things by Faith, and working the Righteousness of Faith, that is, performing
what is required on our parts, we, I say, make it actual; and for this very
reason it is that the Apostle puts more Emphasis upon the Resurrection of
Christ than upon his Death. Romans 8.28. Romans 4.25.
Who is he that condemns? It is Christ that died, yea rather, that is risen
again. And Christ was both delivered for our sins, and is risen again for our
justification; implying to us, that as it is in the principal, so it is in the
correspondent; our sins indeed are potentially pardoned, when they are marked
out for death and crucifixion; when by resolving and fighting against sin we die
to sin daily, and are so made conformable to his death; but we must partake of
Christ's Resurrection before this Justification can be actual; when we are dead
to sin, and are risen again unto righteousness, then as we are partakers of his
Death, so we shall be partakers of his Resurrection (says S. Paul) that is,
then we are truly, effectually, and indeed justified. Till than we are not.

Ecclus. 31.
He that loves Gold shall not be justified, says the wise Bensirach; he that
is covetous, let his faith be what it will, shall not be accounted righteous
before God, because he is not so in himself, and he is not so in Christ, for he
is not in Christ at all; he has no righteousness in himself, and he ha^h none
in Christ; for if we be in Christ, or if Christ be in us, the body is dead by
reason of sin, Romans 8.10.
and the Spirit is life because of righteousness. For this is the (...), that
faithful thing, that is, the faithfulness is manifested; the Emun, from whence
comes Emunah, which is the Hebrew word for Faith; from whence Amen is derived.
Fiat quod dictum est hinc inde; hoc fidum est, when God and we both say Amen to
our promises and undertakings. Plaut. Captiv.
Fac fidelis sis fideli, cave fidem fluxam geras; said he in the Comedy, God is
faithful, be thou so too; for if thou failest him, thy faith has failed thee.
Fides sumitur pro eo quod est inter utrunque placitum, says one; and then it
is true which the Prophet and the Apostle said; the Just shall live by faith,
in both senses: ex fide mea vivet, ex fide sua; we live by Gods Faith, and by
our own; by his Fidelity, and by ours. When the righteousness of God becomes
your righteousness, and exceeds the righteousness of the Scribes and Pharisees,
when the righteousness of the Law is fulfilled in us, by walking not after the
flesh but after the Spirit; then we are justified by Gods truth and by ours, by
his Grace, and our Obedience. So that now we see that Justification and
Sanctification cannot be distinguished, but as words of Art signifying the
various steps of progression in the same course; they may be distinguished in
notion and speculation; but never when they are to pass on to material events:
for no man is justified but he that is also sanctified. They are the express
words of S. Paul, Whom he did foreknow, Romans 8.29.
them he did predestinate to be conformed to the image of his Son, to be like
to Christ; and then it follows, Whom he has predestined, so predestined,
them he has also called, and whom he has called, them he has also justified;
and then it follows, Whom he has justified, them he has also glorified. So
that no man is justified, that is, so as to signify Salvation, but
Sanctification must be precedent to it; and that was my second consideration
(...), that which I was to prove.

3. I pray consider; that he that does not believe the promises of the Gospel,
cannot pretend to Faith in Christ; but the promises are all made to us upon the
conditions of Obedience; And he that does not believe them as Christ made them,
believes them not at all. In well doing commit your selves to God as unto a
faithful Creator; there is no committing our selves to God without well-doing;
For God will render to every man according to his deeds; Romans 2.6, 7, 8.
to them that obey unrighteousness, indignation and wrath; but to them who by
patient continuance in well-doing seek for glory, and honor, and immortality,
to them eternal life. So that if faith apprehends any other promises, it is
illusion, and not faith. God gave us none such, Christ purchased none such for
us; search the Bible over and you shall find none such. But if faith lays hold
on these promises that are, and as they are, then it becomes an Article of our
faith, that without obedience, and a sincere endeavor to keep Gods
Commandments, no man living can be justified. And therefore let us take heed
when we magnify the free Grace of God, we do not exclude the conditions which
this free Grace has set upon us. Christ freely died for us; God pardons us
freely in our first access to him; we could never deserve pardon, because when
we need pardon we are enemies, and have no good thing in us; and he freely
gives us of his Spirit, and freely he enables us to obey him; and for our
little imperfect services he freely and bountifully will give us eternal life;
here is free Grace all the way, and he overvalues his pitiful services, who
thinks that he deserves Heaven by them; and that if he does his duty tolerably,
eternal life is not a free gift to him, but a deserved reward.

Conscius est animus meus, experientia testis,
Mystica quae retuli dogmata vera scio.
Non tamen idcirco scio me fore glorificandum,
Spes mea crux Christi, gratia, non opera.
It was the meditation of the wise Chancellor of Paris. I know that without a
good life, and the fruits of repentance, a sinner cannot be justified; and
therefore I must live well, or I must die for ever. But if I do live holily, I
do not think that I deserve Heaven, it is the cross of Christ that procures me
grace; it is the Spirit of Christ that gives me grace; it is the mercy and the
free gift of Christ that brings me unto Glory. But yet he that shall exclude
the works of faith from the Justification of a sinner by the blood of Christ,
may as well exclude faith it self; for faith it self is one of the works of
God: it is a good work; so said Christ to them that asked him. John 6.28.29:
[ What shall we do to work the works of God? Jesus said, This is the work of
God, that ye believe on him whom he has sent.] Faith is not only the
Foundation of good works, but it self is a good work, it is not only the cause
of obedience, but a part of it; it is not only as the Son of Sirach calls it,
initium adhaerendi Deo, a beginning of cleaving unto God; but it carries us on
to the perfection of it. Christ is the Author and finisher of our Faith, and
when Faith is finished, a good life is made perfect in our kind. Let no man
therefore expect events for which he has no promise, nor call for Gods
fidelity without his own faithfulness, nor snatch at a promi^e without
performing the condition; nor think faith to be a hand to apprehend Christ, and
to do nothing else; for that will but deceive us, and turn Religion into words,
and holiness into hypocrisy, and the promises of God into a snare, and the
truth of God into a ly. For when God made a Covenant of faith, he made also the
(...), the law of Faith, and when he admitted us to a Covenant of more mercy
than was in the Covenant of works, or of the law, he did not admit us to a
Covenant of idleness, and incurious walking in a State of disobedience, but the
mercy of God leads us to repentance, and when he gives us better promises, he
intends we should pay him a better obedience: when he forgives us what is past,
he intends we should sin no more: when he offers us his graces, he would have
us to make use of them; when he causes us to distrust our selves, his meaning
is we should rely upon him; when he enables us to do what he commands us, he
commands us to do all that we can. And therefore this Covenant of Faith and
mercy is also a Covenant of holiness, and the grace that pardons us does also
purify us; for so says the Apostle, He that has this hope purifies himself
even as God is pure. And when we are so, then we are justified indeed; this is
the (...), the law of Faith; and by works in this sense, that is, by the works
of Faith, by Faith working by love, and producing fruits worthy of amendment of
life, we are justified before God. And so I have done with the affirmative
Proposition of my Text; you see that a man is justified by works.

But there is more in it then this matter yet amounts to. For S. James does not
say, we are justified by works, and are not justified by Faith; that had been
irreconcilable with S. Paul; but we are so justified by works, that it is not
by Faith alone; it is Faith and works together: that is, it is by the (...) by
the obedience of Faith, by the works of Faith, by the law of Faith; by
righteousness Evangelical, by the conditions of the Gospel and the measures of
Christ. I have many things to say in this particular; but because I have but a
little time left to say them in, I will sum it all up in this Proposition, That
in the question of justification and salvation, Faith and good works are no
part of a distinction, but members of one entire body. Faith and good works
together work the righteousness of God. That is, that I may speak plainly,
justifying faith contains in it obedience: and if this be made good, then the
two Apostles are reconciled to each other, and both of them to the necessity,
the indispensable necessity of a good life.

Now that justifying and saving Faith must be defined by something more than an
act of understanding, appears not only in this, that S. Peter reckons Faith as
distinctly from knowledge, as he does from patience, or strength or brotherly
kindness; 2 Pet. 1.5.
saying [ Add to your faith virtue, to virtue knowledge] but in this also;
because an error in life, and whatsoever is against holiness, is against faith.
And therefore S. Paul reckons the lawless and the disobedient, murders of
Parents, man-stealing and such things to be against sound doctrines, for the
doctrine of Faith is called (...), the doctrine that is according to godliness.
And when S. Paul prays against ungodly men, 2 These. 3.2.
he adds this reason,(...). for all men have not Faith: meaning that wicked men
are Infidels and Unbelievers, and particularly he affirms of him that does not
provide for his own, 1 Timothy 5.8.
that he has denied the Faith. Now from hence it follows that faith is
godliness, because all wickedness is infidelity, it is an Apostasy from the
Faith. Ille erit, Ille nocens qui me tibi fecerat hostem; he that sins against
God, he is the enemy to the Faith of Jesus Christ; and therefore we deceive our
selves if we place faith in the understanding only; it is not that, and it does
not dwell there, but (...), says the Apostle, the Mystery of Faith is kept no
where, it dwells no where but in a pure conscience.

For I consider that since all moral habits are best defined by their
operations, we can best understand what faith is by seeing what it does. To
this purpose hear S. Paul, By faith Abel offered up to God a more excellent
Sacrifice than Cain. Heb. 11.
By faith Noah made an Ark. By faith Abraham left his Country and offered up
his Son. By faith Moses chose to suffer affliction, and accounted the reproach
of Christ greater than all the riches of Egypt. In short, the children of God
by faith subdued Kingdoms, and wrought righteousness: To work righteousness is
as much the duty and work of faith as believing is. So that now we may quickly
make an end of this great inquiry, whether a man is justified by Faith, or by
works, for he is so by both; if you take it alone, faith does not justify, but
take it in the aggregate sense as it is used in the question of Justification
by S. Paul, and then faith does not only justify, but it sanctifies too, and
then you need to inquire no further; obedience is a part of the definition of
faith, as much as it is of Charity. This is love, says S. John, that we keep
his Commandments. And the very same is affirmed of Faith too by Bensirach,
Ecclus. 32.24.
He that believes the Lord will keep his Commandments.

I have now don with all the Proposi^ions expressed and employed in the Text;
give me leave to make some practical Considerations, and so I shall dismiss you
from this Attention.

Panar. lib. 1. edit. Basil. p. 8. l. 46.
The rise I take from the words of S. Epiphanius speaking in praise of the
Apostolical and purest Ages of the Church. There was at first no distinction of
Sects and Opinions in the Church: she knew no difference of men, but good and
bad; there was no separation made, but what was made by piety or impiety, or
(says he) which is all one, by fidelity and infidelity. (...). For Faith has
in it the Image of godliness engraven, and infidelity has the character of
wickedness and prevarication. A man was not then esteemed a Saint for
disobeying his Bishop or an Apostle, nor for misunderstanding the hard sayings
of S. Paul about predestination: to kick against the laudable customs of the
Church was not then accounted a note of the godly party: and to despise
Government was but an ill mark, and weak indication of being a good Christian.
The Kingdom of God did not then consist in words, but in power, the power of
godliness; though now we are fallen into another method: we have turned all
Religion into Faith, and our Faith is nothing but the productions of interest
or disputing; it is adhering to a party, and a wrangling against all the world
beside; and when it is asked of what Religion he is of, we understand the
meaning to be, what faction does he follow; what are the articles of his Sect,
not what is the manner of his life; and if men be zealous for their party and
that interest, then they are precious men, though otherwise they be Covetous as
the grave, factious as Dathan, Schismatical as Corah, or proud as the falling
Angels, Alas! these things will but deceive us; the faith of a Christian
cannnot consist in strifes about words, and perverse disputings of men. These
things the Apostle calls profane and vain Bablings; 2 Timothy 2.16.
and mark what he says of them, these things will increase (...). They are in
themselves ungodliness and will produce more; they will increase unto more
ungodliness. But the faith of a Christian had other measures: that was faith
then which made men faithful to their vows in Baptism. The faith of a Christian
was the best security in contracts, and a Christians word was as good as his
bond, because he was faithful that promised, and a Christian would rather die
then break his word; and was always true to his trust; he was faithful to his
Friend, and loved as Jonathan did David. This was the Christian Faith then:
their religion was to hurt no man, and to do good to every man, and so it ought
to be. True Religion is to visit the Fatherless and Widow, and to keep our
selves unspotted of the World. That Is a good religion, that is pure and
undefiled: so S. James, and S. Chrysostom defines (...), true religion to be
(...), a pure faith and a godly life, for they make up the whole mystery of
god^iness; and no man could then pretend to Faith, but he that did do
valiantly, and suffer patiently, and resist the Devil, and overcome the world.
These things are as pr^perly the actions of Faith, as alms is of Charity, and
therefore they must enter into the moral definition of it. And this was truly
understood by Salvian, that wi^e and godly Priest of Massilia; what is Faith,
and what is believing (says he) hominem fideliter Christo credere est fidel^m
Deo esse, h. e. fideliter Dei mandata servare. That man does faithfully believe
in Christ who is faithful unto God, who faithfully keeps Gods commandments: and
therefore let us measure our Faith here by our faithfulness to God, and by our
diligence to do our Masters Commandments; For Christianorum omnis religio sine
scelere and m^cula vivere, Instit. l. 5. c. 9.
said Lactantius. The whole religion of a Christian is to live unblameably;
that is, in all holiness and purity of conversation.

2. When our faith is spoken of as the great instrument of justification and
salvation, take Abraham's faith as your best pattern, and that w^ll end the
dispute, because that he was justified by Faith when his faith was mighty in
effect; when he trusted in God, when he believed the promises, when he expected
a resurrection of the dead, when he was strong in Faith* when he gave glory to
God, when against hope he believed in hope, and when all this past into an act
of a most glorious obedience, even denying his greatest desires, contradicting
his most passionate affections, offering to God the best thing he had, and
exposing to death his beloved Isaac, his laughters, all his joy at the command
of God. By this faith he was justified, says S. Paul; by these works he was
justified, says S. James; that is, by this faith working this obedience. And
then all the difficulty is over; only remember this, your faith is weak and
will do but little for you, if it be not stronger then all your secular desires
and all your peevish angers. Thus we find in the holy Gospels, this conjunction
declared necessary, Mark. 11.24.
Whatsoever things ye desire, when ye pray, believe that ye receive them, and
ye shall have them. Here is as glorious an event promised to Faith as can be
expressed, Faith shall obtain any thing of God. True; but it is not Faith
alone; but faith in prayer; faith praying, not faith simply believing. So S.
James; the prayer of Faith shall save the sick, but adds, it must be the
effectual fervent prayer of a righteous man, so that faith shall prevail; but
there must be prayer in faith, and servour in prayer, and devotion in fervor,
and righteousness in devotion, and then impute the effect to faith if you
please, provided that it be declared: that effect cannot be wrought by Faith
unless it be so qualified. But Christ adds one thing more. When ye stand
praying, forgive, but if ye will not forgive, neither will your Father forgive
you. So that it will be to no purpose to say a man is justified by faith,
unless you mingle charity with it: for without the charity of forgiveness,
there can be no pardon; and then justification is but a word, when it effects
nothing.

3. Let every one take heed that by an importune adhering to and relying upon a
mistaken Faith, he do not really make a shipwreck of a right Faith. Hymenaeus
and Alexander lost their faith by putting away a good conscience, and what
matter is it, of what religion or faith a man be of, if he be a Villain and a
cheat, a man of no truth, and of no trust, a lover of the World, and not a
lover of God. But I pray consider, can any man have faith that denies God?
That Is not possible: and cannot a man as well deny God by an evil action, as by
an heritical Proposition? Cannot a man deny God by works as much as by words?
Hear what the Apostle says, Tit. 1.16.
They profess that they know God, but in works they deny him, being abominable
and disobedient, and unto every good work reprobate. Disobedience is a denying
God. Nolumus hunc regnare, is as plain a renouncing of Christ, as nolumus huic
credere* It is to no purpose to say we believe in Christ and have faith, unless
Christ reign in our hearts by faith.

4. From these premises we may see but too evidently, that though a great part
of mankind pretend to be saved by Faith, yet they know not what it is, or else
wilfully mistake it, and place their hopes upon sand, or the more unstable
water. Believing is the least thing in a justifying faith. For faith is a
conjugation of many Ingredients; and faith is a Covenant, and faith is a law,
and faith is obedience, and faith is a work, and indeed it is a sincere
cleaving to and closing with the terms of the Gospel in every instance, in
every particular. Alas! the niceties of a spruce understanding, and the curious
nothings of useless speculation, and all the opinions of men that make the
divisions of heart, and do nothing else, cannot bring us one drop of comfort in
the day of tribulation; and therefore are no parts of the strength of faith.
Nay, when a man begins truly to fear God, and is in the Agonies of
mortification, all these new-nothings and curiosities will neglected by, as
baubles do by children when they are deadly sick. But that only is faith that
makes us to love God, to do his will, to suffer his impositions, to trust his
promises, to see through a cloud, to overcome the World, to resist the Devil,
to stand in the day of trial, and to be comforted in all our sorrows. This is
that precious faith so mainly necessary to be insisted on, that by it we may be
Sons of the free woman, liberi a vitiis ac ritibus, that the true Isaac may be
in us, which is Christ according to the Spirit, the wisdom and power of God, a
Divine vigor and life, whereby we are enabled with joy and cheerfulness to
walk in the way of God. By this you may try your faith, if you please, and make
an end of this question. Do you believe in the Lord Jesus, yea or no? God
forbid else, but if your Faith be good it will abide the trial. There are but
three things that make the integrity of Christian faith, believing the words of
God, confidence in his goodness, and keeping his commandments.

For the first, it is evident that every man pret^nds to it; if he calls
himself Christian, he believes all that is in the Canon of the Scriptures, and
if he did not, he were indeed no Christian. But now consider, what think we of
this Proposition? All shall be damned who believe not the truth, 2 These. 2.12:
but have pleasure in unrighteousness. Does not every man believe this? Is it
possible they can believe there is any such thing as unrighteousness in the
World, or any such thing as damnation; and yet commit that which the Scriptures
call unrighteousness, and which all laws, and all good men say is so? Consider
how many unrighteous men there are in the world, and yet how few of them think
they shall be damned. I know not how it comes to pass; but men go upon strange
principles, and they have made Christianity to be a very odd Institution, if it
had not better measures than they are pleased to afford it. There are two great
roots of all evil, Covetousness and Pride; and they have infected the greatest
parts of mankind, and yet no man thinks himself to be either covetous or proud.
And therefore whatever you discourse against these sins, it never hits any man,
but like Jonathans arrows to David, they fall short, or they fly beyond.
Salvian complained of it in his time. Hoc ad crimina nostra addimus, ut cum in
omnibus rei simus, Lib. 3.
etiam bonos nos, and sanctos esse credamus. This we add unto our crimes, we
are the vilest persons in the world, and yet we think our selves to be good
people, and when we die make no question but we shall go to Heaven. There is no
cause of this, but because we have not so much Faith as believing comes to, and
yet most men will pretend not only to believe, but to love Christ all this
while. And how do they prove this? Truly they hate the memory of Judas, and
curse the Jews that crucified Christ, and think Pilate a very miserable man,
and that all the Turks are damned, and to be called Cajaphas is a word of
reproach; and indeed there are many that do not much more for Christ than this
comes to; things to as little purpose, and of as little signification. But so
the Jews did hate the memory of Corah as we do of Caiphas, and they builded the
Sepulchers of the Prophets, and we also are angry at them that killed the
Apostles and the Martyrs. But in the mean time we neither love Christ nor his
Saints; for we neither obey him, nor imitate them. And yet we should think our
selves highly injured, if one should call us Infidels and haters of Christ. But
I pray consider; what is hating of any man, but designing and doing him all the
injury and spite we can? Does not he hate Christ that dishonours him, that
makes Christ's members the members of an harlot? That does not feed and clothe
these members? If the Jews did hate Christ when they crucified him, then so
does a Christian too when he crucifies him again. Let us not deceive our
selves; a Christian may be damned as well as a Turk; and Christians may with as
much malice crucify Christ as the Jews did. And so does every man that sins
wilfully; he spills the blood of Christ, making it to be spent in vain. He that
hates you, hates me, he that receives you, receives me, said Christ to his
Apostles. I wish the world had so much faith as to believe that; and by this
try whether we love Christ, and believe in him or no, I shall for the trial of
our Faith ask one easy question. Do we believe that the story of David and
Jonathan is true? Have we so much faith as to think it possible that two Rivals
of a Crown should love so dearly? Can any man believe this, and not be
infinitely ashamed to see Christians (almost all Christians) to be
irreconcileably angry, and ready to pull their brothers heart out, when he
offers to take our Land or money from us? Why do almost all men that go to law
for right hate one another persons? Why cannot men with patience hear their
titles questioned? But if Christianity be so excellent a Religion, why are so
very many Christians so very wicked? Certainly they do not so much as believe
the propositions and principles of their own Religion. For the body of
Christians is so universally wicked, that it would be a greater change to see
Christians generally live according to their profession, than it was at first
from infidelity to see them to turn Believers. The conversion from Christian to
Christian, from Christian in title to Christian in sincerity, would be a
greater miracle then it was when they were converted from Heathen and Jew to
Christian. What is the matter? Is not repentance from dead works reckoned by S.
Paul in the 6. Hebr. as one of the fundamental points of Christian Religion? Is
it not a piece of our Catechism, the first thing we are taught, and is it not
the last thing that we practice? We had better be without Baptism than without
repentance, and yet both are necessary; and therefore if we were not without
faith, we should be without neither. Is not Repentance a forsaking all sin, and
an entire returning unto God? Who can deny this? And is it not plainly said in
Scripture, Unless ye repent ye shall all perish? But show me the man that
believes these things heartily: that is, show me a true penitent, he only
believes the doctrines of repentance.

If I had time I should examine your faith by your confidence in God, and by
your obedience. But if we fall in the mere believing, it is not likely we
should do better in the other. But because all the promises of God are
conditional, and there can be no confidence in the particular without a promise
or revelation, it is not possible that any man that does not live well should
reasonably put his trust in God. To live a wicked life, and then to be
confident that in the day of our death God will give us pardon, is not faith
but a direct want of faith. If we did believe the promises upon their proper
conditions, or believe that Gods commandments were righteous and true, or that
the threatenings were as really intended as they are terribly spoken, we should
not dare to live at the rate we do: But wicked men have not faith, says S.
Paul, and then the wonder ceases.

But there are such palpable contradictions between men's practices and the
fundamentals of our faith, that it was a material consideration of our Blessed
Savior, When the Son of man comes shall he find faith upon the earth? Meaning
it should be very hard and scant: every man shall boast of his own goodness;
sed virum fidelem, (says Solomon) but a faithful man who can find? Some men
are very good when they are afflicted.

Hanc sibi virtutem fracta facit urceus ansa,
Et tristis nullo qui tepet igne focus;
Et teges and cimex, and nudi sponda grabati,
Fit brevis atque eadem nocte dieque toga.
When the gown of the day is the mantle of the night, and cannot at the same
time cover the head, and make the feet warm; when they have but one broken dish
and no spoon, then they are humble and modest; then they can suffer an injury,
and bear contempt: but give them riches and they grow insolent; fear and
pusillanimity did their first work, and an opportunity to sin undoes it all.
Bonum militem perdidisti, Imperatorem pessimum creasti, said Galba, you have
spoiled a good Trooper when you made me a bad Commander. Others can never serve
God, but when they are prosperous: if they lose their fortune they lose their
Faith, and quit their Charity. Non rata fides ubi jam melior fortuna ruit. If
they become poor, they become liars and deceivers of their trust, envious and
greedy, restless and uncharitable; that is, one way or other they show that
they love the world, and by all the faith they pretend to cannot overcome it.

Cast up therefore your reckonings impartially; See what is, what will be
required at your hands. Do not think you can be justified by faith, unless your
faith be greater then all your passions; you have not the learning, not so much
as the common notices of faith, unless you can tell when you are covetous, and
reprove your self when you are proud; but he that is so, and knows it not (and
that is the case of most men) has no faith, and neither knows God, nor knows
himself.

To conclude. He that has true justifying faith, believes the power of God to
be above the powers of nature; the goodness of God above the merit and
disposition of our persons, the bounty of God above the excellency of our
works, the truth of God above the contradiction of our weak arguings and fears,
the love of God above our cold experience and ineffectual reason, and the
necessities of doing good works above the faint excuses and ignorant pretenses
of disputing sinners. But want of faith makes us so generally wicked as we are,
so often running to despair; so often baffled in our resolutions of a good
life. But he whose faith makes him more than Conqueror over these difficulties,
to him Isaac shall be born even in his old age; the life of God shall be
perfectly wrought in him, and by this faith so operative, so strong, so
lasting, so obedient, he shall be justified, and he shall be saved.

THE END.
A SERMON Preached at the Consecration of Two Archbishops and Ten Bishops, in
the Cathedral Church of S. Patrick in DVBLIN. January 27.1660.

By Jeremie Tailor D. D. LORD Bishop of Down and Connor.

Sal liquefit, ut condiat. LONDON, Printed for R. Royston, Bookseller to the
Kings most Excellent Majesty. 1663.

To the CHRISTIAN READER.
MY Obedience to the Commands of the Right Honorable the Lords Justices, and
the most Reverend and Learned Primate, and to the desires of my Reverend
Brethren, put it past my inquiry, whether I ought to publish this following
Sermon. I will not therefore excuse it, and say it might have advantages in the
Delivery, which it would want in the Reading; and the ear would be kind to the
Piety of it, which was apparent in the design, when the eye would be severe in
its censure of those arguments, which as they could not be longer in that
measure of time; so would have appeared more firm, if they could have had
liberty to have been pursued to their utmost issue. But reason lies in a little
room, and Obedience in less. And although what I have here said, may not stop
the mouths of Men resolved to keep up a faction, yet I have said enough to the
sober and pious, to them who love Order, and hearken to the voice of the Spouse
of Christ, to the Loving and to the Obedient: And for those that are not so, I
have no argument fit to be used, but Prayer, and readiness to give them a
reason, when they shall modestly demand it. In the mean time I shall only
desire them to make use of those trut^s which the more Learned of their party
have by the evidence of fact been forced to confess. Rivet affirms that it
descended ex veteris aevi reliquiis, that Presbyters should be assistants or
conjoined to the Bishops, (who is by this confessed to be the principal) in the
imposition of hands for Ordination. Walo Messalinus acknowledges it to be rem
antiquissimam, a most ancient thing that these two Orders, (viz.) of Bishops
and Presbyters, should be distinct, even in the middle, or in the beginning of
the next age after Christ. Dd. Blondel places it to be 35. years after the
death of S. John. Now then Episcopacy is confessed to be of about 1600. years
continuance: and if before this they can show any Ordination by mere
Presbyters, by any but an Apostle, or an Apostolical man; and if there were not
visibly a distinction of powers and persons relatively in the Ecclesiastical
Government, or if they can give a rational account why they who are forced to
confess the Honor and distinct Order of Episcopacy for about 16. ages, should
in the dark interval of 35. years (in which they can pretend to no Monument or
Record to the contrary) yet make unlearned scruples of things they cannot
colourably prove; if (I say) they can reasonably account for these things, I
for my part will be ready to confess that they are not guil^y of the greatest,
the most unreasonable and inexcusable schism in the World. But else, they have
no color to palliat the unlearned crime. For will not all wise men in the
world conclude; that the Church of God, which was then Holy, not in title only
and design, but practically and materially; and pers^cuted, and not immerged in
secular temptations, could not all in one instant join together to alter that
form of Church Government, which Christ and his Apostles had so recently
established, and without a Divine warrant destroy a Divine institution, not
only to the confusion of the Hierarchy, but to the ruin of their own Souls. It
were strange that so great a change should be, and no good man oppose it. In
toto orb decretum est: so S. Hierom. All the world consented in the
advancement of the Episcopal Order. And therefore if we had no more to say for
it, yet in prudence and piety we cannot say they would innovate in so great a
matter.

But I shall enter no further upon this inquiry: only I remember that it is not
very many Months since the Bigots of the Popish party cried out against us
vehemently, and inquired, Where is your Church of England, since you have no
Unity? for your Ecclesiastic head of Unity, your Bishops, are gone. And if we
should be desirous to verify their argument, so as indeed to destroy
Episcopacy, We should too much advantage Popery, and do the most imprudent and
most impious thing in the world. But blessed be God, who has restored that
Government, for which our late King of glorious memory gave his blood. And that
(me thinks) should very much weigh with all the Kings true hearted Subjects,
who should make it Religion not to rob that glorious Prince of the greatest
honor of such a Martyrdom. For my part, I think it fit to rest in those words
of another Martyr, S. Cyprian, Si quis cum Episcopo non sit, Ep. 69.
in Ecclesia non esse: He that is not with the Bishop, is not in the Church:
that is, he that goes away from him, and willingly separates, departs from Gods
Church; and whether he can then be with God, is a very material consideration,
and fit to be thought on by all that think Heaven a more eligible good then the
interests of a faction, and the importune desire of rule can countervail.

However, I have in the following papers spoken a few things, which I hope may
be fit to persuade them that are not infinitely prejudiced: and although two or
three good arguments are as good as two or three hundred, yet my purpose here
was to prove the dignity and necessity of the Office and Order Episcopal, only
that it might be as an Economy to convey notice, and remembrances of the great
duty incumbent upon all them that undertake this great charge. The Dignity and
the Duty take one another by the hand, and are born together: only every Sheep
of the Flock must take care to make the Bishops duty as easy as it can, by
humility and love, by prayer and by Obedience. It is at the best very
difficult, but they who oppose themselves to Government, make it harder and
uncomfortable. But take heed; if thy Bishop has cause to complain to God of
thee for thy perverseness and uncharitable walking, thou will be the loser. And
for us, we can only say in the words of the Prophet, We will weep day and night
for the slain of the daughter of my people: Jerem. 9.1.
But Our comfort is in God: for we can do nothing without him, but in him we
can do all things. And therefore We will pray, Domine, dabis pacem nobis, omnia
enim opera nostra operatus es in nobis: Esa. 26.12.
God has wrought all our works within us: and therefore he will give us Peace,
and give us his Spirit.

Finally, Brethren, pray for us, that the word of the Lord may have free
course, 2 These. 3.1.
and be glorified even as it is with you; and that we may be delivered from
unreasonable and wicked men; for all men have not Faith.

A Consecration Sermon Preached at DVBLIN.
Luke XII. 42. And the Lord said, Who then is that faithful and wise Steward,
whom his Lord shall make Ruler over his household, to give them their portion of
meat in due season.

43. Blessed is that Servant whom his Lord when he comes shall find so doing.


(...); THese words are not properly a question, though they seem so, and the
particle (...) is not interrogative, but hypothetical; and extends who to
whosoever; plainly meaning that whoever is a Steward over Christ's household, of
him God requires a great care, because he has trusted him with a great
employment. Every Steward (...), so it is in St. Matthew Cap. 24.25.
(...), so it is in my Text; Every Steward whom the Lord has or shall appoint
over the Family to rule it and to feed it, now and in all generations of men,
as long as this Family shall abide on earth, that is, the Apostles, and they
who were to succeed the Apostles in the Stewardship, were to be furnished with
the same power, and to undertake the same charge, and to give the same strict
and severe accounts.

In these words here is something insinuated, and much expressed.



whom the Lord shall make Ruler over his household.] 2. In the care and duty of
it, which determines the government to be paternal and profitable; i^ is a
rule, but such a rule as Shepherds have over their flocks, to lead them to good
pastures, and to keep them within their appointed walks, and within their
folds: (...): that is the work, to give them a measure and proportion of
nourishment: (...), so St. Matthew calls it: meat in the season; that which is
fit for them, and when it is fit; meat enough, and meat convenient; and both
together mean that which the Greek Poets call (...), the strong wholesome diet.

3. Lastly. Here is the reward of the faithful Blessed is the Servant whom his
Lord when he comes shall find so doing.] Of these in order.

^. Who are these Rulers of Christ's Family: for though Christ knew it, and
therefore needed not to ask; yet we have disputed it so much, and obeyed so
little, that we have changed the plain hypothesis into an entangled question.
The answer yet is easy as to some part of the inquiry. The Apostles are the
first meaning of the Text; for they were our Fathers in Christ; They begat Sons
and Daughters unto God; and were a spiritual paternity is evident: we need look
no further for spiritual Government, because in the paternal rule all power is
founded; They begat the Family by the power of the word and the life of the
Spirit, and they fed this Family and ruled it by the word of their proper
Ministry. They had the keys of this house, the Stewards Ensign; and they had
the Rulers place; for they sat on twelve thrones and judged the twelve tribes
of Israel. But of this there is no question.

And as little of another proposition; that this Stewardship was to last for
ever; for the powers of Ministering in this Office and the Office it self were
to be perpetual. For the issues and powers of Government are more necessary for
the perpetuating the Church, then for the first planting; and if it was
necessary that the Apostles should have a rod and a staff at first, it would be
more necessary afterward, when the Family was more numerous, and their first
zeal abated, and their native simplicity perverted into arts of hypocrisy and
forms of godliness, when Heresies should arise, and the love of many should wax
cold. The Apostles had also a power of Ordination; and that the very power it
self does denote, for it makes perpetuity, that could not expire in the days
of the Apostles; for by it they themselves propagated a succession. And Christ
having promised his spirit to abide with his Church for ever, and made his
Apostles the Channels, the Ministers and conveyances of it, that it might
descend as the inheritance and eternal portion of the Family; it cannot be
imagined that when the first Ministers were gone, there should not others rise
up in the same places, some like to the first, in the same Office and Ministry
of the Spirit. But the thing is plain and evident in the matter of fact also.
Quod in Ecclesia nunc geritur, hoc olim fecerunt Apostoli, said S. Cyprian;
Epist. 73. ad Jubaj.
What the Apostles did at first, that the Church does to this day, and shall do
so for ever. For when S. Paul had given to the Bishop of Ephesus rules of
Government in this Family; 1 Timothy 6.14.
he commands that they should be observed till the coming of our Lord Jesus
Christ: and therefore these authorities and charges are given to him and to his
Successors; it is the observation of S. Ambrose upon the warranty of that Text,
and is obvious and undeniable.

Well then. The Apostles were the first Stewards; and this Office dies not with
them, but must for ever be succeeded in; and now begins the inquiry, who are
the Successors of the Apostles: for they are, they must evidently be the
Stewards to feed and to rule this Family. There are some that say that all who
have any portion of work in the Family, all the Ministers of the Gospel are
these Stewards, and so all will be Rulers. The Presbyters surely; for say they,
Presbyter and Bishop is the same thing, and have the same name in Scripture,
and therefore the Office cannot be distinguished. To this I shall very briefly
say two things, which will quickly clear our way through this bush of thorns.

I. That the word Presbyter is but an honorable appellative used amongst the
Jews, as Alderman amongst us; but it signifies no order at all, nor was ever
us^d in Scripture to signify any distinct company or order of Clergy. And this
appears not only by an induction in all the enumerations of the Offices
Ministerial in the New Testament: Romans 12.6. Ephe. 4 11. 1 Cor. 12.28.
where to be a Presbyter is never reckoned either as a distinct Office, or a
distinct order; but by its being indifferently communicated to all the Superior
Clergy, and all the Princes of the people.

II. The second thing I intended to say is this, that although all the Superior
Clergy had not only one, but diverse common appellatives; all being called
(...), and (...), even the Apostolate it self being called a Deaconship Acts
1.25.
; yet it is evident that before the common appellations were fixed into names of
propriety, they were as evidently distinguished in their offices and powers, as
they are at this day, in their Names and Titles.

To this purpose S. Paul gave to Titus the Bishop of Crete a special
commission, command and power to make Ordinations; and in him, and in the
person of Timothy he did erect a Court of Judicature even over some of the
Clergy, who yet were called Presbyters; 1 Timothy 5.19.
against a Presbyter receive not an accusation but before two or three
witnesses: there is the measure and the warranty of the Audientia Episcopalis,
the Bishops Audience Court; and when the accused were found guilty he gives in
charge to proceed to censures; (...), and (...); 1 Tit. 11. and 2 Titus 15.
You must rebuke them sharply, and you must silence them, stop their mouths,
that is S. Paul's word; that they may no more scatter their venom in the ears and
hearts of the people. These Bishops were commanded to set in order things that
were wanting in the Churches, the same with that power of S. Paul; [other
things will I set in order when I come,] said he to the Corinthian Churches; in
which there were many who were called Presbyters; who nevertheless for all that
name, had not that power. To the same purpose it is plain in Scripture, that
some would have been Apostles that were not; Cap. 2. V. 2.
such were those whom the spirit of God notes in the Revelation; and some did
love preeminence that had it not; for so did Diotrephes; and some were Judges
of questions, and all were not, for therefore they appealed to the Apostles at
Jerusalem; and S. Philip though he was an Evangelist, yet he could not give
confirmation to the Samaritans whom he had baptized, but the Apostles were sent
for; for that was part of the power reserved to the Episcopal or Apostolic
order.

Now from these premises the conclusion is plain and easy. 1. Christ left a
Government in his Church, and founded it in the persons of the Apostles. 2. The
Apostles received this power for the perpetual use and benefit, for the comfort
and edification of the Church for ever. 3. The Apostles had this Government,
but all that were taken into the Ministry, and all that were called Presbyters
had it not. If therefore this Government, in which there is so much disparity
in the very nature and exercise and first original of it, must abide for ever;
then so must that disparity: If the Apostolate in the first stabiliment was
this eminency of power; then it must be so, that is, it must be the same in the
succession, that it was in the foundation. For after the Church is founded upon
its Governors, we are to expect no change of Government. If Christ was the
Author of it, then as Christ left it, so it must abide for ever: forever there
must be the Governing and the Governed, the superior and the subordinate, the
Ordainer and the ordained, the confirmer and the confirmed.

Thus far the way is straight, and the path is plain. The Apostles were the
Stewards and the ordinary Rulers of Christ's Family by virtue of the order and
office Apostolical; and although this must be succeeded to for ever; yet no man
for his now, or at any time being called a Presbyter or Elder can pretend to
it; for besides his being a Presbyter, he must be an Apostle too; else, though
he be called in partem sollicitudinis, and may do the offices of assistance and
understewardship; yet the (...), the Government and Rule of the Family belongs
not to him.

But then (...); who are these Stewards and Rulers over the household now? To
this the answer is also certain and easy. Christ has made the same Governors
to day as heretofore; Apostles still, For though the twelve Apostles are dead;
Yet the Apostolical order is not: it is (...), a generative order, and begets
more Apostles; now who these minores Apostoli are, the successors of the
Apostles in that Office Apostolical and supreme regiment of souls, we are
sufficiently taught in Holy Scriptures; which when I have clearly shown to you,
I shall pass on to some more practical considerations.

1. Therefore, certain and known it is, that Christ appointed two sorts of
Ecclesiastic persons; the XII. Apostles, and the LXXII. Disciples; to these he
gave a limited commission, to those a fullness of power; to these a temporary
employment, to those a perpetual and everlasting; from these two societies
founded by Christ, the whole Church of God derives the two superior orders in
the sacred Hierarchy; and as Bishops do not claim a Divine right but by
succession from the Apostles; so the Presbyters cannot pretend to have been
instituted by Christ, but by claiming a succession to the LXXII. And then
consider the difference, compare the Tables, and all the world will see the
advantages of argument we have; for since the LXXII. had nothing but a mission
on a temporary errand and more then that we hear nothing of them in Scripture;
but upon the Apostles Christ powered all the Ecclesiastical power, and made them
the ordinary Ministers of that spirit which was to abide with the Church for
ever; the Divine institution of Bishops, that is, of Successors to the
Apostles, is much more clear then that Christ appointed Presbyters, or
Successors of the LXXII. And yet if from hence they do not derive it, they can
never prove their order to be of Divine institution at all, much less to be so
alone.

But we may see the very thing it self; the very matter of fact. S. James the
Bishop of Jerusalem, is by S. Paul called an Apostle; Gal. 1.19.
Other Apostles saw I none, save James the Lords Brother. For there were some
whom the Scriptures call the Apostles of our Lord; that is, such which Christ
made by his word immediately, or by his Spirit extraordinarily; and even into
this number and title, Matthias, and S. Paul, and Barnabas were accounted. 2
Cor. 8.23. Philip. 2.25.
But the Church also made Apostles; and these were called by S. Paul (...),
Apostles of the Churches, and particularly, Epaphroditus was the Apostle of the
Philippians; properly so (says Primasius,) and what is this else but the
Bishop faith Theodoret; for (...), those who are now called Bishops were then
called Apostles, says the same Father; the sense and full meaning of which
argument is a perfect commentary upon that famous prophecy of the Church, Psalm
45.16.
[ In stead of thy Fathers thou shall have children whom thou may make
Princes in Lands,] that is, not only the twelve Apostles our Fathers in Christ,
who first begat us, were to rule Christ's Family, but when they were gone, their
children and Successors should arise in their stead: Et nati natorum, and qui
nascentur ab illis their direct Successors to all generations shall be
principes populi, that is, Rulers and Governors of the whole Catholic Church.
De prole enim Ecclesiae crevit eidem paternitas, id est, Episcopi quos illa
genuit, and patres appellat, and constituit in sedibus Patrum; says S. Austin,
the children of the Church become Fathers of the faithful; that is, the Church
begets Bishops; and places them in the seat of Fathers, the first Apostles.

After these plain and evident testimonies of Scripture, it will not be amiss
to say, that this great affair relying not only upon the words of institution,
but on matter of fact; passed forth into a demonstration and greatest notoreity
by the Doctrine and practice of the whole Catholic Church. For so S. Irenaeus
who was one of the most Ancient Fathers of the Church, and might easily make
good his affirmative; We can (says he) reckon the men who by the Apostles were
appointed Bishops in the Churches, to be their Successors unto us; leaving to
them the same power and authority which they had. Thus S. Polycarp was by the
Apostles made Bishop of Smyrna; S. Clement Bishop of Rome by St. Peter, and
diverse others by the Apostles, faith Tertullian; saying also that the Asian
Bishops were consecrated by S. John; and to be short, that Bishops are the
Successors of the Apostles in the Stewardship and Rule of the Church, is
expressly taught by S. Cyprian, and S. Hierom, S. Ambrose, and S. Austin, by
Euthymius, in 1 Cor. 12. in Psalm. 44.
and Pacianus, by S. Gregory, Epist. 1. Simpronianum.
and S. John Damascen, by Clarius a Muscula, and S. Sixtus, by Anacletus, and
S. Isidore; by the Roman Council under S. Sylvester, and the Council of
Carthage; and the (...), or succession of Bishops from the Apostles hands in
all the Churches Apostolical was as certainly known as in our Chronicles we
find the succession of our English Kings, and one can no more be denied then
the other. The conclusion from these premises I give you in the words of S.
Cyprian, Cogitent Diaconi quod Apostolos, id est, Episcopos Dominus ipse
elegerit. Epist. 65. ad Rogat.
Let the Ministers know that Apostles, that is, he Bps. were chosen by our
blessed Lord himself; and this was so evident, and so believed, that S. Austin
affirms it with a nemo ignorant, Quaest. V. and N.T.q. 197.
No man is so ignorant but he knows this, that our blessed Savior appointed
Bishops over Churches.

Indeed the Gnostics spoke evil of this order; for they are noted by three
Apostles, S. Paul, S. Peter and S. Jude, to be despisers of Government, and to
speak evil of dignities; and what government it was they did so despise, we may
understand by the words of S. Jude, they were (...), in the contradiction or
gainsaying of Corah, who with his company rose up against Aaron the high
Priest; and excepting these who were the vilest of men, no man within the first
300. years after Christ, opposed Episcopacy. But when Constantine received the
Church into his arms, he found it universally governed by Bishops, and
therefore no wise or good man professing to be a Christian, that is, to believe
the holy Catholic Church, can be content to quit the Apostolical Government;
(that by which the whole Family of God was fed, and taught, and ruled,) and
beget to himself new Fathers and new Apostles, who by wanting succession from
the Apostles of our Lord, have no Ecclesiastical and Derivative communion with
these fountains of our Savior.

If ever Vincentius Lirinensis's rule could be used in any question, it is in
this: Quod semper, quod ubique, quod ab omibus; That Bishops are the successors
of the Apostles in this Stewardship; and that they did always rule the Family,
was taught and acknowledged always, and every where, and by all men that were
of the Church of God: and if these evidences be not sufficient to convince
modest and sober persons in this question, we shall find our faith to fail in
many other articles, of which we yet are very confident, For the observation of
the Lords day, the consecration of the holy Eucharist by Priests, the baptizing
Infants, the communicating of women, and the very Canon of the Scripture it
self rely but upon the same probation; and therefore the denying of Articles
thus proved is a way (I do not say) to bring in all Sects and Heresies, (that is
but little) but a plain path and inlet to Atheism and Irreligion; for by this
means, it will not only be impossible to agree concerning the meaning of
Scripture, but the Scripture it self, and all the Records of Religion will
become useless, and of no efficacy or persuasion.

I am entered into a sea of matter, but I will break it off abruptly, and sum
up this inquiry with the words of the Council of Chalcedon, which is one of the
four Generals, by our laws made the measures of judging Heresies. (...). It is
sacrilege to bring back a Bishop to the degree and order of a Presbyter. It is
indeed a rifling the order, and intangling the gifts, and confounding the
method of the Holy Ghost; it is a dishonouring them whom God would honor, and
a robbing them of those spiritual eminencies with which the spirit of God does
anoint the consecrated heads of Bishops. And I shall say one thing more, which
indeed is a great truth, that the diminution of Episcopacy was first introduced
by Popery, and the Popes of Rome by communicating to Abbots, and other mere
Priests, special graces to exercise some essential Offices of Episcopacy, has
made this sacred order to be cheap, and apt to be invaded. But then add this:
If Simon Magus was in so damnable a condition for offering to buy the gifts and
powers of the Apostolical order, what shall we think of them that snatch them
away, and pretend to wear them whether the Apostles and their Successors will
or no? This is (...), to belly the Holy Ghost; that is the least of it: it is
rapine and sacrilege, besides the heresy and schism, and the spiritually. For
the government Episcopal, as it was exemplified in the Synagogue, and practiced
by the same measures in the Temple, so it was transcribed by the eternal Son of
God, who translated it into a Gospel Ordinance: it was sanctified by the Holy
Spirit, who named some of the persons, and gave to them all power and graces
from above. It was subjected in the Apostles first, and by them transmitted to
a distinct Order of Ecclesiastics: it was received into all Churches,
configned in the Records of the holy Scriptures, preached by the universal
voice of all the Christian World, delivered by notorious and uninterrupted
practice, and derived to further and unquestionable issue by perpetual
succession.

I have done with the hardest part of the Text, by finding out the persons
entrusted, the Stewards of Christ's Family: which though Christ only intimated
in this place, yet he plainly enough manifested in others: The Apostles and
their Successors the Bishops, are the men entrusted with this great charge; God
grant they may all discharge it well. And so I pass from the Officers, to a
consideration of the Office it self, in the next words; Whom the Lord shall
make Ruler over his Household, to give them their meat in due season.

2. The Office it self is the Stewardship, that is Episcopacy, the Office of
the Bishop. The name signifies an Office of the Ruler indefinitely, but the
word was chosen, and by the Church appropriated to those whom it now signifies,
both because the word it self is a monition of duty, and also because the
faithful were used to it in the days of Moses and the Prophets. The word is in
the prophecy of the Church, [ I will give to thee Princes in peace, Isai. 60.17.
(...), and Bishops in righteousness,] upon which place S. Hierom says, Hunc
locum etiam citat S. Clemens. Ep. ad Cor.
Principes Ecclesiae vocat futuros Episcopos; [The spirit of God calls them who
were to be Christian Bishops, principes, or chief Rulers,] and this was no new
thing; Neh. 11.10.
For the chief of the Priests who were set over the rest, are called Bishops by
all the Hellenist Jews. Thus Joel is called (...), the Bishop over the Priests,
and the son of Bani, (...), the Bishop and Visitor over the Levites, and we
find at the purging of the Land from idolatry, the High Priest placed (...),
Bishops over the House of God. Nay, 2 Kin. 11.18.
it was the appellative of the High Priest himself, (...), Bishop Eleazar,
Numb. 4.16.
the Son of Aaron the Priest, to whom is committed the care of Lamps, and the
daily Sacrifice, and the holy unction.

Now this word the Church retained, choosing the same Name to her superior
Ministers, because of the likeness of the Ecclesiastical Government between the
Old and New Testament.

For Christ made no change but what was necessary. Baptism was a rite among the
Jews, and the Lords Supper was but the post-coenium of the Hebrews changed into
a mystery, from a type to a more real exhibition; and the Lords Prayer was a
collection of the most eminent devotions of the Prophets and Holy men before
Christ, who prayed by the same spirit; and the censures Ecclesiastical were but
an imitation of the proceedings of the Judaical tribunals; and the whole
Religion was but the Law of Moses drawn out of its vail into clarity and
manifestation; and to conclude in order to the present affair, the Government
which Christ left was the same as he found it; for what Aaron and his Sons, and
the Levites were in the Temple, that Bishops, Priests, and Deacons are in the
Church; it is affirmed by S. Hierom more then once; Epist. 2. ad Nepot.
Epistol. ad Evagrium.
and the use he makes of it is this, Esto subjectus Pontificituo, and quasi
animae parentem suscipe; Obey your Bishop, and reeeive him as the nursing
Father of your Soul. But above all, this appellation is made honorable by
being taken by our blessed Lord himself. For he is called in Scripture, the
great Shepherd and Bishop of our Souls.

But our inquiry is not after the Name, but the Office, and the dignity and
duty of it; Ecclesiae gubernandae sublimis ac divina potestas (so S. Cyprian
calls it) a High and a Divine power from God of Governing the Church; rem
magnam and preciosaem in conspectu Domini (so S. Cyril) a great and a precious
thing in the sight of God; (...), by Isidor Pelusiot; the utmost limit of what
is desirable amongst men. But the account upon which it is so desirable, is
the same also that makes it formidable. They who have tried it, and did it
conscientiously, have found the burden so great, as to make them stoop with
care and labor; and they who do it ignorantly or carelessly, will find it will
break their bones. For the Bishops Office is all that duty which can be
signified by those excellent words of S Cyprian; He is a Bishop or Overseer of
the Brotherhood, the Ruler of the people, the Shepherd of the Flock, the
Governor of the Church, the Minister of Christ, and the Priest of God. These
are great titles, and yet less then what is said of them in Scripture; which
calls them Salt of the Earth, Lights upon a candlestick, Stars and Angels,
Fathers of our Faith, Ambassadors of God, Dispensers of the Mysteries of God,
the Apostles of the Churches, and the Glory of Christ; but then they are great
burdens too: for the Bishop is (...), entrusted with the Lords people; that is a
great charge, but there is a worse matter that follows; (...): the Bishop is he
of whom God will require an account for all their souls: they are the words of
S. Paul, Heb. 13.17.
and transcribed into the 40th. Canon of the Apostles, and the 24th. Canon of
the Council of Antioch.

And now I hope the envy is taken off; for the honor does not pay for the
burden; and we can no sooner consider Episcopacy in its dignity, as it is a
Rule, but the very nature of that Rule does imply so severe a duty, that as the
load of it is almost insufferable, so the event of it is very formidable, if we
take not great care. For this Stewardship is (...), a Principality and a
Ministry. So it was in Christ; he is Lord of all, and yet he was the Servant of
all; so it was in the Apostles, Acts. 1.25.
it was (...), their lot was to be Apostles, and yet to serve and minister;
Isai. 60.17.
and it is remarkable that in Isaiah the 70. use the word (...) or Bishop; but
there they use it for the Hebrew word nechosbeth, which the Greeks usually
render by (...), and the interlineary translation by Exactores. Bishops are
only Gods Ministers and tribute gatherers, requiring and overseeing them that
they do their duty; and therefore here the case is so, and the burden so great,
and the dignity so allayed, that the envious man has no reason to be troubled
that his brother has so great a load; nor the proud man plainly to be
delighted with so honorable a danger. It is indeed a Rule, but it is paternal;
it is a Government, but it must be neither (...) nor (...), 1 Pet. 5.1, 5.
it is neither a power to constrain, nor a commission to get wealth; for it
must be without necessity, and not for filthy lucre sake; but it is a Rule,
(...) so S. Luke, Luke 22.27.
as of him that ministers; (...), so S. Mark; as of him that is servant of all;
Mark 10.43.
(...), so S. John; John 13.13.
such a principality as he has that washes the feet of the weary traveller; or
if you please, take it in the words of our Blessed Lord himself, that [ He that
will be chief among you let him be your Minister,] meaning that if under
Christ's Kingdom you desire rule, possibly you may have it; but all that rule
under him are Servants to them that are ruled, and therefore you get nothing by
it, but a great labor, and a busy employment, a careful life, and a necessity
or making severe accounts. But all this is nothing but the general measures, I
cannot be useful or understood unless I be more particular. The particulars we
shall best enumerate by recounting those great conjugations of worthy offices
and actions by which Christian Bishops have blessed and built up Christendom;
for because we must be followers of them, as they were of Christ, the
recounting what they did worthily in their generations, will not only
demonstrate how useful, how profitable, how necessary Episcopacy is to the
Christian Church, but it will at the same time teach us our duty, by what
services we are to benefit the Church, in what works we are to be employed, and
how to give an account of our Stewardship with joy.

1. The Christian Church was founded by Bishops, not only because the Apostles,
who were Bishops, were the first Preachers of the Gospel, and Planters of
Churches, but because the Apostolical men, whom the Apostles used in planting
and disseminating Religion, were by all Antiquity affirmed to have been
Diocesan Bishops; in so much that as S. Epiphanius witnesses, Lib. 3. Tit. 1.
there were at the first disseminations of the faith of Christ, many Church^s
who had in them no other Clergy, but a Bishop and his Deacons, and the
Presbyters were brought in afterward as the harvest grew greater. But the
Bishops names are known, they are recorded in the book of Life, and their
praise is in the Gospel; such were Timothy and Titus, Clemens and Linus, Marcus
and Dionysius, Onesimus and Caius, Epaphroditus and S. James our Lords Brother,
Evodius and Simeon; all which, if there be any faith in Christians that gave
their lives for a testimony to the faith, and any truth in their stories; and
unless we who believe Thucydides and Plutarch, Livy and Tacitus, think that all
Church story is a perpetual Romance, and that all the brave men, the Martyrs
and the Doctors of the Primitive Church, did conspire as one man to abuse all
Christendom for ever; I say unless all these impossible suppositions be
admitted, all these whom I have now reckoned were Bishops fixed in several
Churches, and had Dioceses for their Charges.

The consequent of this consideration is this. It Bishops were those upon whose
Ministry Christ founded and built his Church, let us consider what great wisdom
is required of them that seem to be Pillars: the Stewards of Christ's Family
must be wise: that Christ requires, and if the order be necessary to the
Church, wisdom cannot but be necessary to the Order. For it is a shame if they
who by their Office are Fathers in Christ, shall by their unskilfulness be but
Babes themselves; understanding not the secrets of Religion, the mysteries of
Godliness, the perfections of the Evangelical law, all the advantages and
disadvantages in the Spiritual life. A Bishop must be exercised in Godliness, a
man of great experience in the secret conduct of Souls, not satisfied with an
ordinary skill in making homilies to the people; and speaking common
exhortations in ordinary cases; but ready to answer in all secret inquiries,
and able to convince the gainsayers, and to speak wisdom amongst them that are
perfect.

If the first Bishops laid the foundation; their Successors must not only
preserve whatsoever is fundamental, but build up the Church in a most holy
Faith, taking care that no Heresy sap the foundation, and that no hay or
rotten wood be built upon it; and above all things, that a most Holy life be
superstructed upon a holy and unreproveable Faith. So the Apostles laid the
foundation, and built the walls of the Church, and their Successors must raise
up the roof as high as Heaven. For let us talk and dispute eternally, we shall
never compose the controversies in Religion, and establish truth upon
unalterable foundations, as long as men handle the word of God deceitfully,
that is, with designs and little artifices, and secular partialities, and they
will for ever do so, as long as they are proud or covetous. It is not the
difficulty of our questions, or the subtilty of our adversaries that makes
disputes interminable; but we shall never cure the itch of disputing, or
establish Unity, unless we apply our selves to humility, and contempt of
riches. If we will be contending, let us contend like the Olive and the Vine,
who shall produce best, and most fruit; not like the Aspine and the Elm which
shall make most noise in a wind. And all other methods are a beginning at a
wrong end. And as for the people; the way to make them conformable to the wise
and holy rules of faith and government, is by reducing them to live good lives.
When the children of Israel gave themselves to gluttony and drunkenness, and
filthy lusts, they quickly fell into abominable idolatries; and S. Paul says
that men make shipwreck of their Faith by putting away a good conscience; 1 Timothy 1.19. 2 Timothy 3.9.
for the mystery of Faith is best preserved (...), in a pure conscience, says
the same Apostle; secure but that, and we shall quickly end our disputes, and
have an obedient and conformable people; but else never.

2. As Bishops were the first Fathers of Churches, and gave them being; so they
preserve them in being. For withour Sacraments there is no Church; or it will
be starved and die: and without Bishops there can be no Priests, and
consequently no Sacraments; and that must needs be a supreme order from whence
ordination it self proceeds. For it is evident and notorious that in Scripture
there is no record of ordination, but an Apostolical hand was in it; one of the
(...), one of the chief, one of the superior and Ruling Clergy; and it is as
certain in the descending ages of the Church, the Bishop always had that
power, it was never denied to him, and it was never imputed to Presbyters; and
S. Hierom himself, when out of his anger against John Bishop of Jerusalem he
endeavored to equal the Presbyter with the Bishop, though in very many places
he spoke otherwise, yet even then also and in that heat, he excepted
Ordination, acknowledging that to be the Bishops peculiar. And therefore they
who go about to extinguish Episcopacy, do as Julian did; they destroy the
Presbytery and starve the Flock, and take away their Shepherds, and dispark
their pastures, and tempt Gods providence to extraordinaries, and put the
people to hard shifts, and turn the channels of Salvation quite another way, and
leave the Church to a perpetual uncertainty, whether she be alive or dead, and
the people destitute of the life of their Souls, and their daily bread, and
their spiritual comforts, and holy blessings.

The consequent of this is. If Sacraments depend upon Bishops, then let us take
care that we convey to the people holy and pure materials, sanctified with a
holy ministry, and ministered by holy persons. For although it be true, that the
efficacy of the Sacraments does not depend wholly upon he worthiness of him
that ministers; yet it is as true, that it does not wholly rely upon the
worthiness of the Receiver; but both together relying upon the goodness of God
produce all those blessings which are designed. The Minister has an influence
into the effect, and does very much toward it; and if there be a failure
there, it is a defect in one of the concurring causes; and therefore an unholy
Bishop is a great diminution to the peoples blessing. S. Hierom presses this
severely: Impie faciunt etc. They do wickedly who affirm that the holy
Eucharist is consecrated by the words [alone] and solemn prayer of the
consecrator, in Cap. 2. Zeph.
and not [also] by his life and holiness, and therefore S. Cyprian affirms,
Lib. 1. Ep. 4.
that none but holy and upright men are to be chosen, who offering their
Sacrifices worthily to God may be heard in their prayers for the Lords people:
but for others; Sacrificia eorum panis luctus (says the Prophet Hosea,) their
Sacrifices are like the bread of sorrow, whoever eats thereof shall be defiled.
This discourse is not mine but S. Cyprians: and although his words are not to
be understood dogmatically, but in the case of duty and caution, yet we may lay
our hands upon our hearts, and consider how we shall give an account of our
Stewardship, if we shall offer to the people the bread of God with impure
hands; it is of it self a pure nourishment, but if it passes through an unclean
vessel, it looses much of its excellency.

3. The like also is to be said concerning prayer. For the Episcopal order is
appointed by God to be the great Ministers of Christ's Priesthood, that is, to
stand between Christ and the people in the intercourse of prayer and blessing.
We will give our selves continually to prayer; said the Apostles, that was the
one half of their employment; and indeed a Bishop should spend very much of his
time in holy prayer, and in diverting Gods judgments, and procuring blessings
to the people; for in all times, the chief of the Religion was ever the chief
Minister of blessing. Thus Abraham blessed Abimelech, and Melchisedeck blessed
Abraham, and Aaron blessed the people; and without all controversy (says the
Apostle,) the l^ss is blessed of the Greater. But then we know that God hears
not sinners; and it must be the effectual fervent prayer of a Righteous man
that shall prevail.

And therefore we may easily consider that a vicious Prelate is a great
calamity to that Flock, which he is appointed to bless and pray for. How shall
he reconcile the penitents, who is himself at enmity with God? How shall the
Holy Spirit of God descend upon the Symbols at his prayer who does perpetually
grieve him, and quench his holy fires, and drive him quite away? How shall he
that has not tasted of the spirit by contemplation, stir up others to earnest
desires of Celestial things? Or what good shall the people receive, when the
Bishop lays upon their head a covetous or a cruel, an unjust or an impure
hand? But therefore that I may use the words of S. Hierom. Dial. adv. Lucifer.
Cum ab Episcopo gratia in populum transfundatur, and mundi totius and
Ecclesiae totius condimentum sit Episcopus, etc. Since it is intended that from
the Bishop grace should be diffused amongst all the people, there is not in the
world a greater indecency then a holy office ministered by an unholy person, and
no greater injury to the people, then that of the blessings which God sends to
them by the ministries Evangelical they should be cheated and defrauded by a
wicked Steward. And therefore it was an excellent prayer which to this very
purpose was by the son of Sirach made in behalf of the High Priests the sons of
Aaron; [God give you wisdom in your heart to judge his people in Righteousness,
Eccl. 45.26.
that their good things be not abolished, and that their glory may endure for
ever.]

4. All the offices Ecclesiastical always were, and ought to be conducted by
the Episcopal order, as is evident in the universal doctrine and practice of
the primitive Church. and 24. C. Council. Antioch.
(...). It is the 40th. Canon of the Apostles, Let the Presbyters and Deacons
do nothing without leave of the Bishop. But that case is known.

The consequent of this consideration is no other then the admonition in my
text. We are Stewards of the manifold Grace of God, 1 Cor. 4.1, 2, 3.
and dispensers of the mysteries of the Kingdom; and it is required of Stewards
that they be found faithful; that we preach the word of God in season and out
of season, that we rebuke and exhort, admonish and correct; for these, God
calls Pastores secundum cor meum, Pastors according to his own heart, which
feed the people with knowledge and understanding; but they must also comfort
the afflicted and bind up the broken heart; Jer. 3.15.
minister the Sacraments with great diligence, and righteous measures, and
abundant charity, always having in mind those passionate words of Christ to S.
Peter, If thou love me, feed my sheep; If thou have any love to me, feed my
lambs.

And let us remember this also, that nothing can enforce the people to obey
their Bishops as they ought, but our doing that duty and charity to them which
God requires. There is reason in these words of S. Chrysostom, [It is necessary
that the Church should adhere to their Bishop as the body to the head, as
plants to their roots, as rivers to their springs, as children to their
Fathers, as Disciples to their Masters.] These similitudes express not only the
relation and dependency, but they tell us the reason of the duty. The head
gives light and reason to conduct the body, the roots give nourishment to the
plants, and the springs, perpetual emanation of waters to the channels. Fathers
teach and feed their children, and Disciples receive wise instruction from
their Masters: and if we be all this to the people, they will be all that to
us; and wisdom will compel them to submit, and our humility will teach them
obedience, and our charity will invite their compliance. Our good example will
provoke them to good works, and our meekness will melt them into softness and
flexibility. For all the Lords people are populus voluntarius, a free and
willing people; and we who cannot compel their bodies, must thus constrain
their souls; by inviting their wills, by convincing their understandings, by
the beauty of fair example, the efficacy and holiness, and the demonstrations
of the spirit.

This is experimentum ejus qui in nobis loquitur Christus. Heb. 13.7.
The experiment of Christ that speaks in us. For to this purpose those are
excellent words which S. Paul spoke. [ Remember them who have the rule over
you, whose faith follow, considering the end of their conversation.] There lies
the demonstration: and those prelates who teach good life, whose Sermons are
the measures of Christ, and whose life is a copy of their Sermons; these must
be followed; and surely these will; for these are burning and shining lights;
but if we hold forth false fires, and by the amusement of evil examples call
the vessels that sail upon a dangerous sea to come upon a rock, or an iron
shore instead of a safe harbor, we cause them to make shipwreck of their
precious Faith, and to perish in the deceitful and unstable waters. Vox operum
fortius sonat quam verborum. A good life is the strongest argument that your
faith is good, and a gentle voice will be sooner entertained then a voice of
thunder; but the greatest eloquence in the world, is a meek spirit, and a
liberal hand; these are the two pastoral staves the Prophet speaks of, nognam
and hovelim, beauty and bands; Zech. 11.7.
he that has the staff of the beauty of holiness, the ornament of fair
example, he has also the staff of bands, atque in funiculis Adam trahet eos,
in vinculis cha^itatis; as the Prophet Hosea's expression is; he shall draw the
people after him by the cords of a man, Cap. 11.
by the bands of a holy charity. But if against all these demonstrations any
man will be refractary; We have instead of a staff, an Apostolical rod; which
is the last and latest remedy, and either brings to repentance, or consigns to
ruin and reprobation.

If there were any time remaining, I could reckon that the Episcopal order is
the principle of Unity in the Church; and we see it is so, by the inumerable
Sects that sprang up when Episcopacy was persecuted. I could add, how that
Bishops were the cause that S. John wrote his Gospel; that the Christian Faith
was for 300. years together bravely defended by the sufferings, the prisons and
flames, the life and the death of Bishops, as the principal Combatants. That
the Fathers of the Church whose writings are held in so great veneration in all
the Christian World, were almost all of them Bishops. I could add, that the
Reformation of Religion in England was principally by the Preachings and the
disputings, the writings and the Martyrdom of Bishops. That Bishops have ever
since been the greatest defensatives against Popery. That England and Ireland
were governed by Bishops ever since they were Christian, and under their
conduct have for so many ages enjoyed all the blessings of the Gospel. I could
add also, that Episcopacy is the great stabiliment of Monarchy, but of this we
are convinced by a sad and too dear bought experience. I could therefore in
stead of it, say, that Episcopacy is the great ornament of Religion, that as it
rescues the Clergy from contempt, so it is the greatest preserv^tive of the
peoples liberty from Ecclesiastic Tyranny on one hand, (the Gentry being
little better then servants, while they live under the Presbytery,) and Anarchy
and licentiousness on the other. That it endears obedience, and is subject to
the Laws of Princes. And is wholly ordained for the good of mankind, and the
benefit of Souls. But I cannot stay to number all the blessings which have
entered into the World at this door: I only remark these because they describe
unto us the Bishops employment, which is, to be busy in the service of Souls,
to do good in all capacities, to serve every man's need, to promote all public
benefits, to cement Governments, to establish peace, to propagate the Kingdom
of Christ, to do hurt to no man, to do good to every man; that is, so to
minister, that Religion and Charity, public peace, and private blessings may
be in their exaltation.

As long as it was thus done by the Primitive Bishops, the Princes and the
people gave them all honor. Insomuch that by a decree of Constantine the
great, the Bishop had power given him to retract the sentences made by the
Presidents of Provinces, and we find in the acts of S. Nicholas, that he
rescued some innocent persons from death when the executioner was ready to
strike the fatal blow; which thing even when it fell into inconvenience, was
indeed forbidden by Arcadius and Honorius; but the confidence and honor was
only changed, it was not taken away: for the condemned criminal had leave to
appeal to the Audientia Episcopalis, to the Bishops Court. This was not any
right which the Bishops could challenge, but a reward of their Piety; and so
long as the Holy Office was holily administered, the world found so much comfort
and security, so much justice and mercy, so many temporal and spiritual
blessings consequent to the ministries of that order, that as the Galatians to
S. Paul, men have plucked out their eyes to do them service, and to do them
honor. For then Episcopacy did that good that God intended by it: it was a
spiritual Government, by spiritual persons, for spiritual ends. Then the
Princes and the people gave them honors because they deserved and sought them
not: then they gave them wealth, because they would dispend it wisely, frugally
and charitably: Then they gave them power; because it was sure to be used for
defense of the innocent, for relief of the oppressed, for the punishment of
evil doers, and the reward of the virtuous. Then they desired to be judged by
them, because their audiences or Courts did (...), they appeased all furious
sentences, and taught gentle principles, and gave merciful measures, and in
their Courts were all equity and piety, and Christian determinations.

But afterward, when they did fall (...) into secular methods, and made their
Counsels vain by pride, and durtied their sentences with money, then they
became like other men; and so it will be, unless the Bishops be more holy then
other men; but when our sanctity and severity shall be as eminent as the
calling is, then we shall be called to Councels, and sit in public meetings,
and bring comfort to private Families, and rule in the hearts of men by a jus
relationis, such as was between the Roman Emperors and the Senate; they courted
one another into power, and in giving honor strived to outdo each other; for
from an humble wise man, no man will snatch an employment that is honorable;
but from the proud and from the covetous every man endeavors to wrest it, and
thinks it lawful prize.

My time is now done; and therefore I cannot speak to the third part of my
text, the reward of the good Steward and of the bad; I shall only mention it to
you in a short exhortation; and so conclude. In the Primitive Church a Bishop
was never admitted to public penance; not only because in them every crime is
ten, and he that could descern a public shame, could not deserve a public
honor, nor yet only because every such punishment was scandalous, and did more
evil by the example of the crime, then it could do good by the example of the
punishment; but also because no spiritual power is higher then the Episcopal,
and therefore they were to be referred to the Divine judgment, which was likely
to fall on them very heavily. (...): the Lord will cut the evil Stewards
asunder; he will suffer schisms and Divisions to enter in upon us, and that
will sadly cut us asunder; but the evil also shall fall upon their persons;
like the punishment of quartering Traitors, (...) (...), punishment with the
circumstances of detestation and exemplarity. Consider therefore what is your
great duty. Consider what is your great danger. The lines of duty I have
already described; only remember how dear and precious Souls are to God, since
for their salvation Christ gave his blood, and therefore will not easily lose
them, whom though they had sinned against him, yet he so highly valued; remember
that you are Christ's deputies in the care of Souls, and that you succeed in the
place of the Apostles. Non est facile stare loco Pauli, and tenere gradum
Petri; You have undertaken the work of S. Paul, and the Office of S. Peter, and
what think you upon this account will be required of us? S. Hierom expresses it
thus. The wisdom and skill of a Bishop ought to be so great, that his
countenance, his gesture, his motion, every thing should be vocal, ut quicquid
agit, quicquid loquitur, doctrina sit Apostolorum: that whatever he does or
speaks be doctrine Apostolical. The ancient Fathers had a pious opinion, that
besides the Angel guardian which is appointed to the guard of every man; there
is to every Bishop a second Angel appointed to him at the Consecration; and to
this Origin alludes, saying that every Bishopric has two Angels, the one
visible and the other invisible. This is a great matter, and shows what a
precious thing that order and those persons are in the eyes of God; but then
this also means, that we should live Angelick lives, which the Church rarely
well expresses by saying, that Episcopal dignity is the Ecclesiastic state of
perfection, and supposes the persons to be so far advanced in holiness, as to
be in the state of confirmation in grace. But I shall say nothing of these
things; because it may be they press too hard, but the use I shall make of it
upon occasion of the reward of the good and bad Steward, is to remind you of
your great danger. For if it be required of Bishops to be so wise and so holy,
so industrious and so careful, so busy and so good up to the height of best
examples; if they be anointed of the Lord, and are the Husbands of the
Churches, if they be the Shepherds of the flock, and Stewards of the household;
it is very fit they consider their danger, that they may be careful to do their
duty. S. Bernard considers it well in his epistle to Henry Archbishop of Sens;
If I lying in my Cell, and smoking under a Bushel, not shining, yet cannot
avoid the breath of the winds, but that my light is almost blown out; what will
become of my Candle, if it were placed on a candlestick and set upon a hill? I
am to look to my self alone, and provide for my own salvation; and yet I offend
my self, I am weary of my self, I am my own scandal and my own dang^r; my own
eye, and my own belly, and my own appetite find me work enough; and therefore
God help them who besides themselves are answerable for many others. Jacob kept
the Sheep of Laban; and we keep the Sheep of Christ; and Jacob was to answer
for every Sheep that was stolen, and every lamb that was torn by the wild beast,
and so shall we too, if by our fault one of Christ's Sheep perish; and yet it
may be there are 100000. Souls committed to the care and conduct of some one
Shepherd, who yet will find his own Soul work enough for all his care and
watchfulness. If any man should desire me to carry a Frigate into the Indies, in
which a 100. men were imbarqued; I were a mad man to undertake the charge,
without proportionable skill; and therefore when there is more ^^nger, and more
Souls, and rougher Seas, and more secret Rocks, and horrible storms, and the
Shipwreck is an eternal loss, the matter will then require great consideration
in the undertaking, and greatest care in the conduct.

Upon this account we find many brave persons in the first and in the middle
ages of the Church with great resolution refusing Episcopacy. I will not speak
of those who for fear of Martyrdom declined it: but those who for fear of
damnation did refuse. S. Bernard was by three rich Cities severally called to
be their Bishop, and by two to be their Archbishop, and he refused them; S.
Dominicus refused four successively; S. Thomas Aquinas refused the
Archbishopric of Naples, and Vincentius Ferrerius would not accept of
Valentia, or Ilerda, and Bernardinus Senensis refused the Bishoprics of Sens
Vrbin and Ferrara. They had reason; and yet if they had done amiss in that
Office which they declined, it had been something more excusable; but if they
that s^ek it be as careless in the office as they are greedy of the honor,
that will be found intolerable. Electus Episcopus ambulat in disco, recusans
volvitur in arca, said the Hermit in S. Hierom. The Bishop walks upon round and
trundling stones, but he that refuses it, stands upon a floor. But I shall say
no more of it; because I suppose you have read it and considered it in S.
Chrysostoms six books de sacerdotio, in the Apologetie of S. Greg Naz. in the
p^storal of S. Greg. of Rome, in S. Dionysius's 6th. Epistle to Demophilus, in
the letters of Epiphanius to S. Hierom, in S. Austins Epistle to Bishop
Valerius, in S. Bernards life of S. Malachy, in S. Hieroms 138. Epi^^le to
Fabiola; These things I am sure you could not read without trembling; and
certainly, if it can belong to any Christian, then [work out your salvation
with fear and trembling] that is the Bishops burden. For the Bishop is like a
man that is surety for his friend; he is bound for many, and for great sums;
what is to be done in this case; Solomon's answer is the way: Do this now, my
Son, deliver thy self, make sure thy friend, give not sleep to thine eyes,
Prove. 6.3, 4.
nor slumber to thine eye lids: that is, be sedulous to discharge thy trust, to
perform thy charge; be zealous for Souls, and careless of money; and remember
this, that even in Christ's Family there was one sad example of an Apostate
Apostle; and he fell into that fearful estate merely by the desire and
greediness of money. Be warm in zeal, and indifferent in thy temporalities. For
he that is zealous in temporals, and cold in the spiritual: he that does the
accessories of his calling by himself, and the principal by his Deputies; he
that is present at the feast of Sheep-shearing, and puts others to feed the
flock, has no sign at all upon him of a good Shepherd. It is not fit for us to
leave the word of God, and to serve tables, said the Apostles. And if it be a
less worthy office to serve the tables even of the poor, to the diminution of
our care in the dispensation of Gods word; it must needs be an unworthy
employment to leave the word of God, and to attend the rich and superfluous
furniture of our own Tables Remember the quality of your charges. Civitas est,
Vigilate ad custodiam and concordiam; D. Bernard. ad Henr. Episc. Senensem.
sponsa est, studete amari; oves sunt, intendite pastui. The Church is a
spouse: the Universal Church is Christ's spouse; but your own Diocese is yours;
behave your selves so, that ye be beloved. Your people are as sheep, and they
must be fed, and guided, and preserved, and healed, and brought home. The
Church is a City, and you are the watch men, take care that the City be kept at
Unity in it self; be sure to make peace amongst your people, suffer no hatred,
no quarrels, no suits at law amongst the Citiz^ns, which you can avoid; make
peace in your Dioceses by all the ways of prudence, piety and authority that
you can, and let not your own corrections of criminals be to any purpose, but
for their amendment, for the cure of offenders, as long as there is hope, and
for the security of those who are found and whole. Preach often, and pray
continually; let your discipline be with charity, and your censures flow; let
not excommunications pass for trifles, and drive not away the fly from your
brothers forehead with a hatchet; give counsel frequently, and dispensations
seldom, but never without necessity or great charity. Let every place in your
Diocese say, Invenerunt me vigiles, the watch men have found me out,
hassovevim. They that walk the City round, have sought me out and found me. Let
every one of us, (as S. Paul's expression is, 2 Timothy 2.
) show himself a workman, that shall not be ashamed; operarium inconfusibilem,
mark that, such a labourer as shall not be put to shame for his illness, or his
unskilfulness, his falseness and unfaithfulness in that day when the great
Bishop of souls shall make his last and dreadful visitation. For be sure, there
is not a carkase nor a skin, not a lock of wool, nor a drop of milk of the
whole flock, but God shall for it call the Idol Shepherd to a severe account.
And how, think you, will his anger burn, when he shall see so many goats
standing at his left hand, and so few Sheep at his right? and upon inquiry
shall find, that his ministering Shepherds, were Wolves in Sheeps clothing; and
that by their ill example, or pernicious doctrines, their care of money, and
carelessness of their flocks, so many Souls perish; who if they had been
carefully and tenderly, wisely and conscientiously handled, might have shined
as bright as Angels. And it is a sad conside^ation to remember, how many souls
are pitifully handled in this world, and carelessly dismissed out of this world;
they are left to live at their own rate, and when they are sick, they are
bidden to be of good comfort, and then all is well; who when they are dead,
find themselves cheated of their precious and invaluable eternity. Oh, how will
those Souls in their eternal prisons for ever curse those evil and false
guides! and how will those evil guides themselves abide in jud^ment, when the
Angels of wrath snatch their abused people into everlasting tor^ents! For will
God bless them or pardon them, by whom so many souls perish? Shall they reign
with Christ, who evacuate the death of Christ, and make it useless to dear
Souls? Shall they partake of Christ's glories, by whom it comes to pass that
there is less joy in Heaven it self, even because sinners are not converted,
and God is not glorified, and the people is not instructed, and the Kingdom of
God is not filled? Oh no? the curses of a false Prophet will fall upon them,
and the reward of the evil Steward will be their portion, and they who
destroyed the Sheep, or neglected them, shall have their portion with Goats for
ever and ever in everlasting burnings, in which it is impossible for a man to
dwell.

Can any thing be beyond this? beyond damna^ion? Surely a m^n would think, not.
And yet I remember a severe saying of S. Gregory; Scire debent Prelati, quod
tot mortibus digni sunt, quot perditionis exempla ad subditos extenderunt. One
damnation is not enough for an evil Shepherd; but for every Soul who dies by
his evil example or p^rnitious carelessness, he deserves a new death, a new
damnation. Let us therefore be wise and faithful, walk warily, and watch
carefully, and rule diligently, and pray assiduously. For God is more propense
to rewards, then to punishments; and the good Steward that is wise and faithful
in his dispensation, shall be greatly blessed. But how? He shall be made ruler
over the household. What is that? for he is so already. True; but he shall be
much more. Ex dispensatore faciet procuratorem. God will treat him as Joseph
was treated by his Master; he was first a Steward, and then a Procurator, one
that ruled his goods without account, and without restraint. Our ministry shall
pass into Empire, our labor into rest, our watchfulness into fruition, and our
Bishopric to a Kingdom. In the mean time our Bishoprics are a great and
weighty care, and in a spiritual sense, our dominion is founded in grace, and
our rule is in the hearts of the people, and our strengths are the powers of
the Holy Ghost, and the weapons of our warfare are spiritual; and the eye of
God watches over us curiously, to see if we watch over our flocks by day and by
night. And though the Primitive Church (as the Ecclesiastic Histories
observe,) when they deposed a Bishop from his office, ever concealed his crime,
and made no record of it; yet remember this, that God does, and will call us to
a strict and severe account. Take heed that you may never hear that fearful
sentence, I was hungry and ye gave me no meat. If you suffer Christ's little
ones to starve, it will be required severely at your hands; And know this, that
the time will quickly come, in which God shall say unto thee in the words of
the Prophet, Where is the Flock that was given thee, thy beautiful Flock? Jer.
13.20, 21.
) What will thou say when he shall visit thee?

God of his mercy grant unto us all to be so faithful and so wise, as to
convert Souls, and to be so blessed and so assisted, that we may give an
account of our charges with joy, to the glory of God, to the edification and
security of our Flocks, and the salvation of our own Souls, in that day when
the great Shepherd and Bishop of our Souls shall come to judgment, even our
Lord and Savior Jesus Christ. To whom with the Father and the Holy Ghost, be
all Honor and Glory, Love and Obedience, now and for evermore, Amen.

FINIS.
Thursday the 9 th of May.
ORdered that the Speaker do give the Reverend Father in God, the Lord Bishop
of Down, the thanks of this House for his yesterdaies pains, and that he
desire him to print his Sermon.

John Keating Cler. Parl.

11. die Maii 1661.
ORdered that Sir Theophilus Jones Knight, Marcus Trever Esquire Sir William
Domville Knt his Majesty's Attorney General, and Richard Kirle Esquire be, and are
hereby appointed, a Committee to return thanks unto the Lord Bishop of Down for
his Sermon preached on Wednesday last unto the Lords Justices, and Lords
Spiritual and Temporal, whereunto the House of Commons were invited; and that
they desire his Lordship from this House to cause the same to be forthwith
printed and published.

Copia Vera. Ex. per Philip Ferneley Cler. Dom. Com.

A SERMON PREACHED At the opening of the Parliament of IRELAND, May 8. 1661.

Before the right Honorable the Lords Justices, and the Lords Spiritual and
Temporal and the Commons.

By JEREMY Lord Bishop of Down and Connor.

Salus in multitudine consulentium. LONDON, Printed by J. F. for R. Royston,
Bookseller to his most Sacred MAJESTY, 1661.

To the Right Honorable, the Lords Spiritual and Temporal and Commons of
Ireland Assembled in PARLIAMENT.
My Lords and Gentlemen;
I Ought not to dispute your commands for the printing my Sermon of Obedience;
lest my Sermon should be protestatio contra factum: here I know my Example
would be the best Use to this Doctrine, and I am sure to find no inconveniency
so great as that of Disobedience; neither can I be confident that I am wise in
any thing but when I obey; for then I have the wisdom of my Superior for my
warrant, or my excuse. I remember the saying of Aurelius the Emperor, Aequius
est me tot and talium amicorum consilium, quam tot tales meam unius voluntatem
sequi. I could easily have pretended excuses, but that day I had taught others
the contrary; and I would not shed that Chalice which my own hands had newly
filled with waters issuing from the fountains of Salvation.

My eyes are almost grown old with seeing the horrid mischiefs which came from
Rebellion and Disobedience; and I would willingly now be blessed with
observation of Peace and Righteousness, Plenty and Religion* which do already,
and I hope shall for ever, attend upon Obedience to the best KING and the best
CHURCH in the world. I see no objection against my hopes, but that which ought
least of all in this case to be pretended. Men pretend Conscience against
Obedience; expressly against Saint Paul's Doctrine, teaching us to obey for
conscience sake; but to disobey for Conscience in a thing indifferent, is never
to be found in the books of our Religion.

It is very hard when the Prince is forced to say to his rebellious Subject, as
God did to his stubborn people, Quid faciam tibi? I have tried all the ways I
can to bring thee home, and what shall I now do unto thee? The Subject should
rather say, Quid me vis facere? What will thou have me to do? This Question is
the best end of disputations. Corrumpitur atque dissolvitur Imperantis
officium, si quis ad id quod facere jussus est, non obsequio debito, sed
consilio non considerato respondeat, said one in A. Gellius. When a Subject is
commanded to obey, and he disputes, and says, Nay, but the other is better, he
is like a servant that gives his Master necessary counsel, when he requires of
him a necessary obedience. Utilius parere edicto quam efferre consilium, he had
better obey then give counsel: by how much it is better to be profitable then
to be witty, to be full of goodness rather then full of talk and argument.

But all this is acknowledged true in strong men, but not in the weak; in
vigorous, but not in tender Consciences: for Obedience is strong meat, and will
not down with weak stomachs. As if in the world any thing were easier then to
obey: for we see that the food of Children is milk and laws; the breast-milk
of their Nurses and the commands of their Parents is all that food and
Government by which they are kept from harm and hunger, and conducted to life
and wisdom. And therefore they that are weak brethren, of all things in the
world have the least reason to pretend an excuse for disobedience, for nothing
can secure them but the wisdom of the Laws: for they are like Children in
minority; they cannot be trusted to their own conduct, and therefore must live
at the public charge, and the wisdom of their Superiors is their guide and
their security. And this was wisely advised by S. Paul, Him that is weak in the
faith receive, but not to doubtful disputations: that is not the way for him;
Children must not dispute with their Fathers and their Masters. If old men will
dispute, let them look to it; that is meat for the strong indeed, though it be
not very nutritive: but the Laws and the Counsels, the Exhortations and the
Doctrines of our Spiritual Rulers, are the measures by which God has appointed
Babes in Christ to become Men, and the weak to become strong; and they that are
not to be received to doubtful disputations, are to be received with the arms
of love into the embraces of a certain and regular Obedience.

But it would be considered, that Tenderness of Conscience is an equivocal
term, and does not always signify in a good sense. For a Child is of a
tender flesh; but he whose foot is out of joint, or has a bile in his arm, or
has strained a sinew, is much more tender. The tenderness of age is that
weakness that is in the ignorant and new beginners: the tenderness of a bile,
that is soreness indeed rather then tenderness, is of the diseased, the abused,
and the mis-perswaded. The first indeed are to be tenderly dealt with, and have
usages accordingly: but that is the same I have already told; you must teach
them, you must command them, you must guide them, you must choose for them, you
must be their guardians, and they must comport themselves accordingly. But for
that tenderness of Conscience which is the disease and soreness of Conscience,
it must be cured by anodynes and soft usages, unless they prove ineffective,
and that the Launcet be necessary. But there are amongst us such tender
stomachs, that cannot endure Milk, but can very well digest Iron; Consciences
so tender, that a Ceremony is greatly offensive, but Rebellion is not; a
Surplice drives them away as a bird affrighted with a man of clouts, but their
Consciences can suffer them to despise Government, and speak evil of Dignities,
and curse all that are not of their Opinion, and disturb the peace of
Kingdoms, and commit Sacrilege, and account Schism the character of Saints.
The true Tenderness of Conscience is 1. that which is impatient of a sin; 2ly,
it will not endure any thing that looks like it; and 3ly, it will not give
offense. Now since all Sin is Disobedience, 1. it will be rarely contingent
that a man in a Christian Commonwealth shall be tied to disobey, to avoid sin:
and certain it is, if such a case could happen, yet 2ly, nothing of our present
questions is so like a sin, as when we refuse to obey the Laws; to stand in a
clean Vestment is not so ill a sight as to see men stand in separation, and to
kneel at the Communion is not so like Idolatry as Rebellion is to Witchcraft:
and then 3ly, for the matter of giving offenses, what scandal is greater then
that which scandalizes the Laws? and who is so carefully to be observed, lest
he be offended, as the KING? And if that which offends the weak brother is to
be avoided, much more that which offends the strong; for this is certainly
really criminal, but for the other it is much odds but it is mistaken. And
when the case is so put, between the obedient and the disobedient, which shall
be offended, and one will, I suppose there is no question but the Laws will
take more care of Subjects then of Rebels, and not weaken them in their duty in
compliance with those that hate the Laws, and will not endure the Government.

And after all this, in the conduct of Government what remedy can there be to
those that call themselves Tender Consciences? I shall not need say that every
man can easily pretend it; for we have seen the vilest part of mankind, men
that have done things so horrid, worse then which the Sun never saw, yet
pretend tender Consciences against Ecclesiastical Laws: but I will suppose that
they are really such, that they in the simplicity of their hearts follow
Absalom, and in weakness hide their heads in little Conventicles and places of
separation for a trifle; what would they have done for themselves?

If you make a Law of Order, and in the sanction put a clause of favor for
tender Consciences, do not you invite every Subject to Disobedience by
impunity, and teach him how to make his own excuse? is not such a Law, a Law
without an obligation? may not every man choose whether he will obey or no? and
if he pretends to disobey out of Conscience, is not he that disobeyes equally
innocent with the obedient; altogether as just, as not having done any thing
without leave, and yet much more Religious and conscientious? Quicunque vult is
but an ill preface to a Law; and it is a strange obligation that makes no
difference between him that obeyes and him that refuses to obey.

But what course must be taken with tender Consciences? Shall the execution of
the Law be suspended as to all such persons? that will be all one with the
former: for if the execution be commanded to be suspended, then the obligation
of the Law by command is taken away, and then it were better there were no Law
made. And indeed that is the pretension, that is the secret of the business;
they suppose the best way to prevent Disobedience is to take away all Laws. It
is a short way indeed; there shall then be no Disobedience, but at the same
time there shall be no Government: but the Remedy is worse then the Disease;
and to take away all Wine and strong drink to prevent Drunkenness would not be
half so great a folly.

I cannot therefore tell what to advise in this particular, but that every
Spiritual guide should consider who are tender Consciences and who are weak
brethren, and use all the ways of piety and prudence to instruct and to inform
them, that they may increase in knowledge and spiritual understanding. But they
that will be always learning and never come to the knowledge of the truth,
they that will be children of a hundred years old and never come to years of
discretion, they are very unfit to guide others, and to be Curates of Souls:
but they are most unfit to reprove the Laws, and speak against the wisdom of a
Nation, when it is confessed that they are so weak, that they understand not
the fundamental Liberty which Christ has purchased for them, but are servants
to a scruple, and affrighted at a circumstance, and in bondage under an
indifferent thing, an so much Idolaters of their Sect or Opinion as to prefer
it before all their own nobler interests, and the Charity of their brother, and
the Peace of a whole Church and Nation.

To you, my Lords and Gentlemen, I hope I may say as Marcus Curious said to a
stubborn young man, Non opus Vos habere cive qui parere nesciret; the Kingdom
has no need of those that know not how to obey. But as for them who have weak
and tender Consciences, they are in the state of Childhood and minority: but
then you know that a Child is never happy by having his own humor: if you choose
for him, and make him to use it, he has but one thing to do; but if you put
him to please himself, he is troubled with every thing, and satisfied with
nothing. We find that all Christian Churches kept this Rule. They kept
themselves and others close to the rule of Faith, and peaceably suffered one
another to differ in Ceremonies, but suffered no difference amongst their own:
they gave Liberty to other Churches, and gave Laws, and no Liberty, to their
own Subjects. And at this day the Churches of Geneva, France, Switzerland,
Germany, Low Countries, tie all their people to their own Laws, but tie up no
man's Conscience; if he be not persuaded as they are, let him charitably
dissent, and leave that Government, and adhere to his own Communion. If you be
not of their mind, they will be served by them that are: they will not trouble
your Conscience, and you shall not disturb their Government. But when men think
they cannot enjoy their Conscience unless you give them good Livings, and if
you prefer them not, you afflict their Consciences, they do but too evidently
declare that it is not their Consciences but their Profits they would have
secured. Now to these I have only this to say, That their Conscience is to be
enjoyed by the measures of God's Word, but the Rule for their Estates is the
Laws of the Kingdom: and I show you yet a more excellent way; Obedience is the
best security for both; because this is the best conservatory of Charity and
Truth and Peace. Si vis brevi perfectus esse, esto obediens etiam in minimis,
was the saying of a Saint; and the world uses to look for Miracles from them
whom they shall esteem Saints: but I had rather see a man truly humble and
obedient, then to see him raise a man from the dead, said old Pachomius.

But to conclude: if weak brethren shall still plead for Toleration and
Compliance, I hope my Lords the Bishops will consider where it can do good and
do no harm, where they are permitted, and where themselves are bound up by the
Laws, and in all things where it is safe and holy to labor to bring them ease
and to give them remedy: but to think of removing the Disease by feeding the
Humor, I confess it is a strange cure to our present Distempers. He that took
clay and spittle to open the blind eyes can make any thing be collyrium; but he
alone can do it. But whether any humane power can bring good from so unlikely
an instrument, if any man desires yet to be better informed, I desire him,
besides the calling to mind the late sad effects of Schime, to remember that no
Church in Christendom ever did it. It is neither the way of Peace nor
Government, nor yet a proper remedy for the cure of a weak Conscience.

I shall therefore pray to God that these men who separate in simplicity may by
God's mercy be brought to understand their own Liberty, and that they may not
for ever be babes and Neophytes, and wax old in trifles; and for ever stay at
entrances and outsides of Religion; but that they would pass in interiora
domus, and seek after Peace and Righteousness, Holiness and Justice, the love
of God and Evangelical perfections; and then they will understand how
ill-advised they are who think Religion consists in zeal against Ceremonies and
speaking evil of the Laws.

My Lords and Gentlemen, what I said in pursuance of public Peace and private
Duty, and some little incidences to both, I now humbly present to you, more to
show my own Obedience then to re-mind you of your Duty, which hitherto you have
so well observed in your amicable and sweet concord of counsels and affections,
during this present Session. I owe many thanks to you who heard me patiently,
willingly and kindly; I endeavored to please God, and I find I did not
displease you: but he is the best hearer of a Sermon who first loves the
Doctrine, and then practices it; and that you have hitherto done, very piously
and very prosperously. I pray God continue to direct your Counsels so that you
in all things may please him, and in all things be blessed by him, that all
generations may call you blessed Instruments of a lasting Peace, the restorers
of the old paths, the Patrons of the Church, friends of Religion, and Subjects
fitted for your Prince, who is Just up to the greatest example, and Merciful
beyond all examples, a Prince who has been nourished, and preserved, and
restored, and blessed by Miracles; a Prince whose Virtues and Fortunes are
equally the greatest.

1 SAMUEL 15. latter part of the 22 th verse. Behold to obey is better then
sacrifice, and to hearken then the fat of rams.


First part of the 23th. For Rebellion is as the sin of witchcraft, and
stubbornness is as iniquity and idolatry.
IN the world nothing is more easy then to say our Prayers, and to obey our
Superiors; and yet in the world there is nothing to which we are so unwilling
as to Prayer, and nothing seems so intolerable as Obedience: for men esteem all
Laws to be fetters, and their Superiors are their enemies: and when a command
is given, we turn into all shapes of excuse to escape from the imposition: For
either the authority is incompetent, or the law it self is Statutum non bonum,
or it is impossible to be kept, or at least very inconvenient, and we are to be
relieved in equity, or there is a secret dispensation, and it does not bind in
my particular case, or not now; or it is but the law of a man, and was made for
a certain end; or it does not bind the conscience, but 'twas only for Political
regards; or, if the worst happen, I will obey passively, and then I am
innocent. Thus every man snuffes up the wind, like the wild asses in the
wilderness, and thinks that Authority is an incroachment upon a man's
birthright; and in the mean time never considers that Christ took upon him our
Nature that he might learn us Obedience, and in that also make us become like
unto God. In his Justice and his Mercy he was imitable before; but before the
Incarnation of Christ we could not in passive graces imitate God who was
impassible. But he was pleased at a great rate to set forward this duty; and
when himself became obedient in the hardest point, obediens usque ad mortem,
and is now become to us the author and finisher of our Obedience, as well as of
our Faith, admonetur omnis aetas fieri posse quod aliquando factum est. We must
needs confess it very possible to obey the severest of the divine laws, even to
dye if God commands, because it was already done by a man; and we must needs
confess it excellent, because it was done by God himself.

But this great Example is of universal influence in the whole matter of
Obedience. For that I may speak of that part of this Duty which can be useful,
and concerns us; Men do not deny but they must obey in all Civil things, but in
Religion they have a Supreme, God only, and Conscience is his interpreter; and
in effect every man must be the Judge whether he shall obey or no. Therefore it
is that I say, the Example of our Lord is the great determination of this
inquiry: for he did obey and suffer, according to the commands of his Superiors
under whose Government he was placed; he gave his back to the smiters, and his
cheeks to the nippers; he kept the orders of the Rulers, and the customs of
the Synagogues, the Law of Moses and the rights of the Temple; and by so doing
he fulfilled all righteousness. Christ made no distinctions in his Obedience,
but obeyed God in all things, and those that God set over him in all things
according to God, and in things of Religion most of all; because to obey was of
it self a great instance of Religion, and if ever Religion comes to be
pretended against Obedience in any thing where our Superior can command, it is
imposture: For that is the purpose of my text, Obedience is better then
Sacrifice. Our own judgment, our own opinion is the sacrifice, seldom fit to
be offered to God, but most commonly deserving to be consumed by fire: but take
it at the best, it is not half so good as Obedience; for that was indeed
Christ's Sacrifice, and (as David of Goliah's sword, non est alter talis) there
is no other sacrifice that can be half so good: and when Abraham had lifted up
his sacrificing knife to slay his Son, and so expressed his obedience, God
would have no more; he had the Obedience, and he cared not for the Sacrifice.

By Sacrifice here then is meant the external and contingent actions of
Religion; by Obedience is meant submission to Authority, and observing the
command. Obedience is a not choosing our Duty, a not disputing with our Betters,
not to argue, not to delay, not to murmr; it is not this, but it is much
better; for it is Love, and Simplicity, and Humility, and Usefulness, and I
think these do reductively contain all that is excellent in the whole
conjugation of Christian Graces.

My Text is a perfect Proposition, and has no special remark in the words of
it; but is only a great representation of the most useful Truth to all
Kingdoms and Parliaments and Councels and Authorities in the whole world: It
is your Charter, and the Sanction of your authority, and the stabiliment of
your Peace, and the honor of your Laws, and the great defense of your
Religion, and the building up and the guarding of the King's Throne. It is that
by which all the Societies in heaven and earth are firm: without this you
cannot have a Village prosperous, or a Ship arrive in harbor. It is that which
God has bound upon us by hope and fear, by wrath and conscience, by duty and
necessity. Obedience is the formality of all Virtues, and every Sin is
Disobedience. There can no greater thing be said, unless you please to add,
that we never read that the earth opened and swallowed up any man alive, but a
company of rebellious disobedient people, who rose cup against Moses and Aaron,
the Prince of the People, and the Priest of God. For Obedience is the most
necessary thing in the world, and corruption optimi est pessima: Nullum malum
majus aut infeliciter feracius quam inobedientia. Seneca.
Disobedience is the greatest evil in the world, and that alone which can
destroy it.

My text is instanced in the matter of Obedience to God; but yet the case is
so, that though I shall in the first place discourse of our Obedience to man, I
shall not set one foot aside from the main intention of it; because Obedience
to our Superiors is really and is accounted to be Obedience to God, for they
are sent by God, they are his vicegerents, his Ministers, and his Ambassadors.
Apostolus cujusque est quisque say the Jews, Every man's Apostle is himself;
and he that hears or despises you, said Christ, hears or despises me: And
the reason is very evident, because it is not to be expected that God should
speak to us by himself, but sometimes by Angels, sometimes by Prophets, once by
his Son, and always by his Servants.

Now I desire two things to be observed.

First, We may as well perceive that God speaks to us when he uses the ministry
of men as when he uses the ministry of Angels: one is as much declared and as
certain as the other. And if it be said, a man may pretend to come from God,
and yet deliver nothing but his own errand; that is no strange thing: but
remember also that S. Paul puts this supposition in the case of an Angel, [ If
an Angel preach any other Gospel;] and we know that many Angels come like
Angels of light, who yet teach nothing but the ways of Darkness. So that we
are still as much bound to obey our Superior as to obey an Angel: a man is
paulo minor angelis, a little lower then the Angels; but we are much lower then
the King. Consider then with what fear and love we should receive an Angel, and
so let us receive all those whom God has sent to us, and set over us; for they
are no less: less indeed in their Persons, but not in their Authorities. Nay
the case is nearer yet; for we are not only bound to receive God's Deputies as
God's Angel, but as God himself. For it is the power of God in the hand of a
man, and he that resists, resists God's ordinance. And I pray remember that
there is not only no power greater then God's, but there is no other; for all
Power is his. The consequent of this is plain enough; I need say no more of it:
It is all one to us who commands, God, or God's Vicegerent. This was the first
thing to be observed.

Secondly, there can be but two things in the world required to make Obedience
necessary, the greatness of the Authority, and the worthiness of the Thing. In
the first you see the case can have no difference, because the thing it self is
but one. There is but one Authority in the world, and that is God's: as there
is but one Sun whose light is diffused into all Kingdoms. But is there not
great difference in the Thing commanded? Yes certainly, there is some; but
nothing to warrant disbobedience: for whatever the thing be, it may be
commanded by man, if it be not countermanded by God. For

1. It is not required that every thing commanded should of it self be
necessary; for God himself oftentimes commands things which have in them no
other excellency then that of Obedience. What made Abraham the friend of God?
and what made his offer to kill his Son to be so pleasing to God? It had been
naturally no very great good to cut the throat of a little child; but only that
it was Obedience. What excellency was there in the journeys of the Patriarchs
from Mesopotamia to Syria, from the land of Canaan into Egypt? and what thanks
could the sons of Israel deserve that they sat still upon the seventh day of
the week? and how can a man be dearer unto God by keeping of a Feast, or
building of a Booth, or going to Jerusalem, or cutting off the foreskin of a
boy, or washing their hands and garments in fair water? There was nothing in
these things but the Obedience. And when our blessed Lord himself came to his
Servant to take of him the Baptism of Repentance, alas, he could take nothing
but the water and the ceremony: for, as Tertullian observes, he was nullius
poenitentiae debtor, he was indeed a just person and needed no repentance; but
even so it became him to fulfill all righteousness: but yet even then it was
that the Holy Spirit did descend upon his holy head, and crowned that
Obedience, though it were but to a ceremony. Obedience, you see, may be
necessary when the law is not so. For in these cases, God's Son and God's
Servants did obey in things which were made good only by the commandment: and
if we do so in the Instances of humane Laws, there is nothing to be said
against it, but that what was not of it self necessary, is made so by the
authority of the Commander and the force of the Commandment. But there is more
in it then so. For,

2ly, We pretend to be willing to obey even in things naturally not necessary,
if a divine command does interpose; but if it be only a commandment of man,
and the thing be not necessary of it self, then we desire to be excused. But
will we do nothing else? We our selves will do many things that God has not
commanded, and may not our Superiors command us in many cases to do what we
may lawfully do without a commandment? Can we become a law unto our selves,
and cannot the word and power of our Superiors also become a law unto us? has
God given more to a private then to a public hand? But consider the ill
consequents of this fond opinion. Are all the practices of Geneva or Scotland
recorded in the Word of God? are the trifling Ceremonies of their public
Penance recorded in the four Gospels? are all the rules of decency, and all
things that are of good report, and all the measures of prudence, and the laws
of peace and war, and the customs of the Churches of God, and the lines of
public honesty, are all these described to us by the laws of God? If they be,
let us see and read them, that we may have an end to all questions and minute
cases of Conscience: but if they be not, and yet by the Word of God these are
bound upon us in the general, and no otherwise; then it follows that the
particulars of all these, which may be infinite, and are innumerable, yet may
be the matter of humane Laws; and then are bound upon us by the power of God
put into the hands of man. The consequent is this, that whatsoever is commanded
by our Superior according to the will of God, or whatsoever is not against it,
is of necessity to be obeyed.

3ly, But what if our Princes or our Prelates command things against the Word
of God? what then? Why nothing then, but that we must obey God and not man;
there is no dispute of that. But what then again? Why therefore says the Papist
I will not obey the Protestant Kings, because against the Word of God they
command me to come to Church where Heresy is preached; and I will not
acknowledge the Bishops, says the Presbyterian, because they are against the
discipline and scepter of Jesus Christ; and the Independent hates Parochial
meetings, and is wholly for a gathered Church, and supposes this to be the
practice Apostolical; and I will not bring my Child to Baptism, (says the
Anabaptist) because God calls none but believers to that Sacrament; and I will
acknowledge no Clergy, no Lord, no Master, says the Quaker, because Christ
commands us to call no man master on the earth, and be not called of men Rabbi.
And if you call upon these men to obey the Authority God has set over them,
they tell you with one voice, with all their hearts, as far as the Word of God
will give them leave; but God is to be obeyed, and not man: and therefore if
you put the Laws in execution against them, they will obey you passively,
because you are stronger, and so long as they know it they will not stir
against you; but they in the mean time are little less then Martyrs, and you no
better then Persecutors.

What shall we do now? for here is evidently a great heap or disorder: they
all confess that authority must be obeyed; but when you come to the trial, none
of them all will do it, and they think they are not bound: but because their
Opinions being contrary cannot all be right, and it may be none of them are, it
is certain that all this while Authority is infinitely wronged and prejudiced
amongst them, when all fantastic Opinions shall be accounted a sufficient
reason to despise it. I hope the Presbyterian will join with the Protestant,
and say that the Papist, and the Socinian, and the Independent, and the
Anabaptist, and the Quaker are guilty of Rebellion and Disobedience for all
their pretense of the Word of God to be on their side: and I am more sure that
all these will join with the Protestant, and say that the Presbyterian has no
reason to disobey Authority upon pretense of their new Government concerning
which they do but dream dreams, when they think they see visions. Certain it is
that the biggest part of dissenters in the whole world are criminally
disobedient; and it is a thousand to one but that Authority is in the right
against them, and ought to be obeyed. It remains now in the next place, that we
inquire what Authority is to do in this case, and what these Sectaries and
Recusants are to do; for these are two things worth inquiry,

1. Concerning Authority. All disagreeing persons, to cover their foul shame of
Rebellion or Disobedience, pretend Conscience for their Judge, and the
Scripture for their Law. Now if these men think that by this means they proceed
safely, upon the same ground the Superior may do what he thinks to be his
duty, and be at least as safe as they. If the Rebellious Subject can think that
by God's Law he ought not to obey; the Prince may at the same time think that
by God's Law he ought to punish him: and it is as certain that he is justly
punished, as he thinks it certain he reasonably disobeys. Or is the Conscience
of the Superior bound to relaxe his laws, if the inferior tells him so? Can
the Prince give Laws to the peoples will; and can the people give measures to
the Princes understanding? If any one of the people can prescribe or make it
necessary to change the Law, then every one can; and by this time every new
Opinion will introduce a new Law, and that Law shall be obeyed by him only that
has a mind to it, and that will be a strange Law that binds a man only to do
his own pleasure. But because the King's Conscience is to him as sure a Rule as
the Conscience of any disobedient Subject can be to himself, the Prince is as
much bound to do his duty in Government, as the other can be to follow his
Conscience in disagreeing; and the consequent will be, that whether the Subject
be right or wrong in the disputation, it is certain he has the just reward of
Disobedience in the conclusion. If one man's Conscience can be the measure of
another man's action, why shall not the Princes Conscience be the Subject's
measure? but if it cannot, then the Prince is not to depart: from his own
Conscience, but proceed according to the Laws which he judges just and
reasonable.

2. The Superior is tied by the laws of Christian Charity so far to bend in the
ministration of his Laws, as to pity the invincible Ignorance and Weakness of
his abused people, qui devoratur a malis Pastoribus (as S. Hierom's expression
is) that are devoured by their evil Shepherds: but this is to last no longer
then till the Ignorance can be cured, and the man be taught his duty; for
whatsoever comes after this looks so like Obstinacy, that no Laws in the world
judge it to be any thing else. And then secondly, this also is to be understood
to be the duty of Superiors only in matters of mere Opinion, not relating to
Practice. For no man's Opinion must be suffered to do mischief, to disturb the
Peace, to dishonor the Government: not only because every disagreeing person
can to serve his end pretend his Conscience, and so claim impunity for his
Villainy; but also because those things which concern the good of mankind and
the Peace of Kingdoms are so plainly taught, that no man who thinks himself so
wise as to be fit to oppose Authority, can be so foolish as in these things not
to know his Duty. In other things, if the Opinion does neither bite nor
scratch, if it dwells at home in the house of understanding, and wanders not
into the outhouses of Passion and popular orations, the Superior imposes no
laws, and exacts no obedience, and destroies no liberty, and gives no
restraint. This is the part of Authority.

2. The next enquiry is, What must the disagreeing Subject do when he supposes
the Superiors command is against the Law of God? I answer that if he thinks so,
and thinks true, he must not obey his Superior in that: but because most men
that think so think amiss, there are many particulars fit by such persons to be
considered.

1. Let such men think charitably of others, and that all are not fools or
madmen who are not of the same Opinion with themselves or their own little
party. 2. Let him think himself as fallible and subject to mistake as other men
are. 3. But let him by no means think that every Opinion of his is an
Inspiration from God; for that is the pride and madness of a pretended
Religion: such a man is to be cured by Physic; for he could not enter into
that persuasion by Reason or Experience, and therefore it must enter into him
by folly or the anger of God. 4. From hence it will naturally follow, that he
ought to think his Opinion to be uncertain, and that he ought not to behave
himself like the man that is too confident; but because his Obedience is Duty,
and his Duty certain, he will find it more wise and safe and holy to leave that
which is disputable, and pursue that which is demonstrable; to change his
uncertain Opinion for his certain Duty. For it is twenty to one but he is
deceived in his Opinion; but if he be, it is certain that whatsoever his
Conscience be, yet in his separation from Authority he is a sinner.

2. Every man who by his Opinion is engaged against Authority, should do well
to study his doubtful Opinion less, and Humility and Obedience more. But you
say, that this concerns not me, for my disagreeing is not in a doubtful matter,
but I am sure I am in the right; there is no ifs and ands in my case. Well, it
may be so: but were it not better that you did doubt? A wise man fears (says
Solomon) and departs from evil; but a fool rages and is confident: and the
difference between a Learned man and a Novice is this, that the young fellow
cries out, I am sure it is so; the better learned answers, (...), possibly it
may, and peradventure it is so, but I pray enquire: and he is the best Diviner,
(...), he is the best Judge that conjectures best, not he that is most
confident; for, as Xenophanes said wisely, Man does but conjecture, but God
only knows; and it is no disparagement to a wise man to learn, and by
suspecting the fallibility of things and his own aptness to mistake, to walk
prudently and safely, with an eye to God, and an ear open to his Superior.
Some men are drunk with fancy, and mad with Opinion. Who believe more strongly
then boys and women? who are so hard to be persuaded as fools? and who so
readily suspect their teachers as they who are governed by chance, and know not
the intrinsic measures of good and evil? Qui pauca considerat de facili
pronunciat; it is a little learning and not enough that makes men conclude
hastily, and clap fast hold on the Conclusion before they have well weighed the
Premises: but Experience and Humility would teach us Modesty and Fear.

3. In all disputes he that obeys his Superior can never be a Heretic in the
estimate of Law, and he can never be a Schismatic in the point of Conscience;
so that he certainly avoids one great death, and very probably the other. Res
judicata pro veritate accipitur, says the Law; If the Judge have given
sentence, that sentence is supposed a truth: and Cassiodor said according to
the sentence of the Law, Nimis iniquum est ut ille patiatur dispendium, qui
imperium fecit alienum. Our Obedience secures us from the imputation of evil,
and Error does but seldom go in company with Obedience. But however there is
this advantage to be gotten by Obedience; that he who prefers the sentence of
the Law before his own Opinion does do an act of great Humility, and exercises
the grace of Modesty, and takes the best way to secure his Conscience and the
public Peace, and pleases the Government which he is bound to please, and
pursues the excellencies of Unity, and promotes Charity and Godly Love: whereas
on the other side, he that goes by himself apart from his Superior is always
materially a Schismatic, and is more likely to be deceived by his own
Singularity and Prejudice and Weakness, then by following the guides God has
set over him. And if he loses Truth, certainly he will get nothing else: for by
so doing we lose our Peace too, and give public offense, and arm Authority
against us, and are scandalous in Law, and pull evil upon our heads; and all
this for a proud Singularity, or a trifling Opinion, in which we are not so
likely to be deceived, if we trust our selves less, and the public more. In
omnibus falli possum, in obedientia non possum, said S. Teresa, I can in every
thing else, but in Obedience I can never be deceived. And it is very remarkable
in my Text, that Rebellion or Disobedience is compared to the sin of
witchcraft. Indeed it seems strange, for the meaning of it is not only that a
Rebel is as much hated by God as a Witch, but it means that the sins are
alike in their very natures: quasi peccatum divinationis (says the Vulgar
Latin) they that disobey Authority, trusting in their own opinions, are but
like Witches or Diviners; that is, they are led by an evil spirit; pride and a
lying and deceiving spirit is their teacher, and their answers are seldom
true; for though they pretend the Truth of God for their Disobedience, yet they
fall into the deception of the devil, and that is the end of their soothsaying.
And let me add this, that when a man distrusts his Superior and trusts
himself, if he misses Truth, it will be greatly imputed to him; he shall feel
the evil of his error and the shame of his pride, the reproach of his folly and
the punishment of his disobedience, the dishonor of singularity, and the
restlesness of Schism, and the scorn of the multitude: but on the other side,
if he obey Authority, and yet be deceived, he is greatly excused, he erred on
the safer side, he is defended by the hands of many virtues, and gets peace and
love of the Congregation.

You see the Blessings of Obedience, even in the questions and matters of
Religion: but I have something more to say, and it is not only of great use to
appease the tumultuary disputations and arguings of Religion which have lately
disturbed these Nations, but is proper to be spoken to, and to be reduced to
practice by this Honorable and High Court of Parliament.

That which I am to say is this; You have no other way of Peace, no better way
to appease and quiet the Quarrels in Religion which have been too long among
us, but by reducing all men to Obedience, and all questions to the measures of
the Laws. For they on both sides pretend Scripture, but one side only can
pretend to the Laws: and they that do admit no authority above their own to
expound Scripture, cannot deny but Kings and Parliaments are the makers and
proper expounders of our Laws; and if ever you mean to have Truth and Peace
kiss each other, let no man dispute against your Laws. For did not our Blessed
Savior say, that an Oath is the end of all questions, and after depositions
are taken, all Judges go to sentence? What Oaths are to private questions,
that Laws are to public. And if it be said that Laws may be mistaken; it is
true, but may not an Oath also be a Perjury? and yet because in humane affairs
we have no greater certainty, and greater then God gives we may not look for,
let the Laws be the last determination; and in wise and religious Governments
no disputation is to go beyond them.

2. But this is not only true in religious prudence and plain necessity, but
this is the way that God has appointed, and that he has blessed, and that he
has intended to be the means of ending all questions. This we learn from S.
Paul, I exhort that first of all prayers, 1 Timothy 2.1^.
and supplications, and intercessions, and giving of thanks be made for all
men: for Kings and for all that are in Authority. For all; for Parliaments and
for Councils, for Bishops and for Magistrates: it is for all, and for Kings
above all. Well, to what purpose is all this? that we may lead a quiet and a
peaceable life in all godliness and honesty. Mark that: Kings and all that are
in Authority are by God appointed to be the means of obtaining unity and peace
in Godliness, (...), in all the true and Godly worshippings of God; no Unity in
Religion without Kings and Bishops and those that are in Authority.

3. And indeed because this is God's way of ending our Controversies, the
matter of Authority is highly to be regarded. If you suffer the Authority of
the King to be lessened, to be scrupled, to be denied in Ecclesiastical
affairs, you have no way left to silence the tongues and hands of gainsaying
people. But so it is, the Kings Authority is appointed and enabled by God to
end our questions of Religion: Prove. 16.10.
Divinatio in labiis Regis (says Solomon) in judicio non errabit os ejus,
Divination and a wise sentence is in the lips of the King, and his mouth shall
not err in judgment. In all Scripture there is not so much for the Popes
infallibility, but by this it appears there is divinity in the Kings sentence:
for God gives to Kings, who are his Vicegerents, a peculiar spirit. L. 8. cod.
de veteri jure enucleando.
And when Justinian had out of the sense of Julian the Lawyer observed that
there were many cases for which Law made no provision, he adds, If any such
shall happen, Augustum imploretur remedium, run to the King for remedy; for
therefore God has set the Imperial fortune over humane affairs, ut possit
omnia quae noviter contingunt and emendare and componere, and modis ac regulis
competentibus tradere, that the King may amend and rule and compose every
new-arising question. And it is not to be despised, but is a great indication
of this Truth, that the Answers of the Roman Princes and Judges recorded in the
Civil Law are such that all Nations of the world do approve them, and are a
great testimony how the sentences of Kings ought to be valued, even in matters
of Religion, and questions of greatest doubt. Bona conscientia Scyphus est
Josephi, Petrus Cellensis lib. de Conscientia.
said the old Abbot of Kells; a good Conscience is like Joseph's Cup, in which
our Lord the King divines. And since God has blessed us with so good, so just,
so religious and so wise a Prince, let the sentence of his Laws be our last
resort, and no questions be permitted after his judgment and legal
determination. For Wisdom says, By me Princes rule, by me they decree
justice: and therefore the spirit of the King is a divine eminency, and is as
the spirit of the most High God.

4. Let no man be too busy in disputing the laws of his Superiors, for a man by
that seldom gets good to himself, but seldom misses to do mischief unto
others. (...), said one in Laertius. Will a son contend with his father? that is
not decent, though the son speak that which is right: he may possibly say well
enough, but he does do very ill; not only because he does not pay his duty and
reverential fear, but because it is in it self very often unreasonable to
dispute concerning the command of our Superior, whether it be good or no; for
the very commandment can make it not only good, but a necessary good. It
seemed good to the Holy Ghost and to us to lay on you no greater burden then
these necessary things, said the Council of Jerusalem: and yet these things
were not necessary, but as they were commanded: to abstain from a strangled hen
or a bloody pudding could not of themselves be necessary; but the commandment
came, authority did interpose, and then they were made so.

5. But then besides the advantages both of the spirit, and the authority of
Kings in matters of question, the laws and decrees of a National Church ought
upon the account of their own advantages be esteemed as a final sentence in all
things disputed. The thing is a plain command Hebrews 13.7. Remember them which
have the rule over you, who have spoken unto you the word of God: this tells
what Rulers he means; Rulers Ecclesiastical: and what of them? whose faith
follow; they must praeire in articulis; they are not masters of your faith, but
guides of it: and they that sit in Moses chair must be heard and obeyed, said
our blessed Savior. These words were not said for nothing; and they were
nothing if their authority were nothing.

For between the laws of a Church and the opinion of a Subject the comparison
is the same as between a public spirit and a private. The public is far the
better, the daughter of God, and the mother of a blessing, and always dwells in
light. The public spirit has already passed the trial, it has been subjected
to the Prophets, tried and searched and approved; the private is yet to be
examined. The public spirit is uniform and apt to be followed; the private is
various and multiform as chance, and no man can follow him that has it. For if
he follows one, he is reproved by a thousand; and if he changes, he may get a
shame, but no truth: and he can never rest but in the arms and conduct of his
Superior. When Aaron and Miriam murmured against Moses, God told them that they
were Prophets of an inferior rank then Moses was. God communicated himself to
them in dreams and visions; (...)
but the Ruach hakkodesh, the public spirit of Moses their Prince, that was
higher: Number. 12. ^, 7, 8.
and what then? wherefore then (God said) were ye not afraid to speak against
my servant Moses? plainly teaching us, that where there is a more excellent
spirit, they that have a spirit less excellent ought to be afraid to speak
against it. And this is the full case of the private and public spirit; that
is, of a Subject speaking against the spirit and the laws of the Church. In
heaven, and in the air, and in all the regions of spirits, the spirit of a
lower order dares not speak against the spirit of an higher; and therefore for
a private spirit to oppose the public, is a disorder greater then is in hell
it self.

To conclude this point; Let us consider whether it were not an intolerable
mischief if the Judges should give sentence in causes of instance by the
measures of their own fancy, and not by the Laws; who would endure them? and
yet why may they not do that as well as any Ecclesiastic person preach
Religion, not which the Laws allow, but what is taught him by his own private
Opinion? but he that has the Laws on his side, has ever something of true
Religion to warrant him, and can never want a great measure of justification.
(...), the Laws and the customs of the country are the results of wise
counsels or long experience; they ever comply with Peace and public benefit:
and nothing of this can be said of private Religions; for they break the Peace,
and trouble the Conscience, and undo Government, and despise the Laws, and
offend Princes, and dishonor the wisdom of Parliaments, and destroy Obedience.

Well, but in the last place, if we cannot do what the Laws command, we will
suffer what they impose; and then all is well again. But first, who ever did so
that could help it? And secondly, this talking of passive Obedience is but a
mockery; for what man did ever say the Laws were not good, but he also said the
Punishment was unjust? And thirdly, which of all the Recusants did not
endeavor to get ground upon the Laws, and secretly or openly asperse the
Authority that put him to pain for doing that which he calls his duty? and can
any man boast of his passive Obedience that calls it Persecution? he may think
to please himself, but he neither does or says any thing that is for the
reputation of the Laws. Such men are like them that sail in a storm; they may
possibly be thrown into a harbor, but they are very sick all the way.

But after all this I have one thing to observe to such persons, That such a
passive Obedience as this does not acquit a man before God; and he that suffers
what the Law inflicts is not discharged in the Court of Conscience, but there
he is still a sinner and a debtor. For the law is not made for the righteous,
but for sinners; that is, the punishment appointed by the Law falls on him only
that has sinned: but an offending subject cannot with the fruit of his body
pay for the sin of his Soul: when he does evil he must suffer evil; but if he
does not repent besides, a worse thing will happen to him; for we are not tied
to obey only for wrath, but also for Conscience. Passive obedience is only the
correspondent of wrath, but it is the active obedience that is required by
Conscience; and whatever the Subject suffers for his own fault, it matters
nothing as to his Duty, but this also God will exact at the hands of every man
that is placed under Authority.

I have now told you the sum of what I had to say concerning Obedience to
Laws and to your own Government, and it will be to little purpose to make laws
in matter of Religion, or in any thing else, if the end of it be, that every
man shall choose whether he will obey or no: and if it be questioned whether you
be deceived or no, though the suffering such a question is a great diminution
to your authority, yet it is infinitely more probable that you are in the right
then that the disobedient Subject is; because you are conducted with a public
spirit, you have a special title and peculiar portions of the promise of God's
assistance, you have all the helps of Counsel and the advantages of
deliberation, you have the Scriptures and the Laws, you are as much concerned
to judge according to truth as any man, you have the principal of all
capacities and states of men to assist your consultations, you are the most
concerned for Peace, and to please God also is your biggest interest: and
therefore it cannot be denied to be the most reasonable thing in the world
which is set down in the Law: Praesumptio est pro authoritate imponentis, the
presumption of truth ought to be on your side; and since this is the most
likely way for Truth, and the most certain way for Peace, you are to insist in
this, and it is not possible to find a better.

I have another part or sense of my Text yet to handle; but because I have no
more time of mine own, and I will not take any of yours, I shall only do it in
a short Exhortation to this most Honorable Auditory, and so conclude.

God has put a Royal Mantle, and fastened it with a Golden Clasp, upon the
shoulder of the KING, and he has given you the Judges Robe; the King holds the
Scepter, and he has now permitted you to touch the golden Ball, and to take it
a while into your handling and made obedience to your Laws to be Duty and
Religion: but then remember that the first in every kind is to be the measure
of the Subjects should obey you, unless you obey God. I do not speak this only
in relation to your personal duty; though in that also it would be considered,
that all the Bishops and Ministers of Religion are bound to teach the same
Doctrines by their Lives as they do by their Sermons; and what we are to do in
the matters of Doctrine, you are also to do in matter of Laws; what is
reasonable for the advantages of Religion, is also the best Method for the
advantages of Government; we must preach by our good Example, and you must
govern by it; and your good example in observing the laws of Religion will
strangely endear them to the affections of the people. But I shall rather speak
to you as you are in a capacity of union and of Government; for as now you have
a new Power, so there is incumbent upon you a special Duty.

1. Take care that all your power and your counsels be employed in doing honor
and advantages to Piety and Holiness. Then you obey God in your public
capacity, when by holy Laws and wise administrations you take care that all the
Land be an obedient and a religious People. For then you are princely Rulers
indeed when you take care of the Salvation of a whole Nation. Nihil aliud est
imperium nisi cura salutis alinae, said Ammianus; Government is nothing but a
care that all men be saved. And therefore take care that men do not destroy
their Souls by the abominations of an evil life: see that God be obeyed, take
care that the breach of the laws of God may not be unpunished. The best way to
make men to be good Subjects to the King is to make them good servants of God.
Suffer not Drunkenness to pass with impunity, let Lust find a public shame.
Let the sons of the Nobility and Gentry no more dare to dishonor God then
the meanest of the people shall: let baseness be basely esteemed; that is, put
such characters of Shame upon dishonorable Crimes, that it be esteemed more
against the honor of a Gentleman to be drunk then to be kicked, more shame to
fornicate then to be can'd: and for honors sake and the reputation of
Christianity, take some course that the most unworthy sins of the world have
not reputation added to them by being the practice of Gentlemen and persons of
good birth and fortunes. Let not them who should be examples of Holiness have
an impunity and a license to provoke God to anger; lest it be said that in
Ireland it is not lawful for any man to sin, unless he be a person of quality.
Optimus est reipublicae status, Seneca.
ubi nihil deest nisilicentia pereundi; In a commonwealth that is the best
state of things, where every thing can be had but a leave to sin, a license to
be undone.

2. As God is thus to be obeyed, and you are to take care that he be, so God
also must be honnourd, by paying that reverence and religious obedience which
is due to those persons whom he has been pleased to honor by admitting them
to the dispensation of his blessings, and the ministeries of your Religion. For
certain it is, this is a right way of giving honor and obedience to God. The
Church is in some very peculiar manner the portion and the called and the care
of God; and it will concern you in pursuance of your obedience to God, to take
care that they in whose hands Religion is to be ministered and conducted, be not
discouraged. For what your Judges are to the ministry of Laws, that your
Bishops are in the ministeries of Religion; and it concerns you that the hands
of neither of them be made weak: and so long as you make Religion your care,
and Holiness your measure, you will not think that Authority is the more to be
despised because it is in the hands of the Church, or that it is a sin to speak
evil of dignities, unless they be Ecclesiastical; but that they may be reviled,
and that though nothing is baser then for a man to be a Thief, yet Sacrilege is
no dishonor; and indeed to be an Oppressor is a great and crying sin, yet to
oppress the Church, to diminish her rents, to make her beggarly and
contemptible, that is no offense; and that though it is not lawful to despise
Government, yet if it be Church Government, that then the case is altered. Take
heed of that, for then God is dishonored, when any thing is the more despised
by how much it relates nearer unto God. No Religion ever did despise their
chiefest Ministers: and the Christian Religion gives them the greatest honor.
For honorable Priesthood is like a shower from heaven, it causes blessings
every where: but a pitiful, a disheartened, a discouraged Clergy, waters the
ground with a water-pot, here and there a little good, and for a little while;
but every evil man can destroy all that work whenever he pleases. Take heed; in
the world there is not a greater misery can happen to any man, then to be an
enemy to God's Church. All Histories of Christendom and the whole Book of God
have sad records, and sad threatenings, and sad stories of Corah, and Doeg, and
Balaam, and Jeroboam, and Uzzah, and Ananias, and Sapphira, and Julian, and of
Heretics and Schismatics, and sacrilegious; and after all, these men could
not prevail finally, but pai'd for the mischief they did, and ended their days
in dishonor, and left nothing behind them but the memory of their sin, and the
record of their curse.

3. In the same proportion you are to take care of all inferior Relatives of
God and of Religion. Find out methods to relieve the Poor, to accommodate and
well dispose of the cures of Souls; let not the Churches lie wast and in
ruinous heaps, to the diminution of Religion, and the reproach of the Nation,
lest the nations abroad say, that the Britans are a kind of Christians that
have no Churches: for Churches, and Courts of Judicature, and the public
defenses of an Imperial City, are res sacrae; they are venerable in Law, and
honorable in Religion.

But that which concerns us most is, that we all keep close to our Religion. Ad
magnas reipublicae utilitates retinetur Religio in civitatibus, said Cicero; by
Religion and the strict preserving of it, ye shall best preserve the Interests
of the Nation: and according to the precept of the Romans 16.17.
Apostle, Mark them which cause divisions amongst us, contrary to the doctrine
that ye have received, and avoid them. For I beseech you to consider, all you
that are true Protestants; do you not think that your Religion is holy, and
Apostolical, and taught by Christ, and pleasing unto God? If you do not think
so, why do you not leave it? but if you do think so, why are ye not zealous for
it? Is not the Government a part of? it is that which immures, and adorns, and
conducts all the rest, and is established in the 36. Article of the Church, in
the public Service Book, and in the book of consecration: it is therefore a
part of our Religion, and is not all of it worth preserving? If it be, then
they which make Schisms against this Doctrine, by the rule of the Apostle are
to be avoided. Beatus qui praedicat verbum inauditum, Blessed is he that
preaches a word that was never heard before, so said the Spanish Jesuit: but
Christ said otherwise, No man having drunk old wine straight desires new, for
he says the old is better. And so it is in Religion, Quod primum verum, Truth
is always first: and since Episcopacy has been of so lasting an abode, of so
long a blessing, since it has ever combined with Government, and has been
taught by that spirit that has so long dwelt in God's Church, and has now
according to the promise of Jesus, that says the gates of hell shall not
prevail against the Church, been restored amongst us by a heap of miracles, and
as it went away, so it returned again in the hand of Monarchy, and in the
bosom of our Fundamental Laws; suffer no evil tongue to speak against this
Truth, which has had so long a testimony from God, and from Experience, and
from the wisdom of so many Ages, of all your Ancestors and all your Laws,
lest ye be found to speak against God, and neglect the things that belong unto
your Peace, and get nothing by it but news and danger, and what other effects
ye know not. But Leontimus Bishop of Antioch stroak'd his old white beard and
said, When this snow is dissolved, a great deal of dirty weather will follow;
meaning, that when the old Religion should be questioned and discountenanced,
the new Religion would bring nothing but trouble and unquietness: and we have
found it so by a sad-experience.

4. Ye cannot obey God unless ye do Justice: for this also is better then
sacrifice, said Solomon, Prove. 21.3. For Christ, who is the Sun of
righteousness, is a Sun and a Shield to them that do righteously. The Indian
was not immured sufficiently by the Atlantic sea, nor the Bosphoran by the
walls of Ice, nor the Arabian by his meridian Sun; the Christian Justice of the
Roman Princes brake through all enclosures, and by Justice set up Christ's
standard, and gave to all the world a testimony how much could be done by
Prudence and Valor, when they were conducted by the hands of Justice. And now
you will have a great trial of this part of your Obedience to God.

For you are to give sentence in the causes of half a Nation: and he had need
be a wise and a good man that divides the inheritance amongst Brethren; that he
may not be abused by contrary pretenses, nor biassed by the Interest of
friends, nor transported with the unjust thoughts even of a just Revenge, nor
allured by the opportunities of Spoil, nor turned aside by Partiality in his
own concerns, nor blinded by Gold, which puts out the eyes of wise men, nor
couzened by pretended Zeal, nor wearied with the difficulty of questions, nor
directed by a general measure in cases not measurable by it, nor born down by
Prejudice, nor abused by resolutions taken before the cause be heard, nor
overruled by National Interests. For Justice ought to be the simplest thing in
the world, and is to be measured by nothing but by Truth and by Laws and by the
decrees of Princes. But whatever you do, let not the pretense of a different
Religion make you think it lawful to oppress any man in his just rights. For
Opinions are not, but Laws only, and doing as we would be done to, are the
measures of Justice: and though Justice does alike to all men, Jew and
Christian, Lutheran and Calvinist; yet to do right to them that are of another
Opinion is the way to win them; but if you for Conscience sake do them wrong,
they will hate you and your Religion.

Lastly, as obedience is better then sacrifice, so God also said, I will have
mercy and not sacrifice; meaning that Mercy is the best Obedience. Perierat
totum quod Deus fecerat, nisi misericordia subvenisset, said Chrysologus; all
the creatures both of heaven and earth would perish, if Mercy did not relieve
us all. Other good things, more or less, every man expects according to the
portion of his fortune: Ex clementia omnes idem sperant, Seneca.
but from Mercy and Clemency all the world alike do expect advantages. And
which of us all stands here this day, that does not need God's pardon and the
King's? Surely no man is so much pleased with his own innocence, as that he
will be willing to quit his claim to Mercy: and if we all need it, let us all
show it. Naturae imperio gemimus, cum funus adultae
Virginis occurrit, vel terra clauditur infans,
Et minor igne rogi --
If you do but see a Maiden carried to her grave a little before her intended
marriage, or an Infant dye before the birth of Reason, Nature has taught us to
pay a tributary tear: Alas! your eyes will behold the ruin of many Families,
wnich though they sadly have deserved, yet Mercy is not delighted with the
spectacle; and therefore God places a watery cloud in the eye, that when the
light of heaven shines upon it, it may produce a rainbow to be a Sacrament and
a memorial that God and the sons of God do not love to see a man perish. God
never rejoices in the death of him that dies; and we also esteem it undecent to
have Music at a Funeral. And as Religion teaches us to pity a condemned
Criminal, so Mercy intercedes for the most benign interpretation of the Laws.
You must indeed be as just as the Laws, and you must be as merciful as your
Religion: and you have no way to tie these together, but to follow the pattern
in the Mount; do as God does, who in judgment remembers mercy.

To conclude; If every one in this Honorable Assembly would join together to
promote Christian Religion in it is true notion, that is, Peace and Holiness,
the Love of God and the Love of our Brother, Christianity in all its proper
usefulness, and would not endure in the Nation any thing against the laws of
the Holy Jesus; if they were all zealous for the doctrines of Righteousness,
and impatient of Sin in your selves and in the people, it is not to be imagined
what a happy Nation we should be. But if ye divide into parties, and keep up
useless differences of names or interests; if ye do not join in the bands of
Peace, that is, the King, and the Church, Religion, and the good of the Nation,
you can never hope to see a blessing to be the end of your labors. Remember
the words of Solomon, Righteousness exalts a Nation, Prove. 24.34.
but sin is a reproach to any people: but when Righteousness is advanced in the
hearts and lives of the Nation, who shall dare to reprove your Faith? who can
find fault with your Religion?

God of his mercy grant that in all your Consultations the Word of God may be
your measure, the Spirit of God may be your guide, and the glory of God may be
your end: He of his mercy grant that Moderation may be your limit, and Peace
may be within your walls as long as you are there, and in all the Land for ever
after. But remember, that since the honor and service of his Majesty, and the
peace and prosperity of the Church, the perpetuity of our fundamental Laws,
public Justice, and the honor of all legal Authority, the advancement of
Trade and the wealth of the Nation is your design, remember, I pray, what
warranty you have to expect all this; no less then the words of our Blessed
Savior, but it is upon these terms, Seek ye first the Kingdom of God, and the
righteousness thereof, and all these things shall be added to you. Amen.

FINIS.
A CATALOGUE of some Books written by JEREMY Lord Bishop of Down and Connor,
and Printed for R. Royston at the Angel in Ivy-lane, London.
(...), A Course of Sermons for all the Sundaies of the year; together with a
discourse of the Divine Institution, Necessity, Sacredness and Separation of
the Office Ministerial, in fol.

2. The History of the Life and Death of the Ever-blessed Jesus Christ, the
third Edition in fol.

3. The Rule and Exercises of holy living, in 12.

4. The Rule and Exercises of holy dying, in 12.

5. The Golden Grove, or A Manual of daily Prayers, fitted to the days of the
week, together with a short Method of Peace and Holiness, in 12.

6. A Collection of Polemical and Moral discourses, in fol. newly reprinted.

7. A Discourse of the Nature, Offices and Measure of Friendship, in 12. new.

8. A Collection of Offices or forms of Prayer fitted to the needs of all
Christians, taken out of the Scriptures and Ancient Liturgies of several
Churches, especially the Greek, together with the Psalter or Psalms of David
after the Kings Translation, in a large octavo, newly published.

9. Ductor Dubitantium, or the Rule of Conscience, fol. in two volumes.

10. The doctrine and Practice of Repentance, describing the necessities of a
Strict, a Holy and a Christian Life: serving as a necessary Supplement unto the
Rule of Conscience.

11. The Worthy Communicant in octavo, sold at the Bell in S. Paul's Churchyard.

Via Intelligentiae. A SERMOM Preached to the UNIVERSITY OF DUBLIN: Showing by
what means the Scholars shall become most Learned and most Useful.

Published at their desire.

By the R. R. Father in God, JEREMY, Lord Bishop of Down, etc. and
Vicechancellour of that UNIVERSITY.

Ad majorem Dei gloriam. LONDON: Printed for R. Royston Bookseller to the Kings
most Excellent Majesty, 1662.

TO THE READER.
PEACE is so great a Blessing, and Disputations and Questions in Religion are
so little friends to Peace, that I have thought no man's time can be better
spent then in propositions and promotions of Peace, and consequently in finding
expedients, and putting periods to all contentious Learning. I have already in
a discourse before the Right Honorable the Lords and Commons assembled in this
Parliament proved that Obedience is the best medium of Peace and true Religion;
and Laws are the only common term and certain rule and measure of it. Vocata
ad concionem multitudine, quae coalescere in populum Unius corporis nulla re
praeterquam legibus poterat, said Livy. Obedience to Man is the external
instrument; and the best in the World. To which I now add, that Obedience to
God is the best internal instrument; and I have proved it in this discourse.
Peace and Holiness are twin-Sisters; after which because every man is bound to
follow, and he that does not shall never see God, I concluded that the office
of a Bishop is in nothing so signally to be exhibited as in declaring by what
means these great duties and blessings are to be acquired. This way I have here
described is an old way; for it was Christ's way, and therefore it is truth and
life: but it has been so little regarded and so seldom taught, that when I
first spoke my thoughts of it in the following words before the Little, but
Excellent, University of Dublin, they consented to it so perfectly, and so
piously entertained it, that they were pleased with some earnestness to desire
me to publish it to the World, and to consigne it to them as a perpetual
memorial of their duty, and of my regards to them, and care over them in my
Station. I was very desirous to serve and please them in all their worthy
desires, but had found so much reason to distrust my own abilities, that I
could not resolve to do what I fain would have done; till by a Second
communication of those thoughts, though in differing words, I had published it
also to my Clergy at the Metropolitical Visitation of the most Reverend and
Learned Lord Primate of Armagh in my own Diocese. But when I found that they
also thought it very reasonable and pious, and joined in the desire of making
it public, I consented perfectly, and now only pray to God it may do that Work
which I intended. I have often thought of those excellent words of Mr. Hooker
in his very learned discourse of Justification; [ Such is the untoward
constitution of our Nature, that we do neither so perfectly understand the way
and knowledge of the Lord, nor so steadfastly embrace it when it is understood,
nor so graciously utter it when it is embraced, nor so peaceably maintain it
when it is uttered, but that the best of us are overtaken sometime through
blindness, sometime through hastiness, sometime through impatience, sometime
through other passions of the mind, whereunto (God knows) we are too subject]
That I find by true experience, the best way of Learning and Peace is that
which cures all these evils, as far as in this World they are curable; and that
is the ways of Holiness, which are therefore the best and only way of Truth.
In Disputations there is no end, and but very little advantage; but the way of
godliness has in it no Error, and no Doubtfulness. By this therefore I hoped
best to apply the Counsel of the Wise man: Ecclus. 5.10. Vulg. edit. Lat.
Stand thou fast in thy sure Understanding, in the way and knowledge of the
Lord, and have but one manner of word, and follow the word of peace and
righteousness. I have reason to be confident that they who desired me to
publish this discourse will make use of it, and find benefit by it: and if any
others do so too, both they and I shall still more and more give God all
thanks, and praise, and glory.

Sermons newly Printed, and are sold by R. Royston.
A Sermon preached at the opening of the Parliament in Ireland, May 8. 1661.
Before the Right Honorable the Lords Justices, and the Lords Spiritual and
Temporal and the Commons.

A Sermon preached at the Consecration of two Archbishops and ten Bishops, in
the Cathedral Church of St. Patrick in Dublin, January 27. 1660. Both by Jeremy
Tailor D. D. Lord Bishop of Down and Connor.

A Sermon preached at the Consecration of Herbert Lord Bishop of Hereford, by
Jasper Main D. D. one of His Majesty's Chaplains in Ordinary.

The grand debate resumed in the point of Prayer, being an Answer to the
Presbyterian papers presented to the most Reverend the Lord Bishops at the
Savoy, upon the subject by a Member of the Convocation.

7 JOHN 17. If any man will do his will, he shall know of the Doctrine, whether
it be of God, or whether I speak of my self.


THe Ancients in their Mythological Learning tell us, that when Jupiter espied
the men of the World striving for Truth, and pulling her in pieces to secure
her to themselves, he sent Mercury down amongst them, and he with his usual
Arts dressed Error up in the Imagery of Truth, and thrust her into the crowd,
and so left them to contend still: and though then, by Contention men were sure
to get but little Truth, yet they were as earnest as ever, and lost Peace too,
in their Importune Contentions for the very Image of Truth. And this indeed is
no wonder: but when Truth and Peace are brought into the world together, and
bound up in the same bundle of life; when we are taught a Religion by the
Prince of Peace, who is the Truth it self, to see men Contending for this Truth
to the breach of that Peace; and when men fall out, to see that they should
make Christianity their theme, that is one of the greatest wonders in the
World. For Christianity is (...), a soft and gentle Institution; (...), it was
brought into the World to soften the asperities of humane nature, and to cure
the Barbarities of evil men, and the Contentions of the passionate. The Eagle
seeing her breast wounded, and espying the Arrow that hurt her to be feathered,
cried out, (...), the feathered Nation is destroyed by their own feathers; That
is, a Christian fighting and wrangling wi^h a Christian; and indeed that is very
sad: but wrangling about Peace too; that Peace it self should be the argument
of a War, that is unnatural; and if it were not that there are many who are
homines multae religionis, nullius pene pietatis, Men of much Religion and
little Godliness, it would not be that there should be so many Quarrels in and
concerning that Religion which is wholly made up of Truth and Peace, and was
sent amongst us to reconcile the hearts of men when they were tempted to
uncharitableness by any other unhappy argument. Disputation cures no vice, but
kindles a great many, and makes Passion evaporate into sin: and though men
esteem it Learning, ye^ it is the most useless Learning in the world. When
Eudamidas the Son of Archidamas heard old Xenocrates disputing about Wisdom, he
asked very soberly, If the old Man be yet disputing and enquiring concerning
Wisdom, what time will he have to make use of it? Christianity is all for
Practice, and so much time as is spent in quarrels about it is a diminution to
its Interest: men inquire so much what it is, that they have but little time
left to be Christians. I remember a saying of Erasmus, that when he first read
the New Testament with fear and a good mind, with a purpose to understand it
and obey it, he found it very useful and very pleasant: but when afterward he
fell on reading the vast differences of Commentaries, then he understood it
less then he did before, then he began not to understand it. For indeed the
Truths of God are best dressed in the plain Culture and simplicity of the
Spirit; but the Truths that men commonly teach are like the reflections of a
Multiplying-glasse: for one piece of good money you shall have forty that are
fantastical; and it is forty to one if your finger hit upon the right. Men
have wearied themselves in the dark, having been amused with false fires: and
instead of going home, have wandered all night (...), in untroden, unsafe,
safe, uneasy ways; but have not found out what their Soul desires. But
therefore since we are so miserable, and are in error, and have wandered very
far, we must do as wandering Travelers use to do, go back just to that place
from whence they wandered, and begin upon a new Account. Let us go to the Truth
it self, to Christ, and he will tell us an easy way of ending all our
Quarrels. For we shall find Christianity to be the easiest and the hardest
thing in the World: it is like a secret in Arithmetic, infinitely hard till it
be found out by a right operation, and then it is so plain, we wonder we did
not understand it earlier.

Christ's way of finding out of truth is by doing the will of God. We will try
that by and by, if possibly we may find that easy and certain: in the mean
time let us consider what ways men have propounded to find out Truth, and upon
the foundation of that to establish Peace in Christendom.

1. That there is but one true way is agreed upon; and therefore almost every
Church of one denomination that lives under Government propounds to you a
Systeme or collective Body of Articles, and tells you, that is the true
Religion, and they are the Church, and the peculiar people of God: like Brutus
and Cassius, of whom one says, Ubicunque ipsi essent, praetexebant esse
rempublicam, they supposed themselves were the Commonwealth; and these are the
Church, and out of this Church they will hardly allow salvation. But of this
there can be no end. For divide the Church into Twenty parts, and in what part
soever your lot falls, you and your party are Damned by the other Nineteen; and
men on all hands almost keep their own Proselytes by affrighting them with the
fearful Sermons of Damnation: but in the mean time here is no security to them
that are not able to judge for themselves, and no Peace for them that are.

2. Others cast about to cure this evil, and conclude that it must be done by
submission to an Infallible Guide; this must do it or nothing: and this is the
way of the Church of Rome. Follow but the Pope and his Clergy, and you are
safe, at least as safe as their warrants can make you. Indeed this were a very
good way, if it were a way at all; but it is none; for this can never end our
Controversies: not only because the greatest Controversies are about this
Infallible Guide; but also because, 1. We cannot find that there is upon Earth
any such Guide at all. 2. We do not find it necessary that there should. 3. We
find that they who pretend to be this Infallible Guide are themselves
infinitely deceived. 4. That they do not believe themselves to be Infallible
whatever they say to us; because they do not put an end to all their own
Questions that trouble them. 5. Because they have no peace but what is
constrained by force and Government. 6. And lastly, because if there were such
a Guide, we should fail of Truth by many other causes: for it may be that Guide
would not do his duty; or we are fallible followers of this infallible Leader;
or we should not understand his meaning at all times, or we should be perverse
at some times, or something as bad: because we all confess that God is an
Infallible Guide, and that some way or other he does teach us sufficiently, and
yet it does come to pass by our faults that we are as far to seek for Peace
and Truth as ever.

3. Some very wise men finding this to fail, have undertaken to reconcile the
differences of Christendom by a way of moderation. Thus they have projected to
reconcile the Papists and the Lutherans, the Lutherans and the Calvinists, the
Remonstrants and Contra-remonstrants, and project that each side should abate
of their asperities, and pare away something of their proportions, and join in
Common terms and phrases of Accommodation, each of them sparing something, and
promising they shall have a great deal of peace for the exchange of a little of
their opinion. This was the way of Cassander, Modrevius, Andreas Frisius,
Erasmus, Spalato, Grotius, and indeed of Charles the Fifth in part, but
something more heartily of Ferdinand the Second. This device produced the
conferences at Poissy, at Montpellier, at Ratisbon, at the Hague, at many
places more: and what was the event of these? Their parties when their
Delegates returned, either disclaimed their Moderation, or their respective
Princes had some other ends to serve, or they permitted the Meetings upon
uncertain hopes, and a trial if any good might come; or it may be they were
both in the wrong, and their mutual abatement was nothing but a mutual
quitting of what they could not get, and the shaking hands of false friends; or
it may be it was all of it nothing but Hypocrisy and Arts of Craftiness, and,
like Lucian's man, every one could be a Man and a Pestle when he pleased. And
the Council of Trent, though under another cover, made use of the artifice, but
made the secret manifest and common: for at this day the Jesuits in the
Questions de auxiliis Divinae gratiae have prevailed with the Dominicans to use
their expressions, and yet they think they still keep the sentence of their own
Order. From hence can succeed nothing but folly and a fantastic peace. This
is but the skinning of an old sore, it will break out upon all occasions.

4. Others, who understand things beyond the common rate, observing that many
of our Controversies and peevish wranglings are kept up by the ill stating of
the Question, endeavor to declare things wisely, and make the matter
intelligible, and the words clear; hoping by this means to cut off all
disputes. Indeed this is a very good way, so far as it can go; and would
prevail very much, if all men were wise, and would consent to those stateings,
and would not fall out upon the main enquiry when it were well stated: but we
find by a sad experience that few Questions are well stated; and when they are,
they are not consented to; and when they are agreed on by both sides that they
are well stated, it is nothing else but a drawing up the Armies in Battalia
with great skill and discipline; the next thing they do is, they thrust their
Swords into one another sides.

5. What remedy after all this? Some other good men have propounded one way
yet: but that is a way of Peace rather then Truth; and that is, that all
Opinions should be tolerated and none persecuted; and then all the World will
be at peace. Indeed this relies upon a great reasonableness: not only because
Opinions cannot be forced; but because if men receive no hurt, it is to be
hoped they will do none. But we find that this alone will not do it. For
besides that all men are not so just as not to do any Injury (for some men
begin the evil) besides this (I say) there are very many men amongst us who are
not content that you permit them; for they will not permit you, but rule over
your faith, and say that their way is not only true, but necessary; and
therefore the Truth of God is at stake, and all Indifference and moderation is
carnal Wisdom and want of Zeal for God: nay more then so, they preach for
Toleration when themselves are under the rod, who when they got the rod into
their own hands thought Toleration it self to be Intolerable. Thus do the
Papists, and thus the Calvinists: and for their Cruelty they pretend Charity.
They will indeed force you to come in, but it is in true Zeal for your Soul:
and if they do you violence, it is no more then if they pull your Arm out of
joint, when to save you from drowning they draw you out of a River; and if you
complain, plain, it is no more to be regarded then the outcries of Children
against their Rulers, or sick men against Physicians. But as to the thing it
self, the truth is, it is better in Contemplation then in Practice: for reckon
all that is got by it when you come to handle it, and it can never satisfy for
the infinite disorders happening in the Government; the scandal to Religion,
the secret dangers to public Societies, the growth of Heresy, the nursing up
of parties to a grandeur so considerable as to be able in their own time to
change the Laws and the Government. So that if the Question be whether mere
Opinions are to be persecuted, it is certainly true, they ought not. But if it
be considered how by Opinions men rifle the affairs of Kingdoms, it is also as
certain, they ought not to be made public and permitted. And what is now to be
done? must Truth be for ever in the dark, and the World for ever be divided,
and Societies disturbed, and Governments weakened, and our Spirits debauched
with Error and the uncertain Opinions and the Pedantery of talking men?
Certainly there is a way to cure all this evil; and the wise Governor of all
the World has not been wanting in so necessary a matter as to lead us into all
Truth. But the way has not yet been hit upon, and yet I have told you all the
ways of Man and his Imaginations in order to Truth and Peace: and you see
these will not do; we can find no rest for the soles of our feet amidst all the
waters of Contention and disputations, and little artifices of divided Schools.
Every man is a liar, and his understanding is weak, and his Propositions
uncertain, and his Opinions trifling, and his Contrivances imperfect: and
neither Truth nor Peace does come from man. I know I am in an Auditory of
inquisitive persons, whose business is to study for Truth, that they may find
it for themselves, and teach it unto others: I am in a School of Prophets and
Prophets Sons, who all ask Pilate's Question, What is Truth? You look for it in
your Books, and you tug hard for it in your Disputations, and you derive it
from the Cisterns of the Fathers, and you enquire after the old ways, and
sometimes are taken with new appearances, and you rejoice in false lights, or
are delighted with little umbrages and peep of Day. But where is there a man,
or a Society of men, that can be at rest in his enquiry, and is sure he
understands all the truths of God? where is there a man but the more he studies
and enquires, still he discovers nothing so clearly as his own Ignorance? This
is a demonstration that we are not in the right way, that we do not inquire
wisely, that our Method is not artificial. If men did fall upon the right way,
it were impossible so many learned men should be engaged in contrary parties
and opinions. We have examined all ways but one, all but God's way: Let us
(having missed in all the other) try this: let us go to God for Truth; for
Truth comes from God only, and his ways are plain, and his sayings are true,
and his promises Yea and Amen: and if we miss the Truth, it is because we will
not find it: for certain it is, that all that Truth which God has made
necessary, he has also made legible and plain, and if we will open our eyes,
we shall see the Sun, and if we will walk in the light, we shall rejoice in the
light: only let us withdraw the Curtains, let us remove the impediments and the
sin that does so easily beset us; that's Gods way. Every man must in his station
do that portion of duty which God requires of him, and then he shall be taught
of God all that is fit for him to learn: there is no other way for him but
this. The fear of the Lord is the beginning of wisdom, Psalm. 111. ver. 10.
and a good understanding have all they that do thereafter. And so said David
of himself, Psalm. 119.
I have more understanding then my Teachers; because I keep thy Commandments.
And this is the only way which Christ has taught us: if you ask, What is
truth? you must not do as Pilate did, ask the Question, and then go away from
him that only can give you an answer; for as God is the author of Truth, so he
is the teacher of it; and the way to learn it is this of my Text: For so says
our blessed Lord, If any man will do his will, he shall know of the Doctrine,
whether it be of God or no.

My Text is simple as Truth it self, but greatly Comprehensive, and contains a
truth that alone will enable you to understand all Mysteries, and to expound
all Prophecies, and to interpret all Scriptures, and to search into all
Secrets, all (I mean) which concern our happiness and our duty: and it being
an affirmative hypotheticall, is plainly to be resolved into this Proposition,
The way to judge of Religion is by doing of our duty, and Theology is rather a
Divine life then a Divine knowledge. In Heaven indeed we shall first see, and
then love; but here on Earth we must first love, and love will open our eyes as
well as our hearts, and we shall then see and perceive and understand.

In the handling of which Proposition I shall first represent to you that the
certain causes of our Errors are nothing but direct sins, nothing makes us
Fools and Ignorants but living vicious lives; and then I shall proceed to the
direct demonstration of the Article in question, that Holiness is the only way
of truth and understanding.

1. No man understands the Word of God as it ought to be understood, unless he
lays aside all affections to Sin: of which because we have taken very little
care, the product has been that we have had very little wisdom, and very
little knowledge in the ways of God. (...), said Aristotle, Wickedness does
corrupt a man's reasoning, it gives him false principles and evil measures of
things: the sweet Wine that Ulysses gave to the Cyclops put his eye out; and a
man that has contracted evil affections, and made a League with sin, sees only
by those measures. A Covetous man understands nothing to be good that is not
profitable; and a Voluptuous man likes your reasoning well enough if you
discourse of Bonum jucundum, the pleasures of the sense, the ravishments of
lust, the noises and inadvertencies, the mirth and songs of merry Company. But
if you talk to him of the melancholy Lectures of the Cross, the content of
Resignation, the peace of Meekness, and the Joys of the holy Ghost, and of
rest in God; after your long discourse and his great silence he cries out,
What Is the matter? He knows not what you mean. Either you must fit his humor,
or change your discourse.

I remember that Arianus tells of a Gentleman that was banished from Rome, and
in his sorrow visited the Philosopher, and he heard him talk wisely, and
believed him, and promised him to leave all the thoughts of Rome and splendours
of the Court, and retire to the course of a severe Philosophy: but before the
good man's Lectures were done, there came (...), letters from Caesar to recall
him home, to give him pardon, and promise him great Employment. He presently
grew weary of the good man's Sermon, and wished he would make an end, thought
his discourse was dull and flat; for his head and heart were full of another
story and new principles; and by these measures he could hear only and he
could understand.

Every man understands by his Affections more then by his Reason: and when the
Wolf in the Fable went to School to learn to spell, whatever letters were told
him, he could never make any thing of them but Agnus; he thought of nothing but
his belly: and if a man be very hungry, you must give him meat before you give
him counsel. A man's mind must be like your proposition before it can be
entertained: for whatever you put into a man it will smell of the Vessel: it
is a man's mind that gives the emphasis, and makes your argument to prevail.

And upon this account it is that there are so many false Doctrines in the only
Article of Repentance. Men know they must repent, but the definition of
Repentance they take from the convenience of their own affairs: what they will
not part with, that is not necessary to be parted with, and they will repent,
but not restore: they will say nollem factum, they wish they had never done it;
but since it is done, you must give them leave to rejoice in their purchase:
they will ask forgiveness of God; but they sooner forgive themselves, and
suppose that God is of their mind. If you tie them to hard terms, your
Doctrine is not to be understood, or it is but one Doctors opinion, and
therefore they will fairly take their leave, and get them another Teacher.

What makes these evil, these dangerous and desperate Doctrines? not the
obscurity of the thing, but the cloud upon the heart; for say you what you
will, He that hears must be the expounder, and we can never suppose but a man
will give sentence in behalf of what he passionately loves. And so it comes to
pass that, as Rabbi Moses observed that God for the greatest Sin imposed the
least Oblation, as a she-Goat for the sin of Idolatry; for a woman accused of
Adultery, a Barly-cake: so do most men; they think to expiate the worst of
their sins with a trifling, with a pretended, little, insignificant repentance.
God indeed did so, that the cheapnesse of the oblation might teach them to hope
for pardon; not from the Ceremony, but from a severe internal repentance. But
men take any argument to lessen their repentance, that they may not lessen
their pleasures or their estates, and that Repentance may be nothing but a
word, and Mortification signify nothing against their pleasures, but be a term
of Art only, fitted for the Schools or for the Pulpit, but nothing relative to
practice, or the extermination of their sin. So that it is no wonder we
understand so little of Religion: it is because we are in love with that which
destroys it; and as a man does not care to hear what does not please him, so
neither does he believe it; he cannot, he will not understand it.

And the same is the Case in the matter of Pride; the Church has extremely
suffered by it in many ages. Arius missed a Bishopric, and therefore turned
Heretic; (...), says the story, he disturbed and shaked the Church; for he
did not understand this Truth [ That the peace of the Church was better then
the satisfaction of his person, or the promoting his foolish Opinion.] And do
not we see and feel that at this very day the Pride of men makes it seem
impossible for many persons to obey their Superiors? and they do not see what
they can read every day, that it is a sin to speak evil of Dignities.

A man would think it a very easy thing to understand the 13. Chapter to the
Romans, Whosoever resists the power, resists the Ordinance of God: and yet
we know a generation of men to whom these words were so obscure, that they
thought it lawful to fight against their King. A man would think it easy to
believe that those who were in the gainsaying of Corah, who rose up against
the high Priest, were in a very sad condition: and yet there are too many
amongst us who are in the gainsaying of Corah, and think they do very well;
that they are the Godly party, and the good people of God. Why? what is the
matter? In the world there can be nothing plainer then these words, Let every
soul the subject to the higher powers, and that you need not make a scruple who
are these higher powers, it is as plainly said, there is no power but of God;
all that are set over you by the Laws of your Nation, these are over you in the
Lord: and yet men will not understand these plain things; they deny to do
their notorious duty, and yet believe they are in the right, and if they
sometimes obey for wrath, they oftener disobey for Conscience sake. Where is the
fault? The words are plain, the duty is certain, the Book lies open; but, alas!
it is Sealed within, that is, men have eyes and will not see, ears and will
not hear. But the wonder is the less; for we know when God said to Jonas,
do thou well to be angry? he answered God to his face, I do well to be angry
even unto the death. Let God declare his mind never so plainly, if men will not
lay aside the evil principle that is within, their open love to their secret
sin, they may kill an Apostle, and yet be so ignorant as to think they do God
good service; they may disturb Kingdoms, and break the peace of a well-ordered
Church, and rise up against their Fathers, and be cruel to their Brethren, and
stir up the people to Sedition; and all this with a cold stomach and a hot
liver, with a hard heart and a tender Conscience, with humble carriage and a
proud spirit. For thus men hate Repentance, because they scorn to confess an
Error; they will not return to Peace and Truth, because they fear to lose the
good opinion of the people whom themselves have couzened; they are afraid to be
good, lest they should confess they have formerly done amiss: and he that
observes how much evil is done, and how many Heresies are risen, and how much
obstinacy and unreasonable perseverance in folly dwells in the World upon the
stock of Pride, may easily conclude that no learning is sufficient to make a
proud man understand the truth of God, unless he first learn to be humble. But
Obedite and intelligetis (says the Prophet) obey and be humble, leave the
foolish affections of sin, and then ye shall understand. That Is the First
particular: All remaining affections to sin hinder the learning and
understanding of the things of God.

2. He that means to understand the will of God and the truth of Religion must
lay aside all inordinate affections to the world. 2 Cor. 3.14. S. Paul
complained that there was at that day a veil upon the heart of the Jews in the
reading of the Old Testament: they looked for a Temporal Prince to be their
Messiah, and their affections and hopes dwelt in secular advantages; and so
long as that veil was there, they could not see, and they would not accept the
poor despised JESUS.

For the things of the world, besides that they entangle one another, and make
much business, and spend much time, they also take up the attentions of a man's
mind, and spend his faculties, and make them trifling and secular with the very
handling and conversation. And therefore the Pythagoreans taught their
Disciples (...), a separation from the things of the body, if they would purely
find out truth and the excellencies of wisdom. Had not he lost his labor that
would have discoursed wisely to Apicius, and told him of the books of Fate and
the secrets of the other World, the abstractions of the Soul and its brisker
Immortality, that Saints and Angels eat not, and that the Spirit of a man
lives for ever upon wisdom and holiness and contemplation? The fat Glutton
would have stared a while upon the Preacher, and then have fallen asleep. But
if you had discoursed well and knowingly of a Lamprey, a large Mullet, or a
Boar, animal propter Convivia natum, and have sent him a Cook from Asia to
make new Sawces, he would have attended carefully, and taken in your discourses
greedily. And so it is in the Questions and secrets of Christianity: which made
St. Paul, when he intended to convert Felix, discourse first with him about
Temperance, Righteousness and Judgment to come. He began in the right point;
he knew it was to no purpose to preach Jesus Christ crucified to an intemperate
person, to an Usurper of other men's rights, to one whose soul dwelt in the
World, and cared not for the sentence of the last day. The Philosophers began
their Wisdom with the meditation of death, and St. Paul his with a discourse of
the day of Judgment: to take the heart off from this world and the amabilities
of it, which dishonor and baffle the understanding, and made Solomon himself
become a child and fooled into Idolatry, by the prettiness of a talking woman.
Men now-a-dayes love not a Religion that will cost them dear. If your Doctrine
calls upon men to part with any considerable part of their estates, you must
pardon them if they cannot believe you; they understand it not. I shall give
you one great instance of it.

When we consider the infinite unreasonableness that is in the Popish Religion,
how against Common sense their Doctrine of Transubstantiation is, how against
the common Experience of humane nature is the Doctrine of the Popes
Infallibility, how against Scripture is the Doctrine of Indulgences and
Purgatory; we may well think it a wonder that no more men are persuaded to
leave such unlearned follies. But then on the other side, the wonder will
cease, if we mark how many temporal ends are served by these Doctrines. If you
destroy the Doctrine of Purgatory and Indulgences you take away the Priests
Income, and make the Sea Apostolic to be poor; if you deny the Popes
Infallibility, you will despise his Authority, and examine his Propositions,
and discover his Failings, and put him to answer hard Arguments, and lessen his
Power: and indeed, when we run through all the Propositions of difference
between them and us, and see that in every one of them they serve an end of
money or of power; it will be very visible that the way to confute them is not
by learned disputations, (for we see they have been too long without effect,
and without prosperity) the men must be cured of their affections to the World,
ut nudi nudum sequantur crucifixum, that with naked and divested affections
they might follow the naked Crucified Jesus, and then they would soon learn
the truths of God, which till then will be impossible to be apprehended. (...).
Men (as St. Basil says) when they expound Scripture, always bring in
something of themselves: but till there be (as one said) (...), a rising out
from their own seats; until they go out from their dark dungeons, they can
never see the light of Heaven. And how many men are there amongst us who are
therefore enemies to the Religion, because it seems to be against their profit?
The argument of Demetrius is unanswerable; by this craft they get their
livings: leave them in their Livings, and they will let your Religion alone; if
not, they think they have reason to speak against it. When men's souls are
possessed with the World, their souls cannot be invested with holy Truths.
(...), as St. Isidor said: the Soul must be informed, insoul'd, or animated
with the propositions that you put in, or you shall never do any good, or get
Disciples to Christ. Now because a man cannot serve two Masters; because he
cannot vigorously attend two objects; because there can be but one soul in any
living Creature; if the World have got possession, talk no more of your
Questions, shut your Bibles, and read no more of the words of God to them, for
they cannot tell of the Doctrine, whether it be of God, or of the World. That
is the Second particular: Worldly affections hinder true understandings in
Religion.

3. No man, how learned soever, can understand the Word of God, or be at peace
in the Questions of Religion, unless he be a Master over his Passions. Tu
quoque si vis Lumine claro
Cernere verum, Gaudia pelle,
Pelle Timorem: Nubila men's est
Vinctaque fraenis Haec ubi regnant.
said the wise Boethius. A man must first learn himself before he can learn
God. Tua te fallit Imago: nothing deceives a man so soon as a man's self; when a
man is (that I may use Plato's expression) (...), mingled with his nature and
his Congeniall infirmities of anger and desire, he can never have any thing but
(...), a knowledge partly moral and partly natural: his whole life is but
Imagination; his knowledge is Inclination and opinion; he judges of Heavenly
things by the measures of his fears and his desires, and his Reason is half of
it sense, and determinable by the principles of sense. (...), then a man learns
well when he is a Philosopher in his Passions. Nazianz. ad. Philagrium.
Passionate men are to be taught the first elements of Religion: and let men
pretend to as much learning as they please, they must begin again at Christ's
Cross; they must learn true mortification and crucifixion of their anger and
desires, before they can be good Scholars in Christ's School, or be admitted
into the more secret enquiries of Religion, or profit in spiritual
understanding. It was an excellent Proverb of the Jews, In passionibus Spiritus
Sanctus non habitat, the Holy Ghost never dwells in the house of Passion. Truth
enters into the heart of Man when it is empty and clean and still; but when
the mind is shaken with Passion as with a storm, you can never hear the voice
of the Charmer, though he charm very wisely: and you will very hardly sheath a
sword when it is held by a loose and a paralytic Arm. He that means to learn
the secrets of Gods wisdom must be, as Plato says, (...), his soul must be
Consubstantiated with Reason, not invested with Passion: to him that is
otherwise, things are but in the dark, his notion is obscure and his sight
troubled; and therefore though we often meet with passionate Fools, yet we
seldom or never hear of a very passionate wise man.

I have now done with the First part of my undertaking, and proved to you that
our evil life is the cause of our Controversies and Ignorances in the Religion
of the things of God. You see what hinders us from becoming good Divines. But
all this while we are but in the preparation to the Mysteries of Godliness.
When we have thrown off all affections to sin; when we have stripped our selves
from all fond adherencies to the things of the world, and have broken the
chains and dominion of our Passions; then we may say with David, Ecce paratum
est Cormeum, Deus; My heart is ready, O God, my heart is ready: then we may
say, Speak, Lord, for thy servant hears: but we are not yet instructed. It
remains therefore that we enquire what is that immediate principle or means
by which we shall certainly and infallibly be led into all truth, and be taught
the mind of God, and understand all his secrets: and this is worth our
knowledge. I cannot say that this will end your labors, and put a period to
your studies, and make your learning easy: it may possibly increase your
labor, but it will make it profitable; it will not end your Studies, but it
will direct them; it will not make humane Learning easy, but will make it wise
unto salvation, and conduct it into true notices and ways of wisdom.

I am now to describe to you the right way of knowledge. Qui facit voluntatem
Patris mei (says Christ) that is the way: do Gods will, and you shall
understand Gods Word. And it was an excellent saying of St. Peter, Add to your
faith Virtue, etc. 2 Pet. 1.
If these things be in you and abound, ye shall not be unfruitful in the
knowledge of our Lord Jesus Christ. For in this case it is not enough that all
our hindrances of knowledge are removed; for that is but the opening of the
covering of the Book of God: but when it is opened, it is written with a hand
that every eye cannot read. Though the windows of the East be open, yet every
eye cannot behold the glories of the Sun. (...), says Plotinus; the eye that
is not made Solar cannot see the Sun; the eye must be fitted to the splendour:
and is not the wit of the man, but the spirit of the man; not so much his head
as his heart, that learnes the Divine Philosophy.

1. Now in this inquiry I must take one thing for a praecognitum, that every
good man is (...), he is taught of God: and indeed unless he teach us, we shall
make but ill Scholars our selves, and worse guides to others. Nemo potest Deum
scire, nisi a Deo doceatur, said St. Jrenaeus, (lib. 6. c. 14.) If God teaches
us, then all is well: but if we do not learn wisdom at his feet, from whence
should we have it? it can come from no other spring. And therefore it naturally
follows, that by how much nearer we are to God, by so much better we are like
to be instructed.

But this being supposed, as being most evident, we can easily proceed by
wonderful degrees and steps of progression in the Economy of this Divine
Philosophy. For,

2. There is in every righteous man a new vital principle: the Spirit of Grace
is the spirit of Wisdom, and teaches us by secret inspirations, by proper
arguments, by actual persuasions, by personal applications, by effects and
energies: and as the soul of a man is the cause of all his vital operations,
so is the Spirit of God the life of that life, and the cause of all actions and
productions Spiritual. And the consequence of this is what St. John tells us
of; Ye have received the Unction from above: 1 John 2.27.
and that anointing teaches you all things. All things of some one kind: that
is, certainly, all things that pertain to life and Godliness; all that by
which a man is wise and happy. We see this by common experience. Unless the
soul have a new life put into it, unless there be a vital principle within,
unless the spirit of life be the Informer of the spirit of the man, the Word
of God will be as dead in the operation as the body in its powers and
possibilities. Sol and Homo generant hominem, says our Philosophy. A Man alone
does not beget a man; but a Man and the Sun: for without the influence of the
Celestial bodies all natural actions are ineffective: and so it is in the
operations of the Soul.

Which principle diverse Fanatics, both amongst us and in the Church of Rome,
misunderstanding, look for new Revelations, and expect to be conducted by
ecstasy, and will not pray but in a transfiguration, and live upon raptures and
extravagant expectations, and separate themselves from the conversation of men
by affectations, by new measures and singularities, and destroy order and
despise Government, and live upon illiterate phantasmes and ignorant
discourses. These men do (...), they belly the holy Ghost: For the Spirit of God
makes men wise; it is an evil Spirit that makes them Fools. The Spirit of God
makes us Wise unto Salvation, it does not spend its holy influences in
disguises and convulsions of the understanding. Gods spirit does not destroy
Reason, but heightens it: he never disorders the beauties of Government, but is
a God of Order; it is the spirit of Humility, and teaches no Pride: he is to be
found in Churches and Pulpits, upon Altars and in the Doctors Chaires; not in
Conventicles and mutinous corners of a house: he goes in company with his own
Ordinances, and makes progressions by the measures of life: his infusions are
just as our acquisitions, and his Graces pursue the methods of nature: that
which was imperfect he leads on to perfection, and that which was weak he
makes strong: he opens the heart, not to receive murmurs, or to attend to
secret whispers, but to hear the Word of God; and then he opens the heart, and
creates a new one; and without this new creation, this new principle of life,
we may hear the Word of God, but we can never understand it; we hear the
sound, but are never the better; unless there be in our hearts a secret
conviction by the spirit of God, the Gospel it self is a dead Letter, and
works not in us the light and righteousness of God.

Do not we see this by a daily experience? Even those things which a good man
and an evil man know, they do not know them both alike. A wicked man does know
that good is lovely, and sin is of an evil and destructive nature; and when he
is reproved, he is convinced; and when he is observed, he is ashamed; and when
he has done, he is unsatisfied; and when he pursues his sin, he does it in the
dark. Tell him he shall dye, and he sighs deeply, but he knows it as well as
you: proceed, and say that after death comes Judgment, and the poor man
believes and trembles. He knows that God is angry with him; and if you tell him
that for ought he knows he may be in Hell to morrow, he knows that it is an
intolerable truth, but it it also undeniable. And yet after all this he runs to
commit his sin with as certain an event and resolution, as if he knew no
argument against it. These notices of things terrible and true pass through
his understanding as an Eagle through the Air: as long as her flight lasted,
the Air was shaken; but there remains no path behind her.

Now since at the same time we see other persons, not so learned it may be, not
so much versed in Scriptures, yet they say a thing is good and lay hold of it,
they believe glorious things of Heaven, and they live accordingly, as men that
believe themselves; half a word is enough to make them understand; a nod is a
sufficient reproof; the Crowing of a Cock, the singing of a Lark, the dawning
of the day, and the washing their hands are to them competent memorialls of
Religion and warnings of their duty: What is the reason of this difference?
They both read the Scriptures, they read and hear the same Sermons, they have
capable understandings, they both believe what they hear and what they read,
and yet the event is vastly different. The reason is that which I am now
speaking of: the one understands by one Principle, the other by another; the
one understands by Nature, and the other by Grace; the one by humane Learning,
and the other by Divine; the one reads the Scriptures without, and the other
within; the one understands as a son of man, the other as a son of God; the one
perceives by the proportions of the World, and the other by the measures of the
Spirit; the one understands by Reason, and the other by Love; and therefore he
does not only understand the Sermons of the Spirit, and perceives their
meaning, but he pierces deeper, and knows the meaning of that meaning, that is,
the secret of the Spirit, that which is spiritually discerned, that which gives
life to the Proposition, and activity to the Soul.

And the reason is, because he has a Divine principle within him, and a new
understanding: that is plainly, he has Love, and that is more then Knowledge;
as was rarely well observed by St. Paul, Knowledge puffethup, but Charity
edifieth; that is, Charity makes the best Scholars. No Sermons can edify you,
no Scriptures can build you up a holy building to God, unless the love of God,
be in your hearts; and purify your souls from all filthiness of the Flesh and
spirit.

But so it is in the regions of Stars, where a vast body of fire is so divided
by excentric motions, that it looks as if Nature had parted them into Orbs and
round shells of plain and purest materials: but where the cause is simple and
the matter without variety, the motions must be uniforme; and in Heaven we
should either espy no motion, or no variety. But God, who designed the Heavens
to be the causes of all changes and motions here below, has placed his Angels
in their houses of light, and given to every one of his appointed officers a
portion of the fiery matter to circumagitate and roll; and now the wonder
ceases: for if it be enquired why this part of the fire runs Eastward and the
other to the South, they being both indifferent to either, it is because an
Angel of God sits in the Center, and makes the same matter turn, not by the
bent of its own mobility and inclination, but in order to the needs of Man and
the great purposes of God; and so it is in the understandings of men: When they
all receive the same notions, and are taught by the same Master, and give full
consent to all the propositions, and can of themselves have nothing to
distinguish them in the events, it is because God has sent his Divine spirit,
and kindles a new fire, and creates a braver capacity, and applies the actives
to the passives, and blesses their operation. For there is in the heart of man
such a dead sea, and an indisposition to holy flames, like as in the cold
Rivers in the North, so as the fires will not burn them, and the Sun it self
will never warm them, till Gods holy Spirit does from the Temple of the new
Jerusalem bring a holy flame, and make it shine and burn.

The Natural man (says the holy Apostle) cannot perceive the things of the
Spirit: 1 Cor. 2.14.
they are foolishness unto him; for they are spiritually discerned. For he
that discourses of things by the measures of sense, thinks nothing good but
that which is delicious to the palate, or pleases the brutish part of man; and
therefore while he estimates the secrets of Religion by such measures, they
must needs seem as insipid as Cork, or the uncondited Mushrom; for they have
nothing at all of that in their constitution. A voluptuous person is like the
Dogs of Sicily, so filled with the deliciousness of Plants that grow in every
furrow and hedge, that they can never keep the sent of their game. (...), said
St. Chrysostom: the fire and water can never mingle; so neither can sensuality
and the watchfulness and wise discerning of the spirit. Pilato interroganti de
veritate, Christus non respondit: When the wicked Governor asked of Christ
concerning truth, Christ gave him no answer. He was not fit to hear it.

He therefore who so understands the Words of God, that he not only believes,
but loves the proposition; he who consents with all his heart, and being
convinced of the truth does also apprehend the necessity, and obeys the
precept, and delights in the discovery, and lays his hand upon his heart, and
reduces the notices of things to the practice of duty; he who dares trust his
proposition, and drives it on to the utmost most issue, resolving to go after
it whithersoever it can invite him; this Man walks in the spirit: at least thus
far he is gone toward it, his Understanding is brought in obsequium Christi,
into the obedience of Christ. This is a loving God with all our mind; and
whatever goes less then this, is but Memory, and not Understanding; or else
such notice of things by which a man is neither the wiser nor the better.

3. Sometimes God gives to his choicest, his most elect and precious Servants,
a knowledge even of secret things, which he communicates not to others. We find
it greatly remarked in the case of Abraham, Genesis 18.17. And the Lord said,
Shall I hide from Abraham that thing that I do? Why not from Abraham? God tells
us v. 19. For I know him, that he will command his Children and his household
after him, and they shall keep the way of the Lord, to do justice and
judgment. And though this be irregular and infrequent, yet it is a reward of
their piety, and the proper increase also of the spiritual man. We find this
spoken by God to Daniel, and promised to be the lot of the righteous man in the
days of the Messiah; Many shall be purified and made white and tried; Dan.
12.10.
but the wicked shall do wickedly: and what then? None of the wicked shall
understand; but the wise shall understand. Where besides that the wise man and
the wicked are opposed, plainly signifying that the wicked man is a Fool and an
Ignorant: it is plainly said that None of the wicked shall understand the
wisdom and mysteriousnesse of the Kingdom of the Messiah.

4. A good life is the best way to understand Wisdom and Religion; because by
the experiences and relishes of Religion there is conveyed to them such a
sweetness, to which all wicked men are strangers: there is in the things of
God to them which practice them a deliciousness that makes us love them, and
that love admits us into Gods Cabinet, and strangely clarifies the
understanding by the purification of the heart. For when our reason is raised
up by the spirit of Christ, it is turned quickly into experience: when our
Faith relyes upon the principles of Christ, it is changed into vision: and so
long as we know God only in the ways of man, by contentious Learning, by
arguing and dispute, we see nothing but the shadow of him, and in that shadow
we meet with many dark appearances, little certainty and much conjecture: But
when we know him (...), with the eyes of holiness and the intuition of
gracious experiences, with a quiet spirit and the peace of Enjoyment; then we
shall hear what we never heard, and see what our eyes never saw; then the
mysteries of Godliness shall be opened unto us, and clear as the windows of
the morning. And this is rarely well expressed by the Apostle, Ephesians. 5.14.
If we stand up from the dead and awake from sleep, then Christ shall give us
light.

For although the Scriptures themselves are written by the Spirit of God, yet
they are written within and without: and besides the light that shines upon the
face of them, unless there be a light shining within our hearts, unfolding the
leaves and interpreting the mysterious sense of the spirit, convincing our
Consciences and preaching to our hearts; to look for Christ in the leaves of
the Gospel, is to look for the living amongst the dead. There is a life in
them, but that life is (according to St. Paul's expression) hid with Christ in
God: and unless the spirit of God be the Promo-condus, we shall never draw it
forth.

Humane Learning brings excellent ministeries toward this: it is admirably
useful for the reproof of Heresies, for the detection of Fallacies, for the
Letter of the Scripture, for Collateral testimonies, for exterior advantages;
but there is something beyond this, that humane Learning without the addition
of Divine can never teach. Moses was learned in all the learning of the
Egyptians; and the holy men of God contemplated the glories of God in the
admirable order, motion and influences of the Heaven: but besides all this,
they were taught of God something far beyond these prettinesses. Pythagoras
read Moses's Books, and so did Plato; and yet they became not Proselytes of the
Religion, though they were learned Scholars of such a Master. The reason is,
because that which they drew forth from thence was not the life and secret of
it. Tradidit arcano quodcunque Volumine Moses. There is a secret in these
Books, which few men, none but the Godly, did understand: and though much of
this secret is made manifest in the Gospel, yet even here also there is a
Letter and there is a Spirit: still there is a reserve for Gods secret ones,
even all those deep mysteries which the old Testament covered in Figures, and
stories, and names, and prophesies, and which Christ has, and by his Spirit
will yet reveal more plainly to all that will understand them by their proper
measures. For although the Gospel is infinitely more legible and plain then the
obscurer Leaves of the Law, yet there is a seal upon them also: which Seal no
man shall open hut he that is worthy. We may understand something of it by the
three Children of the Captivity; they were all skilled in all the wisdom of the
Chaldees, and so was Daniel: but there was something beyond that in him; the
wisdom of the most high God was in him, and that taught him a learning beyond
his learning.

In all Scripture there is a spiritual sense, a spiritual Cabala, which as it
tends directly to holiness, so it is best and truest understood by the sons of
the Spirit, who love God, and therefore know him. (...), every thing is best
known by its own similitudes and analogies.

But I must take some other time to speak fully of these things. I have but one
thing more to say, and then I shall make my Applications of this Doctrine, and
so conclude.

5. Lastly, there is a sort of Gods dear Servants who walk in perfectness,
who perfect holiness in the fear of God; and they have a degree of Clarity
and divine knowledge more then we can discourse of, and more certain then the
Demonstrations of Geometry, brighter then the Sun, and indeficient as the light
of Heaven. This is called by the Apostle the (...) Christ is this brightness
of God, manifested in the hearts of his dearest servants.

(...)
(...). --
But I shall say no more of this at this time, for this is to be felt and not
to be talked of; and they that never touched it with their finger, may secretly
perhaps laugh at it in their heart, and be never the wiser. All that I shall
now say of it is, that a good man is united unto God (...), as a flame touches
a flame, and combines into splendour and to glory: so is the Spirit of a man
united unto Christ by the spirit of God. These are the friends of God, and they
best know Gods mind, and they only that are so know how much such men do know.
They have a special Unction from above. So that now you are come to the top of
all: this is the highest round of the Ladder, and the Angels stand upon it:
they dwell in love and Contemplation, they worship and obey, but dispute not;
and our quarrels and impertinent wranglings about Religion are nothing else but
the want of the measures of this State. Our light is like a Candle, every wind
of vain Doctrine blows it out, or spends the wax, and makes the light
tremulous; but the lights of Heaven are fixed and bright, and shine for ever.

But that we may speak not only things mysterious, but things intelligible; how
does it come to pass, by what means and what Economy is it effected, that a
holy life is the best determination of all Questions, and the surest way of
knowledge? Is it to be supposed that a Godly man is better enabled to determine
the Questions of Purgatory or Transubstantiation? is the gift of Chastity the
best way to reconcile Thomas and Scotus? and is a temperate man always a
better Scholar then a Drunkard? To this I answer, that in all things in which
true wisdom consists, Holiness, which is the best wisdom, is the surest way of
understanding them. And this

1. Is effected by Holiness as a proper and natural instrument: for naturally
every thing is best discerned by its proper light and congenial instrument.

(...) For as the eye sees visible objects, and the understanding perceives the
Intellectual; so does the spirit the things of the Spirit. The natural man
(says St. Paul,) knows not the things of God, for they are Spiritually
discerned: that is, they are discovered by a proper light, and concerning these
things an unsanctified man discourses pitifully, with an imperfect Idea, as a
blind man does of Light and Colors which he never saw.

A good man, though unlearned in secular notices, is like the windows of the
Temple, narrow without and broad within: he sees not so much of what profits
not abroad; but whatsoever is within, and concerns Religion and the
glorifications of God, that he sees with a broad inspection. But all humane
learning without God is but blindness and ignorant folly.

But when it is (...), righteousness dipped in the wells of Truth, it is like an
eye of Gold in a rich Garment, or like the light of Heaven, it shows it self by
its own splendour. What Learning is it to discourse of the Philosophy of the
Sacrament, if you do not feel the virtue of it? and the man that can with
eloquence and subtilty discourse of the intrumentall efficacy of Baptismal
waters, talks ignorantly in respect of him who has the answer of a good
Conscience within, and is cleansed by the purifications of the Spirit. If the
Question concern any thing that can perfect a man and make him happy, all that
is the proper knowledge and notice of the good man. How can a wicked man
understand the purities of the heart? and how can an evil and unworthy
Communicant tell what it is to have received Christ by faith, to dwell with
him, to be united to him, to receive him in his heart? The good man only
understands that: the one sees the color, and the other feels the substance;
the one discourses of the Sacrament, and the other receives Christ; the one
discourses for or against Transubstantiation, but the good man feels himself to
be changed and so joined to Christ, that he only understands the true sense of
Transubstantiation, while he becomes to Christ bone of his bone, flesh of his
flesh, and of the same spirit with his Lord.

We talk much of Reformation, and (blessed be God) once we have felt the good
of it: But of late we have smarted under the name and pretension. The Woman
that lost her groate, everrit domum, not evertit; she swept the house, she did
not turn the house out of doors. That was but an ill Reformation that untiled
the Roof, and broak the Walls, and was digging down the Foundation.

Now among all the pretensions of Reformation, who can tell better what is, and
what is not, true Reformation, then he that is truly Reformed himself? He knows
what pleases God, and can best tell by what instruments he is reconciled. Prove.
10.31, 32.
The mouth of the just brings forth wisdom; and the lips of the righteous
know what is acceptable, says Solomon. He cannot be cousen'd by names of
things, and feels that Reformation to be Imposture that is Sacrilegious:
himself is humble and obedient, and therefore knows that is not Truth that
persuades to Schism and Disobedience: and most of the Questions of Christendom
are such which either are good for nothing, and therefore to be laid aside; or
if they be complicated with action, and are ministeries of practice, no man can
judge them so well as the spiritual man. That which best pleases God, that
which does good to our Neighbor, that which teaches sobriety, that which
combines with Government, that which speaks honor of God and does him honor,
that only is Truth. Holiness therefore is a proper and natural instrument of
Divine knowledge, and must needs be the best way of instruction in the
Questions of Christendom, because in the most of them a Duty is complicated
with the Proportion.

No man that intends to live holily can ever suffer any pretenses of Religion
to be made to teach him to fight against his King. And when the men of Geneva
turned their Bishop out of doors, they might easily have considered that the
same person was their Prince too; and that must needs be a strange Religion
that rose up against Moses and Aaron at the same time: but that has been the
method ever since. There was no Church till then was ever Governed without an
Apostle or a Bishop: and since then, they who go from their Bishop have said
very often to their King too, Nolumus hunc regnare: and when we see men
pretending Religion, and yet refuse to own the Kings Supremacy, they may upon
the stock of holiness easily reprove their own folly; by considering that such
recusancy does introduce into our Churches the very worst, the most intolerable
parts of Popery. For perfect submission to Kings is the glory of the,
Protestant cause: and really the reproveable Doctrines of the Church of Rome
are by nothing so much confuted, as that they destroy good life by consequent
and evident deduction; as by an Induction of particulars were easy to make
apparent, if this were the proper season for it.

2. Holiness is not only an advantage to the learning all wisdom and
holiness, but for the discerning that which is wise and holy from what is
trifling and useless and contentious: and to one of these heads all Questions
will return: and therefore in all, from Holiness we have the best
Instructions. And this brings me to the next Particle of the general
Consideration. For that which we are taught by the holy Spirit of God, this new
nature, this vital principle within us, it is that which is worth our learning;
not vain and empty, idle and insignificant notions, in which when you have
labored till your eyes are fixed in their Orbs and your flesh unfixed from
its bones, you are no better and no wiser. If the Spirit of God be your
Teacher, he will teach you such truths as will make you know and love God, and
become like to him, and enjoy him for ever, by passing from similitude to union
and eternal fruition. But what are you the better if any man should pretend to
teach you whether every Angel makes a species? and what is the individuation of
the Soul in the state of separation? what are you the wiser if you should study
and find out what place Adam should for ever have lived in if he had not
fallen? and what is any man the more learned if he hears the disputes, whether
Adam should have multiplied Children in the state of Innocence, and what would
have been the event of things if one Child had been born before his Fathers sin?

Too many Scholars have lived upon Air and empty notions for many ages past,
and troubled themselves with tying and untying Knots, like Hypochondriacs in a
fit of Melancholy, thinking of nothing, and troubling themselves with nothing,
and falling out about nothings, and being very wise and very learned in things
that are not and work not, and were never planted in Paradise by the finger of
God. Men's notions are too often like the Mules, begotten by aequivocall and
unnatural Generations; but they make no species: they are begotten, but they
can beget nothing: they are the effects of long study, but they can do no good
when they are produced: they are not that which Solomon calls viam
intelligentiae, the way of understanding. If the Spirit of God be our Teacher,
we shall learn to avoid evil, and to do good, to be wise and to be holy, to be
profitable and careful: and they that walk in this way shall find more peace
in their Consciences, more skill in the Scriptures, more satisfaction in their
doubts, then can be obtained by all the polemical and impertinent disputations
of the world. And if the holy spirit can teach us how vain a thing it is to do
foolish things, he also will teach us how vain a thing it is to trouble the
world with foolish Questions, to disturb the Church for interest or pride, to
resist Government in things indifferent, to spend the peoples zeal in things
unprofitable, to make Religion to consist in outsides, and opposition to
circumstances and trifling regards. No, no, the Man that is wise, he that is
conducted by the Spirit of God, knows better in what Christ's Kingdom does
consist, then to throw away his time and interest and peace and safety; for
what? for Religion? no: for the body of Religion? not so much: for the garment
of the body of Religion? no, not for so much: but for the Fringes of the
garment of the Body of Religion; for such and no better are the disputes that
trouble our discontented Brethren; they are things, or rather Circumstances and
manners of things, which the Soul and spirit is not at all concerned.

3. Holiness of life is the best way of finding out truth and understanding;
not only as a Natural medium, nor only as a prudent medium, but as a means by
way of Divine blessing. John 14.21.
He that has my Commandments and keeps them, he it is that loves me: and he
that loves me shall be loved of my Father, and I will love him, and will
manifest my self to him. Here we have a promise for it; and upon that we may
rely.

The old man that confuted the Arian Priest by a plain recital of his Creed,
found a mighty power of God effecting his own Work by a strange manner, and by
a very plain instrument: it wrought a divine blessing just as Sacraments use to
do: and this Lightning sometimes comes in a strange manner as a peculiar
blessing to good men. For God kept the secrets of his Kingdom from the wise
Heathens and the learned Jews, revealing them to Babes, not because they had
less learning, but because they had more love; they were children and Babes in
Malice, they loved Christ, and so he became to them a light and a glory. St.
Paul had more learning then they all; and Moses was instructed in all the
Learning of the Egyptians: yet because he was the meekest man upon Earth, he
was also the wisest, and to his humane Learning in which he was excellent, he
had a divine light and excellent wisdom superadded to him by way of spiritual
blessings. And St. Paul, though he went very far to the knowledge of many great
and excellent truths by the force of humane learning, yet he was far short of
perfective truth and true wisdom till he learned a new lesson in a new School,
at the feet of one greater then his Gamaliel: his learning grew much greater,
his notions brighter, his skill deeper, by the love of Christ, and his desires,
his passionate desires after Jesus.

The force and use of humane learning and of this Divine learning I am now
speaking of, are both well expressed by the Prophet Isaiah, 29.11, 12. And the
vision of all is become unto you as the words of a Book that is sealed, which
men deliver to one that is learned, saying, Read this, I pray thee: and he
says, I cannot, for it is sealed. And the Book is delivered to him that is not
learned, saying Read this, I pray thee: and he says, I am not learned. He that
is no learned man, who is not bred up in the Schools of the Prophets, cannot
read Gods Book for want of learning. For humane Learning is the gate and first
entrance of Divine vision; not the only one indeed, but the common gate. But
beyond this, there must be another learning; for he that is learned, bring the
Book to him, and you are not much the better as to the secret part of it, if
the Book be sealed, if his eyes be closed, if his heart be not opened, if God
does not speak to him in the secret way of discipline. Humane learning is an
excellent Foundation; but the top-stone is laid by Love and Conformity to the
will of God. For we may further observe, that blindness, error and Ignorance
are the punishments which God sends upon wicked and ungodly men. Etiamsi
propter nostrae intelligentiae tarditatem and vitae demeritum veritas nondum se
apertissime ostenderit, was St. Austin's expression. The truth has not yet
been manifested fully to us, by reason of our demerits: our sins have hindered
the brightness of the truth from shining upon us. And St. Paul observes, that
when the Heathens gave themselves over to lusts, Romans 1.25, 26.
God gave them over to strong delusions, and to believe a Lie. But God gives
to a man that is good in his sight, wisdom and knowledge and joy, said the wise
Preacher. Eccl. 2.26.
But this is most expressly promised in the New Testament, and particularly in
that admirable Sermon which our blessed Savior preached a little before his
death. John 14.26.
The Comforter, which is the Holy Ghost, whom the Father will send in my name,
he shall teach you all things. Well: there is our Teacher told of plainly. But
how shall we obtain this teacher, and how shall we be taught? v. 15, 16, 17.
Christ will pray for us that we may have this spirit. That Is well: but shall
all Christians have the spirit? Yes, all that will live like Christians: for so
said Christ, If ye love me, keep my Commandments; and I will pray the Father,
and he will give you another Comforter, that may abide with you for ever; even
the spirit of truth, whom the World cannot receive, because it sees him not,
neither knows him. Mark these things. The Spirit of God is our teacher: he
will abide with us for ever to be our teacher: he will teach us all things; but
how? if ye love Christ, if ye keep his Commandments, but not else: if ye be of
the World, that is, of worldly affections, ye cannot see him, ye cannot know
him. And this is the particular I am now to speak to, The way by which the
Spirit of God teaches us in all the ways and secrets of God is Love and
Holiness.

Secreta Dei Deo nostro et filiis domus ejus, Gods secrets are to himself and
the sons of his House, says the Jewish Proverb. Love is the great instrument
of Divine knowledge, that is the (...), the height of all that is to be taught
or learned. Love is Obedience, and we learn his words best when we practice
them: (...), Lib. 2. Ethic. c. 1.
said Aristotle: those things which they that learn ought to practice, even
while they practice they will best learn. Quisquis non venit, profecto nec
didicit: Nullum bonum perfect noscitur quod non perfect amatur.

Aug. lib. 83. qu. de gratia Christi.


Ita enim Dominus docet per Spiritus gratiam, ut quod quisque didicerit, non
tantum cognoscendo videat, sed etiam volendo appetat and agedo perficiat. St.
Austin De gratia Christi lib. 1. c. 14. Unless we come to Christ, we shall
never learn: for so our Blessed Lord teaches us by the grace of his spirit,
that what any one learns, he not only sees it by knowledge, but desires it by
choice, and perfects it by practice.

4. When this is reduced to practice and experience, we find not only in things
of practice, but even in deepest mysteries, not only the choicest and most
eminent Saints, but even every good man can best tell what is true, and best
reprove an error.

He that goes about to speak of and to understand the mysterious Trinity, and
does it by words and names of man's invention, or by such which signify
contingently, if he reckons this mystery by the Mythology of Numbers, by the
Cabala of Letters, by the distinctions of the School, and by the weak
inventions of disputing people; if he only talks of Essences and existencies,
Hypostases and personalities, distinctions without difference, and priority in
Coequalities, and unity in Pluralities, and of superior Praedicates of no
larger extent then the inferior Subjects, may amuse himself, and find his
understanding will be like St. Peter's upon the Mount of Tabor at the
Transfiguration: he may build three Tabernacles in his head, and talk
something, but he knows not what. But the good man that feels the power of the
Father, and he to whom the Son is become Wisdom, Righteousness,
Sanctification, and Redemption; he in whose heart the love of the Spirit of God
is spread, to whom God has communicated the Holy Ghost, the Comforter; this
man, though he understands nothing of that which is unintelligible, yet he only
understands the mysteriousnesse of the Holy Trinity. No man can be convinced
well and wisely of the Article of the Holy, Blessed and Undivided Trinity, but
he that feels the mightiness of the Father begetting him to a new life, the
wisdom of the Son building him up in a most holy Faith, and the love of the
spirit of God making him to become like unto God.

He that has passed from his Childhood in Grace under the spiritual
generation of the Father, and is gone forward to be a young man in Christ,
strong and vigorous in holy actions and holy undertakings, and from thence is
become an old Disciple, and strong and grown old in Religion, and the
conversation of the Spirit; this man best understands the secret and
undiscernable Oeconomie, he feels this unintelligible mystery, and sees with
his heart what his tongue can never express, and his Metaphysics can never
prove. In these cases Faith and Love are the best Knowledge, and Jesus Christ
is best known by the grace of our Lord Jesus Christ; and if the Kingdom of God
be in us, then we know God, and are known of him: and when we communicate of
the Spirit of God, when we pray for him, and have received him, and entertained
him, and dwelt with him, and warmed our selves by his holy fires, then we know
him too. But there is no other satisfactory knowledge of the Blessed Trinity
but this: And therefore whatever thing is spoken of God Metaphysically, there
is no knowing of God Theologically and as he ought to be known, but by the
measures of Holiness and the proper light of the Spirit of God.

But in this case Experience is the best learning, and Christianity is the best
institution, and the Spirit of God is the best teacher, and Holiness is the
greatest wisdom; and he that sins most is the most Ignorant, and the humble
and obedient man is the best Scholar. Ecclus. 21.11.
For the Spirit of God is a loving Spirit, and will not enter into a polluted
Soul: But he that keeps the Law gets the understanding thereof, and the
perfection of the fear of the Lord is wisdom, said the wise Ben-Sirach. And now
give me leave to apply the Doctrine to you, and so I shall dismiss you from
this attention.

Many ways have been attempted to reconcile the differences of the Church in
matters of Religion, and all the Counsels of man have yet proved ineffective.
Let us now try Gods Method, let us betake our selves to live holily, and then
the spirit of God will lead us into all truth. And indeed it matters not what
Religion any man is of, if he be a Villain; the opinion of his Sect, as it
will not save his Soul, so neither will it do good to the public. But this is
a sure Rule; If the holy man best understands Wisdom and Religion, then by the
proportions of holiness we shall best measure the Doctrines that are obtruded
to the disturbance of our peace, and the dishonor of the Gospel. And therefore

1. That is no good Religion whose Principles destroy any duty of Religion. He
that shall maintain it to be lawful to make a War for the defense of his
Opinion be it what it will, his Doctrine is against Godliness. Any thing that
is proud, any thing that is peevish and scornful, any thing that is
uncharitable, is against the (...), that form of sound Doctrine which the
Apostle speaks of. And I remember that Ammianus Marcellinus telling of George a
proud and factious Minister, that he was an Informer against his Brethren, he
says, he did it oblitus professionis suae, que nil nisi justum suadet and
lene; He forgot his profession, which teaches nothing but justice and meekness,
kindnesses and charity. And however Bellarmine and others are pleased to take
but indirect and imperfect notice of it, yet Goodness is the best note of the
true Church.

2. It is but an ill sign of Holiness when a man is busy in troubling himself
and his Superior in little Scruples and Fantastic Opinions about things not
concerning the life of Religion, or the pleasure of God, or the excellencies of
the Spirit. A good man knows how to please God, how to converse with him, how
to advance the Kingdom of the Lord Jesus, to set forwards Holiness and the
love of God and of his Brother; and he knows also that there is no Godliness in
spending our time and our talk, our heart and our spirits, about the garments
and outsides of Religion. And they can ill teach others, that do not know that
Religion does not consist in these things; but Obedience may, and reductively
that is Religion; and he that for that which is no part of Religion destroys
Religion directly, by neglecting that duty that is adopted into Religion, is a
man of fancy and of the World: but he gives but an ill account that he is a man
of God, and a son of the Spirit.

Spend not your time in that which profits not; for your labor and your
health, your time and your studies are very valuable; and it is a thousand
pitties to see a diligent and a hopeful person spend himself in gathering
Cockleshells and little pebbles, in telling Sands upon the shores, and making
Garlands of useless Daisies. Study that which is profitable, that which will
make you useful to Churches and Commonwealths, that which will make you
desirable and wise. Only I shall add this to you, That in Learning there are
variety of things as well as in Religion: there is Mint and Cummin, and there
are the weighty things of the Law; so there are studies more and less useful,
and every thing that is useful will be required in its time: and I may in this
also use the words of our blessed Savior, These things ought you to look
after, and not to leave the other unregarded. But your great care is to be in
the things of God and of Religion, in holiness and true wisdom, remembering the
saying of Origin, that the knowledge that arises from goodness is (...),
something that is more certain and more divine then all demonstration, then all
other Learnings of the World.

3. That Is no good Religion that disturbs Governments, or shakes a foundation
of public peace. Kings and Bishops are the foundations and the great
principles of unity, of peace and Government; like Rachel and Leah they build
up the house of Israel: and those blind Samsons that shake these Pillars intend
to pull the house down. My Son, fear God and the King, says Solomon; and
meddle not with them that are given to change. That is not Truth that loves
changes: and the new-nothings of Heretical and Schismatical Preachers are
infinitely far from the blessings of Truth.

In the holy Language Truth has a Mysterious Name, (...) Emet; it consists of
three Letters, the first and the last and the middlemost of the Hebrew Letters:
implying to us that Truth is first, and will be last, and it is the same all
the way, and combines and unites all extremes; it ties all ends together. Truth
is lasting, and ever full of blessing. For the Jews observe that those Letters
which signify Truth, are both in the figure and the number Quadrate, firm and
cubical; these signify a foundation, and an abode for ever. Whereas on the
other side; the word which in Hebrew signifies a lie, (...) Secher, is made of
Letters whose numbers are imperfect, and their figure pointed and voluble: to
signify that a Lie has no foundation.

And this very observation will give good light in our Questions and disputes.
And I give my instance in Episcopal Government, which has been of so lasting
an abode, of so long a blessing, has its firmament by the principles of
Christianity, has been blessed by the issues of that stabiliment, it has for
sixteen hundred years combined with Monarchy, and has been taught by the
spirit which has so long dwelt in Gods Church, and has now (according to the
promise of Jesus, that says the gates of Hell shall never prevail against the
Church) been restored amongst us by a heap of Miracles; and as it went away, so
now it is returned again in the hand of Monarchy, and in the bosom of our
Fundamental Laws. Now that Doctrine must needs be suspected of Error and an
intolerable Lie that speaks against this Truth, which has had so long a
testimony from God, and from the wisdom and experience of so many ages, of all
our Ancestors, and all our Laws.

When the Spirit of God wrote in Greek, Christ is called A and O: if he had
spoken Hebrew, he had been called (...) and (...), that is Christ is (...)
Emet, he is Truth, the same yesterday and to day and for ever: and whoever
opposes this holy Sanction which Christ's Spirit has sanctified, his word has
warranted, his blessings have endeared, his promises have ratifyed, and his
Church has always kept, he fights against this (...) Emet, and Secher is his
portion; his Lot is a Lie, his portion is there where holiness can never dwell.

And now to conclude, to you Fathers and Brethren, you who are, or intend to be
of the Clergy; you see here the best Compendium of your Studies, the best
abbreviature of your labors, the truest method of wisdom, and the infallible,
the only way of judging concerning the Disputes and Questions in Christendom.
It is not by reading multitude of Books, but by studying the truth of God: it
is not by laborious Commentaries of the Doctors that you can finish your work,
but by the expositions of the Spirit of God: it is not by the Rules of
Metaphysics, but by the proportions of Holiness: and when all Books are read,
and all Arguments examined, and all Authorities alleged, nothing can be found
to be true that is unholy. Give your selves to reading, to exhortation, and to
Doctrine, says St. Paul. Read all good Books you can: but exhortation unto
good life is the best Instrument, and the best teacher of true Doctrine, of
that which is according to Godliness.

And let me tell you this, The great learning of the Fathers was more owing to
their piety then to their skill; more to God then to themselves: and to this
purpose is that excellent ejaculation of St. Chrysostom, with which I will
conclude. O blessed and happy men, whose names are in the Book of life, Lib. de
Consummat. saeculi, inter opera

Ephrem Syri.


from whom the Devils fled and Heretics did fear them, who (by Holiness) have
stopped the mouths of them that spoke perverse things! But I, like David, will
cry out, Where are thy loving-kindnesses which have been ever of old? Where is
the blessed Quire of Bishops and Doctors, who shined like lights in the World,
and contained the Word of Life? Dulce est meminisse; their very memory is
pleasant. Where is that Evodias, the sweet savor of the Church, the successor
and imitator of the holy Apostles? where is Ignatius, in whom God dwelt? where
is St. Dionysius the Areopagite, that Bird of Paradise, that celestial Eagle?
where is Hippolytus, that good man, (...), that gentle sweet person? where is
great St. Basil, a man almost equal to the Apostles? where is Athanasius, rich
in virtue? where is Gregory Nyssen, that great Divine? and Ephrem the great
Syrian, that stirred up the sluggish, and awakened the sleepers, and comforted
the afflicted, and brought the young men to discipline, the Looking-glass of
the religious, the Captain of the Penitents, the destruction of Heresies, the
receptacle of Graces, and the habitation of the holy Ghost? These were the men
that prevailed against Error, because they lived according to Truth: and
whoever shall oppose you and the truth you walk by, may better be confuted by
your lives then by your disputations. Let your adversaries have no evil thing
to say of you, and then you will best silence them. For all Heresies and false
Doctrines are but like Myron's counterfeit Cow, it deceived none but Beasts;
and these can cozen none but the wicked and the negligent, them that love a lie
and live according to it. [But if ye become burning and shining lights; if ye
do not detain the truth in unrighteousness; if ye walk in light and live in
the Spirit; your Doctrines will be true, and that Truth will prevail.] But if
ye live wickedly and scandalously, every little Schismatic shall put you to
shame, and draw Disciples after him, and abuse your flocks, and feed them with
Colocynths and Hemlock, and place Heresy in the Chaires appointed for your
Religion.

I pray God give you all grace to follow this Wisdom, to study this Learning,
to labor for the understanding of Godliness: so your time and your studies,
your persons and your labors will be holy and useful, sanctified and blessed,
beneficial to men and pleasing unto God, through him who is the wisdom of the
Father, who is made to all that love him Wisdom and Righteousness and
Sanctification and Redemption: To whom with the Father, etc.

FINIS.
Imprimatur,

M. FRANCK, S.T.D. Rsso. in Xto. P. ac Dno. D. GILB. Archiep. Cant. a Sacris
Dom. Sept. 21. 1663.

A SERMON Preached in Christs-Church Dublin, July 16. 1663. AT THE FUNERAL Of
the most Reverend Father in God, JOHN, Late Lord Archbishop of Armagh, and
Primate of all Ireland: WITH A succinct Narrative of his whole Life.

The third Edition, enlarged.

By the Right Reverend Father in God, JEREMY, Lord Bishop of Down and Connor.

LONDON: Printed by J. G. for Richard Royston, Bookseller to the Kings most
Excellent Majesty, 1663.

1 Cor. 15.23. But every Man in his own order: Christ the first fruits;
afterward they that are Christ's at his coming.


THe Condition of Man in this world is so limited and depressed, so relative
and imperfect, that the best things he does he does weakly, and the best things
he has are imperfections in their very constitution. I need not tell how
little it is that we know; the greatest indication of this is, That we can
never tell how many things we know not: and we may soon span our own Knowledge,
but our Ignorance we can never fathom. Our very Will, in which Mankind pretends
to be most noble and imperial, is a direct state of imperfection; and our very
liberty of Choosing good and evil is permitted to us, not to make us proud, but
to make us humble; for it supposes weakness of Reason and weakness of Love. For
if we understood all the degrees of Amability in the Service of God, or if we
had such love to God as he deserves, and so perfect a conviction as were fit
for his Services, we could no more Deliberate: For Liberty of Will is like the
motion of a Magnetic Needle toward the North, full of trembling and
uncertainty till it were fixed in the beloved Point; it wavers as long as it is
free, and is at rest when it can choose no more. And truly what is the hope of
Man? It is indeed the resurrection of the Soul in this world from sorrow and
her saddest pressures, and like the Twilight to the Day, and the Harbinger of
joy; but still it is but a conjugation of Infirmities, and proclaims our
present calamity, only because it is uneasy here, it thrusts us forwards
toward the light and glories of the Resurrection.

For as a Worm creeping with her belly on the ground, with her portion and
share of Adam's, curse, lifts up its head to partake a little of the blessings
of the air, and opens the junctures of her imperfect body, and curles her
little rings into knots and combinations, drawing up her tail to a
neighborhood of the heads pleasure and motion; but still it must return to
abide the fate of its own nature, and dwell and sleep upon the dust: So are the
hopes of a mortal Man; he opens his eyes and looks upon fine things at
distance, and shuts them again with weakness, because they are too glorious to
behold; and the Man rejoices because he hopes fine things are staying for him;
but his heart aches, because he knows there are a thousand ways to fail and
miss of those glories; and though he hopes, yet he enjoys not; he longs, but he
possesses not, and must be content with his portion of dust; and being a worm
and no Man must lie down in this portion, before he can receive the end of his
hopes, the Salvation of his Soul in the resurrection of the dead. For as Death
is the end of our lives, so is the Resurrection the end of our hopes; and as we
die daily, so we daily hope: but Death, which is the end of our life, is the
enlargement of our Spirits from hope to certainty, from uncertain fears to
certain expectations, from the death of the body to the life of the soul; that
is, to partake of the light and life of Christ, to rise to life as he did; for
his Resurrection is the beginning of ours: He died for us alone, not for
himself; but he rose again for himself and us too. So that if he did rise, so
shall we; the Resurrection shall be universal; good and bad; all shall rise,
but not altogether. First Christ, then we that are Christ's; and yet there is a
third Resurrection, though not spoken of here; but thus it shall be. The dead
in Christ shall rise first; that is, next to Christ; and after them the wicked
shall rise to condemnation.

So that you see here is the sum of affairs treated of in my Text; Not
whether it be lawful to eat a Tortoise or a Mushrome, or to tread with the foot
bare upon the ground within the Octaves of Easter. It is not here inquired
whether Angels be material or immaterial; or whether the dwellings of dead
Infants be within the Air or in the regions of the Earth; the inquiry here is
whether we are to be Christians or no? whether we are to live good lives or no?
or whether it be permitted to us to live with Lust or Covetousness acted with
all the daughters of rapine and ambition? whether there be any such thing as
sin, any judicatory for Consciences, any rewards of Piety, any difference of
Good and Bad, any rewards after this life? This is the design of these words by
proper interpretation: for if Men shall die like Dogs and sheep, they will
certainly live like Wolves and Foxes: but he that believes the Article of the
Resurrection, has entertained the greatest Demonstration in the world, That
nothing can make us happy but the Knowledge of God, and Conformity to the life
and death of the holy Jesus. Here therefore are the great Hinges of all
Religion: 1. Christ is already risen from the dead. 2. We also shall rise in
Gods time and our order. Christ is the first fruits. But there shall be a full
harvest of the Resurrection, and all shall rise. My Text speaks only of the
Resurrection of the just, of them that belong to Christ; explicitly I say of
these; and therefore directly of Resurrection to life eternal. But because he
also says there shall be an order for every man; and yet every man does not
belong to Christ; therefore indirectly also he implies the more universal
Resurrection unto judgment. But this shall be the last thing that shall be
done; for, according to the Proverb of the Jews, Michael flies but with one
wing, and Gabriel with two; God is quick in sending Angels of peace, and they
fly apace; but the messengers of wrath come slowly: God is more hasty to
glorify his servants then to condemn the wicked. And therefore in the story of
Dives and Lazarus we find that the beggar died first; the good man Lazarus was
first taken away from his misery to his comfort, and afterward the rich man
died: and as the good many times die first, so all of them rise first, as if it
were a matter of haste: And as the mothers breasts swell and shoot and long to
give food to her babe; so Gods bowels did yearn over his banished children, and
he longs to cause them to eat and drink in his Kingdom. And at last the wicked
shall rise unto condemnation, for that must be done too; every man in his own
order: first Christ, then Christ's servants, and at last Christ's enemies. The
first of these is the great ground of our faith, the second is the consummation
of all our hopes: the first is the foundation of God that stands sure, the
second is that superstructure that shall never perish: by the first we believe
in God unto righteousness, by the second we live in God unto salvation: But the
third, for that also is true and must be considered, is the great affrightment
of all them that live ungodly. But in the whole Christ's Resurrection and ours
is the A and O of a Christian; that as Jesus Christ is the same yesterday and
to day, and the same for ever; so may we in Christ, become in the morrow of the
Resurrection the same or better then yesterday in our natural life; the same
body and the same soul tied together in the same essential union, with this
only difference, that not Nature but Grace and Glory with an Hermetick seal
give us a new signature, whereby we shall no more be changed, but like unto
Christ our head we shall become the same for ever. Of these I shall discourse
in order. 1. That Christ, who is the first fruits, is the first in this order:
he is already risen from the dead. 2. We shall all take our turns, we shall all
die, and as sure as death we shall all rise again. And 3. This very order is
effective of the thing it self. That Christ is first risen, is the
demonstration and certainty of ours, for because there is an order in this
economy, the first in the kind is the measure of the rest. If Christ be the
first fruits, we are the whole vintage, and we shall all die in the order of
Nature, and shall rise again in the order of Christ: They that are Christ's,
and are found so at his coming, shall partake of his resurrection. But Christ
first, then they that are Christ's: that is the order.

1. Christ is the first fruits; he is already risen from the dead. For he alone
could not be held by death. Free among the dead. (...), Synes. him. 6

(...);
Death was Sins eldest daughter, and the Grave-clothes were her first mantle;
but Christ was conqueror over both, and came to take that away, and to disarm
this. This was a glory fit for the head of mankind, but it was too great and
too good to be easily believed by incredulous and weak-hearted Man. It was at
first doubted of by all that were concerned; but they that saw it had no reason
to doubt any longer. But what is that to us who saw it not? Yes, very much.
Valde dubitatum est ab illis, ne dubitaretur a nobis, says S. Augustine. They
doubted very much, that by their confirmation we might be established and doubt
no more. Mary Magdalene saw him first, and she ran with joy and said she had
seen the Lord, and that he was risen from the dead; but they believed her not.
After that diverse women together saw him, and they told it, but had no thanks
for their pains, and obtained no credit among the Disciples. The two Disciples
that went to Emaus saw him, talked with him, eat with him, and they ran and
told it: they told true, but nobody believed them. Then S. Peter saw him, but
he was not yet got into the Chair of the Catholic Church, they did not think
him i^fallible, and so they believed him not at all. Five times in one day he
appeared; for after all this he appeared to the Eleven; they were indeed
transported with joy and wonder, but they would scarce believe their own eyes,
and though they saw him they doubted. Well, all this was not enough; he was
seen also of James, and suffered Thomas to thrust his hand into his side, and
appeared to S. Paul, and was seen by five hundred brethren at once. So that
there is no capacity of mankind, no time, no place, but had an ocular
demonstration of his Resurrection. He appeared to Men and Women, to the Clergy
and the Laity, to sinners of both sexes; to weak men and to criminals, to
doubters and deniers, at home and abroad, in public and in private, in their
houses and their journeys, unexpected and, by appointment, betimes in the
morning and late at night, to them in conjunction and to them in dispersion,
when they did look for him and when they did not; he appeared upon earth to
many, and to S. Paul and S. Stephen from heaven. So that we can require no
greater testimony then all these are able to give us, and they saw for
themselves and for us too, that the Faith and certainty of the Resurrection of
Jesus might be conveyed to all that shall die and follow Christ in their own
order.

Now this being matter of fact, cannot be supposed infinite, but limited to
time and place, and therefore to be proved by them who at that time were upon
the place; good men and true, simple and yet losers by the bargain, many and
united, confident and constant, preaching it all their life, and stoutly
maintaining it at their death. Men that would not deceive others, and Men that
could not be deceived themselves in a matter so notorious and so proved, and so
seen: and if this be not sufficient credibility in a matter of Fact as this
was, then we can have no story credibly transmitted to us, no Records kept, no
Acts of Courts, no narratives of the days of old, no traditions of our
Fathers, no memorials of them in the third generation. Nay, if from these we
have not sufficient causes and arguments of Faith, how shall we be able to know
the will of Heaven upon Earth? unless God do not only tell it once, but
always, and not only always to some Men, but always to all Men: for if some
Men must believe others, they can never do it in any thing more reasonably than
in this; and if we may not trust them in this, then without a perpetual
miracle, no Man could have Faith: for Faith could never come by hearing; by
nothing but by seeing. But if there be any use of History, any Faith in Men,
any honesty in manners, any truth in humane intercourse; if there be any use of
Apostles or Teachers, of Ambassadors, or Letters, of ears or hearing; if there
be any such thing as the Grace of Faith, that is less than demonstration or
intuition, then we may be as sure that Christ the first Fruits is already
risen, as all these credibilities can make us. But let us take heed; as God
hates a lie, so he hates incredulity; an obstinate, a foolish and pertinacious
understanding. What we do every minute of our lives in matters of title and
great concernment, if we refuse to do it in Religion, which yet is to be
conducted as all humane affairs are, by humane instruments and arguments of
persuasion proper to the nature of the thing, it is an obstinacy as cross to
humane reason, as it is to Divine Faith.

But this Article was so clearly proved, that presently it came to pass that
Men were no longer ashamed of the Cross, but it was worn upon breasts, printed
in the air, drawn upon foreheads, carried upon Banners, put upon crowns
Imperial, presently it came to pass that the Religion of the despised Jesus did
infinitely prevail: a Religion that taught Men to be meek and humble, apt to
receive injuries, but unapt to do any; a Religion that gave countenance to the
poor and pitiful, in a time when riches were adored, and ambition and pleasure
had possessed the heart of all Mankind; a Religion that would change the face
of things, and the hearts of Men, and break vile habits into gentleness and
counsel; that such a Religion, in such a time by the Sermons and Conduct of
Fishermen, Men of mean breeding and illiberal Arts, should so speedily triumph
over the Philosophy of the World, and the arguments of the subtle, and the
Sermons of the Eloquent; the Power of Princes and the Interests of States, the
inclinations of Nature, and the blindness of zeal, the force of custom, and the
solicitation of passions, the pleasures of sin and the busy Arts of the
Devil; that is, against Wit and Power, Superstition and Wilfulness, Fame and
Money, Nature and Empire, which are all the causes in this World that can make
a thing impossible; this, this is to be ascribed to the power of God, and is
the great demonstration of the Resurrection of Jesus. Every thing was an
Argument for it, and improved it; no Objection could hinder it, no Enemies
destroy it; whatsoever was for them, it made the Religion to increase;
whatsoever was against them, made it to increase; Sunshine and Storms, Fair
Weather or Foul, it was all one as to the event of things: for they were
instruments in the hands of God, who could make what himself should choose to be
the product of any cause; So that if the Christians had peace, they went abroad
and brought in Converts; if they had no peace, but persecution; the Converts
came in to them. In prosperity they allured and enticed the World by the beauty
of holiness; in affliction and trouble they amazed all men with the splendor
of their Innocence, and the glories of their patience; and quickly it was that
the World became Disciple to the glorious Nazarene, and men could no longer
doubt of the Resurrection of Jesus, when it became so demonstrated by the
certainty of them that saw it, and the courage of them that died for it, and
the multitude of them that believed it; who by their Sermons, and their
Actions, by their public Offices and Discourses, by Festivals and Eucharists,
by Arguments of Experience and Sense, by Reason and Religion, by persuading
rational Men, and establishing believing Christians, by their living in the
obedience of Jesus, and dying for the testimony of Jesus, have greatly advanced
his Kingdom, and his Power, and his Glory, into which he entered after his
Resurrection from the dead. For he is the first fruits; and if we hope to rise
through him, we must confess that himself is first risen from the dead. That Is
the first particular.

2. There is an order for us also. We also shall rise again. Combustusque senex
tumulo procedit adultus,
Consumens dat membra rogus; --
The ashes of old Camillus shall stand up spritely from his Urne; and the
Funeral fires shall produce a new warmth to the dead bones of all those who
died under the arms of all the Enemies of the Roman greatness. This is a less
wonder than the former: for admonetur omnis aetas jam fieri posse quod
aliquando factum est. If it was done once, it may be done again; for since it
could never have been done, but by a power that is infinite, that infinite must
also be eternal and indeficient. By the same Almighty power which restored life
to the dead body of our living Lord, we may all be restored to a new life in
the Resurrection of the dead.

When Man was not, what power, what causes made him to be? whatsoever it was,
it did then as great a work as to raise his body to the same being again; and
because we know not the method of Natures secret changes, and how we can be
fashioned beneath in secreto terrae, and cannot handle and discern the
possibilities and seminal powers in the ashes of dissolved bones, must our
ignorance in Philosophy be put in balance against the Articles of Religion, the
hopes of Mankind, the Faith of Nations and the truth of God? and are our
Opinions of the power of God so low, that our understanding must be his
measure; and he shall be confessed to do nothing, unless it be made plain in
our Philosophy? Certainly we have a low Opinion of God unless we believe he can
do more things then we can understand. But let us hear S. Paul's demonstration:
If the Corn dies and lives again; if it lays its body down, suffers
alteration, dissolution and death, but at the spring rises again in the verdure
of a leaf, in the fullness of the ear, in the kidneys of wheat; if it proceeds
from little to great, from nakedness to ornament, from emptiness to plenty,
from unity to multitude, from death to life: be a Sadducee no more, shame not
thy understanding, and reproach not the weakness of thy Faith, by thinking that
Corn can be restored to life and Man cannot; especially since in every creature
the obediential capacity is infinite, and cannot admit degrees; for every
Creature can be any thing under the power of God, which cannot be less than
infinite.

But we find no obscure footsteps of this mystery even amongst the Heathens.
Pliny reports that Appion the Grammarian by the use of the plant 0siris called
Homer from his grave; and in Valerius Maximus we find that Aelius Tubero
returned to life when he was seated in his Funeral pile; and in Plutarch, that
Soleus after three days burial did live, and in Valerius that Aeris Pamphilius
did so after ten days. And it was so commonly believed, that Glaucus who was
choked in a vessel of honey did rise again, that it grew to a Proverb; Glaucus
poto melle resurrexit; Glaucus having tasted honey, died and lived again. I
pretend not to believe these stories true; but from these instances it may be
concluded that they believed it possible that there should be a Resurrection
from the dead; and natural reason, and their Philosophy did not wholly destroy
their hopes and expectation to have a portion in this Article.

For God knowing that the great hopes of Man, that the biggest endearment of
Religion, the sanction of private Justice, the band of Piety and holy Courage,
does wholly derive from the Article of the Resurrection, was pleased not only
to make it credible, but easy and familiar to us; and we so converse every
night with the Image of death, that every morning we find an argument of the
Resurrection. Sleep and Death have but one mother, and they have one name in
common.

Soles occidere and redire possunt,
Nobis cum semel occidit lux brevis,
Nox est perpetua una dormienda.
Catul. Charnel-houses are but (...) Cemeteries or sleeping-places, and they
that die are fallen asleep, and the Resurrection is but an awakening and
standing up from sleep: but in sleep our Senses are as fast bound by Nature, as
our Joints are by the grave-clothes; and unless an Angel of God awaken us every
morning, we must confess our selves as unable to converse with Men, as we now
are afraid to die and to converse with Spirits. But however Death it self is no
more; it is but darkness and a shadow, a rest and a forgetfulness. What is
there more in death? what is there less in sleep? For do we not see by
experience that nothing of equal loudness does awaken us sooner then a Man's
voice, especially if he be called by name? and thus also it shall be in the
Resurrection. We shall be awakened by the voice of a Man, and he that called
Lazarus by name from his grave, shall also call us: for although S. Paul
affirms, 1 These. 4.16.
that the trumpet shall sound, and there shall be the voice of an Archangel;
yet this is not a word of Nature, but of Office and Ministry: Christ himself is
that Archangel, and he shall descend with a mighty shout, John 5.28.
(says the Apostle) and all that are in the grave shall hear his voice, says
S. John: So that we shall be awakened by the voice of a Man, because we are
only fallen asleep by the decree of God; and when the Cock and the Lark call
us up to prayer and labor, the first thing we see is an argument of our
Resurrection from the dead. And when we consider what the Greek Church reports,
That amongst them the bodies of those that die Excommunicate will not return to
dust till the Censure be taken off; we may with a little faith and reason
believe, that the same power that keeps them from their natural Dissolution,
can recall them to life and union. I will not now insist upon the story of the
Rising Bones seen every year in Egypt, nor the pretenses of the Chemists, that
they from the ashes of Flowers can re-produce from the same materials the same
beauties i^ color and figure; for he that proves a certain Truth from an
uncertain Argument, is like him that wears a Wooden leg when he has two sound
legs already; it hinders his going, but helps him not: The Truth of God stands
not in need of such supporters, Nature alone is a sufficient preacher: Quae
nunc herba fuit, lignum jacet, berba futura, Dracuntius de opere Dei.

Aeriae nudantur aves cum penna vetusta,
Et nova subvestit reparatas pluma volucres.
Night and Day, the Sun returning to the same point of East, every change of
Species in the same matter, Generation and Corruption, the Eagle renewing her
youth and the Snake her skin; the Silkworm and the Swallows the care of
posterity and the care of an immortal name, Winter and Summer, the Fall and
Spring, the Old Testament and the New, the words of Job, and the Visions of the
Prophets, the prayer of Ezekiel for the resurrection of the men of Ephraim, and
the return of Jonas from the Whales belly, the histories of the Jews and the
Narratives of Christians, the Faith of Believers and the Philosophy of the
reasonable; all join in the verification of this Mystery. And amongst these
heaps it is not of the least consideration that there was never any good man,
who having been taught this Article, but if he served God, he also relied upon
this. If he believed God, he believed this; and therefore S. Paul says that
they who were (...), were also (...), they who had no hope (meaning of the
Resurrection) were also Atheists, and without God in the world. And it is
remarkable what S. Augustine observes, That when the World saw the righteous
Abel destroyed, and that the murderer outlived his crime, and built up a
numerous family, and grew mighty upon Earth, they neglected the Service of God
upon that account, till God in pity of their prejudice and foolish arguings
took Enoch up to heaven to recover them from their impieties, by showing them
that their bodies and souls should be rewarded for ever in an eternal union.
But Christ the first fruits is gone before, and himself did promise that when
himself was lifted up he would draw all men after him. Every man in his own
order; first Christ, then they that are Christ's at his coming. And so I have
done with the second Particular, not Christ only, but we also shall rise in
Gods time and our order.

But concerning this order I must speak a word or two, not only for the fuller
handling the Text, but because it will be matter of application of what has
been already spoken of the Article of the Resurrection.

3. First Christ and then we. And we therefore because Christ is already risen.
But you must remember, that the Resurrection and Exaltation of Christ was the
reward of his perfect obedience and purest holiness; and he calling us to an
imitation of the same obedience, and the same perfect holiness, prepares a way
for us to the same Resurrection. If we by holiness become the Sons of God as
Christ was, we shall also as he was become the Sons of God in the Resurrection:
But upon no other terms. So said our blessed Lord himself: Ye which have
followed me in the regeneration, Luke 14.14.
when the Son of Man shall sit on the throne of his glory, ye also shall sit
upon thrones judging the tribes of Israel. For as it was with Christ the first
fruits, so it shall be with all Christians in their own order: as with the
Head, so it shall be with the Members. He was the Son of God by love and
obedience, and then became the Son of God by Resurrection from the dead to life
Eternal, and so shall we; but we cannot be so in any other way. To them that
are Christ's, and to none else shall this be given. For we must know that God
has sent Christ into the World to be a great example and demonstration of the
Economy and Dispensation of Eternal life. As God brought Christ to glory, so
he will bring us, but by no other method. He first obeyed the will of God, and
patiently suffered the will of God; he died, and rose again, and entered into
glory; and so must we. Thus Christ is made Via, Veritas, and Vita, the Way, the
Truth, and the Life; that is, the true way to Eternal life: He first trod this
Wine Press, and we must insist in the same steps, or we shall never partake of
this blessed Resurrection. He was made the Son of God in a most glorious
manner, and we by him, by his merit, and by his grace, and by his example: but
other then this there is no way of Salvation for us. That Is the first and great
effect of this glorious order.

4. But there is one thing more in it yet, Every Man in his own order. First
Christ, and then they that are Christ's. But what shall become of them that are
not Christ's? why there is an order for them too. First, they that are
Christ's; and then they that are not his. Rev. 20.6.
Blessed and holy is he that has his part in the first resurrection. There is
a first and a second Resurrection even after this life. The dead in Christ
shall rise first. Now blessed are they that have their portion here; for upon
these the second death shall have no power. 1 These. 4.16.
As for the recalling the wicked from their graves, it is no otherwise in the
sense of the Spirit to be called a Resurrection, then taking a Criminal from
the Prison to the Bar is a giving of liberty. When poor Attilius Aviola had
been seized on by an Apoplexy, his friends supposing him dead carried him to
his Funeral pile; but when the fire began to approach, and the heat to warm the
body, he revived, and seeing himself incircled with Funeral flames, called out
aloud to his friends to rescue, not the dead, but the living Aviola from that
horrid burning. But it could not be. He only was r^stor'd from his sickness to
fall into death, and from his dull disease to a sharp and intolerable torment.
Just so shall the wicked live again; they shall receive their souls, that they
may be a portion for Devils; they shall receive their bodies, that they may
feel the everlasting burning; they shall see Christ, that they may look on him
whom they have pierced; and they shall hear the voice of God passing upon them
the intolerable sentence; they shall come from their graves, that they may go
into hell; and live again, that they may die for ever. So have we seen a poor
condemned Criminal, the weight of whose sorrows sitting heavily upon his soul
has benumbed him into a deep sleep, till he has forgotten his groans, and
laid aside his deep sighings; but on a sudden comes the messenger of death, and
unbinds the Poppy garland, scatters the heavy cloud that incircled his
miserable head, and makes him return to acts of life, that he may quickly
descend into death and be no more. So is every sinner that lies down in shame,
and makes his grave with the wicked; he shall indeed rise again, and be called
upon by the voice of the Archangel, but then he shall descend into sorrows
greater then the reason and the patience of a man, weeping and shrieking louder
then the groans of the miserable children in the Valley of Hinnon.

These indeed are sad stories, but true as the voice of God and the Sermons of
the holy Jesus. They are Gods words and Gods decrees; and I wish that all who
profess the belief of these, would consider sadly what they mean. If ye believe
the Article of the Resurrection, then you know that in your body you shall
receive what you did in the body, whether it be good or bad. It matters not now
very much whether our bodies be beauteous or deformed; for if we glorify God
in our bodies, God shall make our bodies glorious. It matters not much whether
we live in ease and pleasure, or eat nothing but bitter herbs: the body that
lies in dust and ashes, that goes stooping and feeble, that lodges at the foot
of the Cross and dwells in discipline, shall be feasted at the eternal supper
of the Lamb. And ever remember this, that beastly pleasures, and lying lips,
and a deceitful tongue, and a heart that sends forth proud things, are no
good dispositions to a blessed Resurrection. (...). It is not good that in the
body we live a life of Dissolution, for that is no good harmony with that
purpose of glory which God designs the body. (...),
(...),
said Phocyllides; for we hope that from our beds of darkness we shall rise
into Regions of light, and shall become like unto God: They shall partake of a
Resurrection to life; and what this can infer is very obvious. For if it be so
hard to believe a Resurrection from one death, let us not be dead in trespasses
and sins, for a Resurrection from two deaths will be harder to be believed, and
harder to be effected. But if any of you have lost the life of Grace, and so
forfeited all your title to a life of Glory, betake your selves to an early and
an entire piety, that when by this first Resurrection you have made this way
plain before your face, you may with confidence expect a happy Resurrection
from your graves. For if it be possible that the spirit, when it is dead in
sin, can arise to a life of righteousness; much more it is easy to suppose
that the body after death is capable of being restored again. And this is a
consequent of S. Paul's argument, If when ye were enemies ye were reconciled by
his death, Romans 5.10.
much more being reconciled we shall be saved by his life; plainly declaring
that it is a harder and more wonderful thing for a wicked man to become the
friend of God, then for one that is so, to be carried up to heaven and partake
of his glory. The first Resurrection is certainly the greater miracle: But he
that has risen once, may rise again; and this is as sure as that he that dies
once, may die again, and die for ever. But he who partakes of the death of
Christ by Mortification, and of his Resurrection by holiness of life and a holy
Faith, shall, according to the expression of the Prophet Isaiah, Enter into his
chamber of death; Isa. 26.20.
when Nature and Gods decree shall shut the doors upon him, and there he shall
be hidden for a little moment: But then shall they that dwell in dust awake and
sing, with Christ's dead body shall they arise: all shall rise, but every man in
his own order, Christ the first fruits, then they that are Christ's at his
coming. Amen.

I have now done with my Meditation of the Resurrection; but we have a new and
a sadder subject to consider: It is glorious and brave when a Christian
contemplates those glories which stand at the foot of the Account of all God's
Servants; but when we consider, that before all or any thing of this happens
every Christian must twice exuere hominem, put off the Old man, and then lie
down in dust and the dishonours of the Grave, it is Vinum Myrrhatum, there is
Myrrh put into our Wine; it is wholesome, but it will allay all our pleasures of
that glorious expectation. But no man can escape it. After that the Great Cyrus
had ruled long in a mighty Empire; yet there came a Message from Heaven, not so
sad it may be, yet as decretory as the Handwriting on the wall that arrested
his Successor Darius, (...), Prepare thy self, O Cyrus, and then go unto the
Gods; he laid aside his Tiar and his beauteous Diadem, and covered his face
with a cloth, and in a single Linen laid his honored head in a poor humble
Grave; and none of us all can avoid this sentence. For if Wit and Learning,
great Fame and great Experience, if wise Notices of things, and an honorable
Fortune, if Courage and Skill, if Prelacy and an honorable Age, if any thing
that could give Greatness and Immunity to a wise and prudent man, could have
been put in bar against a sad day, and have gone for good plea, this sad Scene
of Sorrows had not been the entertainment of this Assembly. But tell me, where
are those great Masters, who while they lived flourished in their studies? Jam
eorum praebendas alii possident, and nescio utrum de iis cogitant; Other men
have got their Prebends and their Dignities, and who knows whether ever they
remember them or no? While they lived they seemed nothing, when they are dead,
every man for a while speaks of them what they please, and afterward they are
as if they had not been. But the piety of the Christian Church has made some
little provision toward an artificial Immortality for brave and worthy
persons; and the Friendships, which our dead contracted while they were alive,
require us to continue a fair memory as long as we can; but they expire in
monthly minds, or at most in a faint and declining Anniversary; (...)
(...).
And we have great reason so to do in this present sad accident of the death of
our late most Reverend Primate, whose death the Church of Ireland has very
great reason to deplore; and we have great obligation to remember: his very
many worthy Deeds done for this poor afflicted and despised Church. S. Paul
made an excellent Funeral Oration, as it were instituting a Feast of All
Saints, Who all died having obtained a good report; and that excellent Preacher
in the 11. chap. of the Hebrews made a Sermon of their Commemoration. For since
good men, while they are alive, have their conversation in Heaven; when they
are in Heaven it is also fit that they should in their good names live upon
Earth. And as their great Examples are an excellent Sermon to the living, and
the praising them when Envy and Flattery can have no Interest to interpose, as
it is the best and most vigorous Sermon and Incentive to great things; so to
conceal what good God has wrought by them, is great unthankfulness to God and
to good men.

When Dorcas died the Apostle came to see the dead Corpse, and the friends of
the deceased expressed their grief and their love by showing the Coats that
she, whilst she lived, wrought with her own hands. She was a good Needle-woman
and a good Huswife, and did good to Mankind in her little way, and that it self
ought not to be forgotten, and the Apostle himself was not displeased with
their little Sermons, and that (...) which the women made upon that sad
interview. But if we may have the same liberty to record the worthy things of
this our most venerable Father and Brother, and if there remains no more of
that Envy which usually obscures the splendor of living Hero's, if you can
with your charitable though weeping eyes behold the great gifts of God with
which he adorned this great Prelate, and not object the failings of Humanity to
the participation of the Graces of the Spirit, or think that Gods gifts are the
less because they are born in Earthen Vessels, (...), for all men bear
Mortality about them, and the Cabinet is not beauteous as the Diamond that
shines within its bosom; then we may without interruption pay this duty to
Piety, and Friendship, and Thankfulness, and deplore our sad loss by telling a
true and sad story of this great man, whom God has lately taken from our eyes.

He was bred in Cambridge in Sidney-college under Mr. Hulet, a grave and a
worthy man, and he showed himself not only a fruitful Plant by his great
progress in his Studies, but made him another return of gratitude, taking care
to provide a good Employment for him in Ireland, where he then began to be
greatly interested. It was spoken as an honor to Augustus Caesar, that he gave
his Tutor an honorable Funeral; and Marcus Antoninus erected a Statue unto
his; and Gratian the Emperor made his Master Ausonius to be Consul: And our
worthy Primate, knowing the Obligation which they pass upon us, who do
Obstetricari gravidae animae, help the parturient Soul to bring forth fruits
according to its seminal powers, was careful not only to reward the industry
of such persons so useful to the Church in the cultivating infantes palmarum,
young Plants, whose joints are to be stretched and made straight; but to
demonstrate that his Scholar knew how to value Learning, when he knew so well
how to reward the Teacher.

Having passed the course of his studies in the University, and done his
Exercise with that Applause which is usually the reward of pregnant Wits and
hard study, he was removed into Yorkshire; where first in the City of York he
was an assiduous Preacher, but by the disposition of the Divine Providence he
happened to be engaged at North-Alerton in Disputation with three pragmatical
Romish Priests of the Jesuits Order, whom he so much worsted in the Conference,
and so shamefully disadvantaged by the evidence of Truth, represented wisely
and learnedly, that the famous Primate of York, Archbishop Matthews, a learned
and an excellent Prelate, and a most worthy Preacher, hearing of that Triumph,
sent for him and made him his Chaplain; in whose service he continued till the
death of the Primate, but in that time had given so much testimony of his great
Dexterity in the Conduct of Ecclesiastical and Civil Affairs, that he grew dear
to his Master. In that Employment he was made Prebendary of York, and then of
Rippon; the Dean of which Church having made him his Sub-Dean, he managed the
affairs of that Church so well, that he soon acquired a greater fame, and
entered into the possession of many hearts, and admiration to those many more
that knew him. There and at his Parsonage he continued long to do the duty of a
learned and good Preacher, and by his Wisdom, Eloquence and Deportment, so
gained the affections of the Nobility, Gentry and Commons of that Country,
that as at his return thither upon the blessed Restoration of His most Sacred
Majesty he knew himself obliged enough, and was so kind as to give them a
Visit; so they by their coming in great numbers to meet him, their joyful
Reception of him, their great Caressing of him when he was there, their forward
hopes to enjoy him as their Bishop, their trouble at his Departure, their
unwillingness to let him go away, gave signal testimonies that they were wise
and kind enough to understand and value his great worth.

But while he lived there he was like a Diamond in the dust, (or Lucius
Quinctius at the plough) his low Fortune covered a most valuable person, till
he became observed by Sir Thomas Wentworth Lord President of York, whom we all
knew for his great Excellencies, and his great but glorious Misfortunes. This
rare person espied the great abilities of Doctor Bramhall, and made him his
Chaplain, and brought him into Ireland as one whom he believed would prove the
most fit instrument to serve in that design, which for two years before his
arrival here he had greatly meditated and resolved, the Reformation of Religion
and the Reparation of the broken Fortunes of the Church: The Complaints were
many, the Abuses great, the Causes of the Church vastly numerous, but as fast
as they were brought in, so fast they were by the Lord Deputy referred back to
Dr. Bramhall, who by his indefatigable Pains, great Sagacity, perpetual
Watchfulness, daily and hourly Consultations, reduced things to a more
tolerable condition then they had been left in by the Schismatical principles
of some, and the unjust Prepossessions of others, form any years before. For at
the Reformation the Popish Bishops and Priests seemed to conform, and did so,
that keeping their Bishoprics they might enrich their Kindred and dilapidate
the Revenues of the Church; which by pretended Offices, false Informations,
Fee-farms at contemptible Rents, and ungodly Alienations, were made low as
Poverty it self, and unfit to minister to the needs of them that served the
Altar, or the noblest purposes of Religion. For Hospitality decayed, and the
Bishops were easy to be oppressed by those that would; and they complained,
but for a long time had no helper, till God raised up that glorious Instrument
the Earl of Strafford, who brought over with him as great affections to the
Church and to all public Interests, and as admirable Abilities, as ever before
his time did invest and adorn any of the Kings Vicegerents: and God fitted his
hand with an Instrument good as his skill was great. For the first Specimen of
his Abilities and Diligence in recovery of some lost Tithes being represented
to His late Majesty of blessed and glorious memory, it pleased His Majesty upon
the death of Bishop Downham to advance the Doctor to the Bishopric of D^rry;
which he not only adorned with an excellent spirit and a wise Government, but
did more then double the Revenue, not by taking any thing from them to whom it
was due, but by resuming something of the Churches Patrimony, which by undue
means was detained in unfitting hands.

But his care was beyond his Diocese, and his zele broke out to warm all his
Brethren; and though by reason of the Favor and Piety of King James the
escheated Counties were well provided for their Tithes, yet the Bishoprics
were not so well till the Primate, then Bishop of Derry, by the favor of the
Lord Lieutenant and his own incessant and assiduous labor and wise conduct,
brought in diverse Impropriations, cancelled many unjust Alienations, and did
restore them to a condition much more tolerable; I say much more tolerable; for
though he raised them above contempt, yet they were not near to envy; but he
knew there could not in all times be wanting too many that envied to the Church
every degree of prosperity: so Judas did to Christ the expense of Ointment, and
so Dyonisius told the Priest, When himself stole the golden Cloak from Apollo,
and gave him one of Arc^dian homespun, that it was warmer for him in Winter
and cooler in Summer. And forever, since the Church by God's blessing and the
favor of Religious Kings and Princes, and Pious Nobility, has been endowed
with fair Revenues; inimicus homo, the Enemy has not been wanting by pretenses
of Religion to take away God's portion from the Church, as if his Word were
intended as an instrument to rob his Houses. But when the Israelites were
governed by a (...), and God was their King, and Moses his Lieutenant, and
things were of his management, he was pleased by making great Provisions for
them that ministered in the service of the Tabernacle to consign this truth for
ever, That Men, as they love God, at the same rate are to make provisions for
his Priests. For when himself did it, he not only gave the 48. Cities, with a
mile of Glebe round about their City every way, and yet the whole Country was
but 140. miles long, or thereabouts, from Dan to Beersheba; but besides this
they had the tithe of a^l increase, the first fruits, offerings, vows,
redemptions, and in short, they had 24. sorts of Dues, as Buxtorf relates; and
all this either brought to the Barn home to them without trouble, or else, as
the nature of the thing required, brought to the Temple; the first to make it
more profitable, and the second to declare that they received it not from the
People but from God, not the Peoples kindness but the Lords inheritance;
insomuch that this small Tribe of Levi, which was not the 40th. part of the
People, Numb. 1.46.3.39.
as the Scripture computes them, had a Revenue almost treble to any of the
largest of the Tribes. I will not insist on what Villalpandus observes, Seld.
Hist. of Tithes, c. 2.
it may easily be read in the 45. of Ezekiel concerning that portion which God
reserves for himself and his service, but whatsoever it be this I shall say,
that it is confessedly a Prophecy of the Gospel; See Philo. (...).
but this I add, that they had as little to do, and much less than a Christian
Priest, and yet in all the 24. courses the poorest Priest amongst them might be
esteemed a Rich man. I speak not this to upbraid any man or any thing but
Sacrilege and Murmur, nor to any other end but to represent upon what great and
Religious grounds the then Bishop of Derry did with so much care and assiduous
labor endeavor to restore the Church of Ireland to that splendour and fullness;
which as it is much conducing to the honor of God and of Religion, God himself
being the Judge, so it is much more necessary for you than it is for us, and so
this wise Prelate rarely well understood it; and having the same advantage and
blessing as we now have, a Gracious King, and a Lieutenant Patron of Religion,
and the Church, he improved the deposita pietatis, as Origin calls them, the
Gages of Piety, Tract. 25. in St. Matthew.
which the Religion of the ancient Princes and Nobles of this Kingdom had
bountifully given to such a comfortable competency, that though there be place
left for present and future Piety to enlarge it self, yet no man has reason to
be discouraged in his duty; insomuch that as I have heard from a most worthy
hand, that at his going into England he gave account to the Archbishop of
Canterbury of 30000 l. a year, in the recovery of which he was greatly and
principally instrumental. But the goods of this World are called waters by
Solomon. Stolen waters are sweet, and they are too unstable to be stopped: some
of these waters did run back from their proper chanel, and return to another
course than God and the Laws intended, yet his labors and pious Counsels were
not the less acceptable to God and good men, and therefore by a thankful and
honorable recognition the Convocation of the Church of Ireland has
transmitted in Record to posterity their deep resentment of his singular
services and great abilities in this whole affair. And this honor will for
ever remain to that Bishop of Derry; he had a Zerubbabel who repaired the
Temple and restored its beauty, but he was the Joshuah, the High Priest, who
under him ministered this blessing to the Congregations of the Lord.

But his care was not determined in the exterior part only, and Accessaries
of Religion; he was careful, and he was prosperous in it, to reduce that Divine
and excellent Service of our Church to public and constant Exercise, to Unity
and Devotion; and to cause the Articles of the Church of England to be accepted
as the Rule of public confessions and persuasions here, that they and we might
be Populus unius labii, of one heart and one lip, building up our hopes of
heaven on a most holy Faith; and taking away that Shibboleth which made this
Church lisp too undecently, or rather in some little degree to speak the speech
of Ashdod, and not the language of Canaan; and the excellent and wise pains he
took in this particular no man can dehonestate or reproach, but he that is not
willing to confess that the Church of England is the best Reformed Church in
the world. But when the brave Roman Infantry under the Conduct of Manlius
ascended up to the Capitol to defend Religion and their Altars from the fury of
the Gauls, they all prayed to God, Ut quemadmodum ipsi ad defendendum templum
ejus concurrissent, ita ille virtutem ecrum numine suo tueretur: That as they
came to defend his Temple by their Arms, so he would defend their Persons and
that Cause with his Power and Divinity. And this excellent man in the Cause of
Religion found the like blessing which they prayed for; God by the prosperity
of his labors and a blessed effect gave testimony not only of the Piety and
Wisdom of his purposes, but that he loves to bless a wise Instrument when it is
vigorously employed in a wise and religious labor. He overcame the difficulty
in defiance of all such pretenses as were made even from Religion it self to
obstruct the better procedure of real and material Religion.

These were great things and matter of great envy, and like the fiery eruptions
of Vesuvius might with the very ashes of Consumption have buried another man.
At first indeed, as his blessed Master the most holy Jesus had, so he also had
his Annum acceptabilem. At first the product was nothing but great admiration
at his stupendous parts, and wonder at his mighty diligence and observation of
his unusual zele in so good and great things; but this quickly passed into the
natural daughters of Envy, Suspicion and Detraction, the spirit of Obloquy and
Slander. His zele for recovery of the Church-revenues was called Oppression and
Rapine, Covetousness and Injustice; his care of reducing Religion to wise and
justifiable principles was called Popery and Arminianism, and I know not what
names, which signify what the Authors are pleased to mean, and the People to
conster and to hate. The intermedial prosperity of his Person and Fortune,
which he had as an Earnest of a greater reward to so well-meant labors, was
supposed to be the production of Illiberal Arts and ways of getting; and the
necessa^y refreshment of his wearied spirits, which did not always supply all
his needs, and were sometimes less then the permissions even of prudent
charity, they called Intemperance: Dederunt enim malum M^t^lli Naevio poetae;
their own surmises were the Bills of Accusation, and the splendor of his great
(...), or Doing of good works, was the great probation of all their Calumnies.
But if Envy be the accuser, what can be the defenses of Innocence? Saucior
invidiae morsu, quaerenda medela est,
Dic quibus in terris sentiet aeger opem?
Our B.S. knowing the unsatisfiable angers of men if their Money or Estates
were meddled with, refused to divide an Inheritance amongst Brethren; it was not
to be imagined that this great person (invested, as all his Brethren were, with
the infirmities of Mortality, and yet employed in dividing and recovering and
apportioning of Lands) should be able to bear all that reproach which Jealousy
and Suspicion, and malicious Envy, ^ould invent against him. But (...), said
Sophocles: And so did he; the Affrightments brought to his great Fame and
Reputation made him to walk more warily, and do justly, and act prudently, and
conduct his affairs by the measures of Laws, as far as he understood, and
indeed that was a very great way: but there was Aperta justitia, Clausa manus,
Justice was open, but his Hand was shut; and though every Slanderer could tell
a story, yet none could prove that ever he received a Bribe to blind his eyes
to the value of a Pair of Gloves. It was his own Expression, when he gave glory
to God who had preserved him innocent. But because every man's Cause is right in
his own eyes, it was hard for him so to acquit himself, that in the Intriques
of Law and difficult Cases some of his Enemies should not seem (when they were
heard alone) to speak reason against him. But see the greatness of Truth and
Prudence, and how greatly God stood with him. When the numerous Armies of vexed
people, Turba gravis paci, placidaeque inimica quieti, heaped up Catalogues of
Accusations, when the Parliament of Ireland imitating the violent procedures of
the then disordered English, when his glorious Patron was taken from his head,
and he was disrobed of his great defenses; when Petitions were invited and
Accusations furnished, and Calumny was rewarded and managed with art and power,
when there were above 200. Petitions put in against him, and himself denied
leave to answer by word of mouth; when he was long imprisoned, and treated so
that a guilty man would have been broken into affrightment and pitiful and low
considerations; yet then he him self standing almost alone, like Callimachus at
Marathon invested with enemies and covered with arrows, defended himself beyond
all the powers of guiltiness, even with the defenses of Truth and the bravery
of Innocence, and answered the Petitions in writing, sometimes twenty in a day,
with so much clearness, evidence of truth, reality of Fact and Testimony of
Law, that his very Enemies were ashamed and convinced; they found they had done
like Aesops Viper, they licked the file till their tongues bled; but himself
was wholly invulnerable. They were therefore forced to leave their muster-rolls
and decline the particulars, and fall to their (...) to accuse him for going
about to subvert the fundamental Laws; the way by which great Strafford and
Canterbury fell; which was a device, when all reasons failed, to oppress the
Enemy by the bold affirmation of a Conclusion they could not prove, they did
like those Gladiatores whom the Romans called Retiaries, when they could not
stab their Enemies with their daggers, they threw nets over him, and covered
him with a general mischief. But the Martyr King Charles the First, of most
glorious and Eternal Memory; seeing so great a Champion likely to be oppressed
with numbers and despair, sent what rescue he could, his Royal Letter for his
Bail, which was hardly granted to him, and when it was, it was upon such hard
terms, that his very delivery was a persecution. So necessary it was for them,
who intended to do mischief to the public, to take away the strongest pillars
of the house. This thing I remark to acquit this great man from the tongue of
slander, which had so boldly spoken, that it was certain something would stick,
yet was so impotent and unarmed, that it could not kill that great fame which
his greater worthiness had procured him. It was said of Hippasus the
Pythagorean, that being asked how and what he had done: He answered, Nondum
nihil, neabque; enim adhuc mihi invidetur; I have done nothing yet, for no man
envies me. He that does great things, cannot avoid the tongues and teeth of
Envy; but if calumnies must pass for evidences, the bravest Hero's must always
be the most reproched Persons in the World.

Nascitur Aetolicus, pravum ingeniosus ad omne;
Qui facere assuerat, patriae non degener artis,
Candida de nigris, and de candentibus atra.
Every thing can have an ill name and an ill sense put upon it; but God, who
takes care of reputations as he does of lives, by the orders of his providence
confutes the slander, ut memoria justorum sit in benedictionibus, that the
memory of the righteous man might be emba^m'd with honor: And so it happened to
this great man; for by a public Warranty, by the concurrent consent of both
Houses of Parliament, the Libellous Petitions against him, the false Records
and public Monuments or injurious shame were cancelled, and he was restored in
integrum to that fame where his great labors and just procedures had first
estated him; which, though it was but justice, yet it was also such honor,
that it is greater then the virulence of tongues, which his worthiness and
their envy had armed against him.

But yet the great scene of the troubles was but newly opened. I shall not
refuse to speak yet more of his troubles, as remembering that St. Paul, when he
discourses of the glories of the Saints departed, he tells more of their
sufferings than of their prosperities, as being that Laboratory and Crysable in
which God makes his Servants vessels of honor to his glory. The storm quickly
grew high; and transitum est a linguis ad gladios, and that was indeed (...),
Iniquity had put on arms; when it is armata nequitia, then a man is hard put to
it. The Rebellion breaking out the Bishop went to his charge at Derry, and,
because he was within the defense of Walls, the execrable Traitor Sir Phelim o
Neale laid a snare to bring him to a dishonorable death. For he wrote a Letter
to the Bishop, pretended Intelligence between them, desired that according to
their former agreement such a Gate might be delivered to him. The messenger was
not advised to be cautious, not at all instructed in the art of Secrecy, for it
was intended that he should be searched, intercep^ed and hanged for ought they
cared: but the Arrow was shot against the Bishop, that he might be accused for
base Conspiracy, and die with shame and sad dishonor. But here God manifested
his mighty care of his Servants; he was pleased to send into the heart of the
messenger such an affrightment, that he directly ran away with the Letter, and
never durst come near the Town to deliver it. This story was published by Sir
Phelim himself, who added, That if he could have thus ensnared the Bishop, he
had good assurance the Town should have been his own: Sed bonitas Dei
praevalitura est super omnem malitiam hominis, The goodness of God is greater
then all the malice of Men; and nothing could so prove how dear that sacred
Life was to God, as his rescue from the dangers. Stantia non poterant tecta
probare Deos: To have kept him in a warm house had been nothing, unless the
roof had fallen upon his head, that rescue was a remark of Divine favor and
Providence. But it seems Sir Phelim's Treason against the Life of this worthy
Man had a Correspondent in the Town; and it broke out speedily; for what they
could not effect by malicious stratagem, they did in part by open force; they
turned the Bishop out of the Town, and upon trifling and unjust pretenses
searched his Carriages, and took what they pleased, till they were ashamed to
take more: they did worse then divorce him from his Church, for in all the
Roman Divorces they said, Tuas tibi res habeto, Take your goods and be gone;
but Plunder was Religion then. However, though the usage was sad, yet it was
recompensed to him by his taking Sanctuary in Oxford, where he was graciously
received by that most incomparable and divine Prince; but having served the
King in Yorkshire by his Pen, and by his Counsels, and by his Interests,
returned back to Ireland, where under the excellent conduct of his Grace the
now Lord Lieutenant, he ran the risque and fortune of oppressed Virtue.

But God having still resolved to afflict us, the good man was forced into the
fortune of the Patriarchs, to leave his Country and his Charges, and seek for
safety and bread in a strange Land; for so the Prophets were used to do,
wandering up and down in sheeps-clothing, but poor as they were the world was
not worthy of them; and this worthy man, despising the shame, took up his Cross
and followed his Master. Exilium causa ipsa jubet sibi dulce videri,
Et desiderium dulce levat patriae.
He was not ashamed to suffer where the Cause was honorable and glorious; but
so God provided for the needs of his banished, and sent a man who could
minister comfort to the afflicted, and courage to the persecuted, and
resolutions to the tempted, and strength to that Religion for which they all
suffered.

And here this great man was indeed triumphant; this was one of the last and
best scenes of his life: Pindar.
(...), The last days are the best witnesses of a man. But so it was, that he
stood up in public and brave defense for the Doctrine and Discipline of the
Church of England; First, by his Sufferings and great Example, for Verbis
tantum philosophari non est Doctoris sed Histrionis, To talk well and not to do
bravely is for a Comedian, not a Divine: But this great man did both; he
suffered his own Calamity with great courage, and by his wise Discourses
strengthened the hearts of others.

For there wanted not diligent Tempters in the Church of Rome, who (taking
advantage of the Afflictions of His Sacred Majesty, in which state Men commonly
suspect every thing, and like men in sickness are willing to change from side
to side, hoping for ease and finding none) flew at Royal Game, and hoped to
draw away the King from that Religion which His most Royal Father, the best Man
and the wisest Prince in the world, had sealed with the best Blood in
Christendom; and which Himself sucked in with His Education, and had confirmed
by Choice and Reason, and confessed publicly and bravely, and has since
restored prosperously. M^llitie^e was the man, witty and bold enough to a^tempt
a zealous and a foolish undertaking, and addressed himself with ignoble indeed
but witty arts to persuade the King to leave what was dearer to Him then His
Eyes. It is true, it was a Wave dashed against a Rock, and an Arrow shot
against the Sun, it could not reach him; but the Bishop of Derry turned it
al^o, and made it to fall upon the shooters head; for he made so ingenious, so
learned and so accute Reply to that book, he so discovered the Errors of the
Roman Church, retorted the Arguments, stated the Questions, demonstrated the
Truth, and shamed their Procedures, that nothing could be a greater argument of
the Bishops Learning, great Parts, deep Judgment, Quickness of Apprehension,
and Sincerity in the Catholic and Apostolic Faith, or of the Follies and
Prevarications of the Church of Rome. He wrote no Apologies for himself; though
it were much to be wished that, as Junius wrote his own Life, or Moses his own
story, so we might have understood from himself how great things God had done
for him and by him; but all that he permitted to God, and was silent in his own
Defenses; Gloriosius enim est injuriam tacendo fugere, quam respondendo
superare. But when the Honor and Conscience of his King, and the Interest of a
true Religion, was at stake, the fire burned within him, and at last he spoke
with his tongue; he cried out like the son of Croesus, (...), Take heed and
meddle not with the King; His Person is too sacred, and Religion too dear to
Him to be assaulted by Vulgar hands. In short, he acquitted himself in this
affair with so much Truth and Piety, Learning and Judgment, that in those
Papers his memory will last unto very late succeeding Generations.

But this most Reverend Prelate found a nobler adversary and a braver scene for
his contention. He found that the Roman Priests being wearied and baffled by
the wise Discourses and pungent Arguments of the English Divines, had
studiously declined any more to dispute the particular Questions against us,
but fell at last upon a general Charge, imputing to the Church of England the
great crime of Schism; and by this they thought they might with most
probability deceive unwary and unskilful Readers; for they saw the Schism, and
they saw we had left them, and because they considered not the Causes, they
resolved to outface us in the Charge. But now it was that dignum nactus
argumentum, having an Argument fit to employ his great abilities, Consecrat hic
praesul calamum calamique labores
Ante aras Domino laeta trophaea suo;
the Bishop now dedicates his labors to the service of God and of his Church,
undertook the Question, and in a full Discourse proves the Church of Rome, not
only to be guilty of the Schism by making it necessary to depart from them, but
they did actuate the Schisms, and themselves made the first separation in the
great point of the Popes Supremacy, which was the Palladium for which they
principally contended. He made it appear that the Popes of Rome were Usurpers
of the rights of Kings and Bishops, that they brought in new Doctrines in every
Age, that they imposed their own devices upon Christendom as Articles of Faith,
that they prevaricated the Doctrines of the Apostles, that the Church of
England only returned to her Primitive purity, that she joined with Christ and
his Apostles, that she agreed in all the Sentiments of the Primitive Church. He
stated the questions so wisely, and conducted them so prudently, and handled
them so learnedly, that I may truly say, they were never more materially
confuted by any man, since the questions have so unhappily disturbed
Christendom. Verum hoc eos male ussit: and they finding themselves smitten
under the fifth rib, set up an old Champion of their own, a Goliath to fight
against the Armies of Israel; the old Bishop of Chalcedon, known to many of us,
replied to this excellent Book; but was so answered by a Rejoinder made by the
Lord Bishop of Derry, in which he so pressed the former Arguments, refuted the
Cavils, brought in so many impregnable Authorities and Probations, and added so
many moments and weights to his discourse, that the pleasures of reading the
Book would be the greatest, if the profit to the Church of God were not
greater. Flumina tum lactis, tum flumina nectaris ibant,
Flavaque de viridi stillabant ilice mella.
For so Sampson's riddle was again expounded; Out of the strong came meat, and
out of the eater came sweetness; his Arguments were strong, and the Eloquence
was sweet and delectable; and though there start up another combatant against
him, yet he had only the honor to fall by the hands of Hector: still haeret
lateri lethalis arundo; the headed arrow went in so far, that it could not be
drawn out, but the barbed steel stuck behind. And whenever men will desire to
be satisfied in those great questions, the Bishop of Derry's book shall be his
Oracle.

I will not insist upon his other excellent writings; but it is known every
where with what Piety and acumen he wrote against the Manichean Doctrine of
Fatal necessity, which a late witty man had pretended to adorn with a new
Vizor; but this excellent person washed off the Cerusse and the meretricious
Paintings, rarely well asserted the economy of the Divine Providence, and
having once more triumphed over his Adversary, plenus victoriarum and
trophaeorum betook himself to the more agreeable attendance upon Sacred
Offices, and having usefully and wisely discoursed of the sacred Rite of
Confirmation, imposed hands upon the most Illustrious Princes, the Dukes of
York and Gloucester, and the Princess Royal, and ministered to them the promise
of the holy Spirit, and ministerially established them in the Religion and
Service of the holy Jesus. And one thing more I shall remark, that at his
leaving those Parts upon the Kings Return, some of the Remonstrant Ministers of
the Low Countries coming to take their leaves of this great man, and desiring
that by his means the Church of England would be kind to them, he had reason to
grant it, because they were learned men, and in many things of a most excellent
belief; yet he reproved them, and gave them caution against it, that they
approached too near and gave too much countenance to the great and dangerous
errors of the Socinians.

He thus having served God and the King abroad, God was pleased to return to
the King and to us all, as in the days of old, and we sung the song of David.

In convertendo captivitatem Sion: When King David and all his servants
returned to Jerusalem, this great person having trod in the Wine Press was
called to drink of the Wine, and as an honorary Reward of his great services
and abilities was chosen Primate of this National Church: In which time we are
to look upon him, as the King and the Kings great Vicegerent did, as a person
concerning whose abilities the World had too great testimony ever to make a
doubt. It is true, he was in the declension of his age and health; but his very
Ruins were goodly; and they who saw the broken heaps of Pompey's Theater, and
the crushed Obelisks, and the old face of beauteous Philaenium, could not but
admire the disordered glories of such magnificent structures, which were
venerable in their very dust.

He ever was used to overcome all difficulties, only Mortality was too hard
for him; but still his Virtues and his Spirit was immortal, he still took great
care, and still had new and noble designs, and proposed to himself admirable
things. He governed his Province with great justice and sincerity; Unus amplo
consulens pastor gregi,
Somnos tuetur omnium solus vigil.
And had this remark in all his Government, that as he was a great hater of
Sacrilege, so he professed himself a public enemy to Non-residence, and often
would declare wisely and religiously against it, allowing it in no case but of
Necessity or the greater good of the Church. There are great things spoken of
his Predecessor S. Patrick, that he founded 700. Churches and Religious
Convents, that he ordained 5000. Priests, and with his own hands consecrated
350. Bishops. How true the story is I know not; but we were all witnesses that
the late Primate, whose memory we now celebrate, did by an extraordinary
contingency of Providence in one day consecrate two Archbishops and ten
Bishops; and did benefit to almost all the Churches in Ireland, and was greatly
instrumental to the Reendowments of the whole Clergy; and in the greatest
abilities and incomparable industry was inferior to none of his most glorious
Antecessours.

Since the Canonization of Saints came into the Church, we find no Irish Bishop
canonized except S. Laurence of Dublin, and S. Malachias of Down; indeed
Richard of Armagh's Canonization was propounded, but not effected; but the
Character which was given of that learned Primate by Trithemius does exactly
fit this our late Father; De scriptor. Eccles.
Vir in Divinis Scripturis eruditus, secularis Philosophiae jurisque Canonici
non ignarus, clarus ingenio, sermon scholasticus, in declamandis sermonibus ad
populum excellentis industriae: He was learned in the Scriptures, skilled in
secular Philosophy, and not unknowing in the Civil and Canon Laws, (in which
studies I wish the Clergy were with some carefulness and diligence still more
conversant) he was of an excellent spirit, a scholar in his discourses, an
early and industrious Preacher to the people. And as if there were a more
particular sympathy between their souls, our Primate had so great a Veneration
to his memory, that he purposed, if he had lived, to have restored his Monument
in Dundalke, which Time, or Impiety, or Unthankfulness had either omitted or
destroyed. So great a lover he was of all true and inherent worth, that he
loved it in the very memory of the dead, and to have such great Examples
transmitted to the intuition and imitation of posterity.

At his coming to the Primacy he knew he should at first espy little besides
the Ruins of Discipline, a Harvest of Thorns, and Heresies prevailing in the
hearts of the People, the Churches possessed by Wolves and Intruders, Men's
hearts greatly estranged from true Religion; and therefore he set himself to
weed the fields of the Church; he treated the Adversaries sometimes sweetly,
sometimes he confuted them learnedly, sometimes he rebuked them sharply. He
visited his Charges diligently, and in his own person, not by Proxies and
instrumental Deputations: Quaerens non nostra, sed nos, and quae sunt Jesu
Christi; he designed nothing that we knew of but the Redintegration of
Religion, the Honor of God and the King, the Restoring of collapsed
Discipline, and the Renovation of Faith and the Service of God in the Churches.
And still he was indefatigable, and, even as the last scene of his life,
intended to undertake a a Regal Visitation. Quid enim vultis me otiosum a
Domino comprehendi? said one; he was not willing that God should take him
unimployed: But, good man, he felt his Tabernacle ready to fall in pieces, and
could go no further, for God would have no more work done by that hand; he
therefore espying this, put his house in order, and had lately visited his
Diocese, and done what he then could to put his Charge in order; for he had a
good while since received the sentence of death within himself, and knew he was
shortly to render an account of his stewardship; he therefore upon a brisk
alarm of death, which God sent him the last January, made his Will; in which,
besides the prudence and presence of spirit manifested in making just and wise
settlement of his Estate, and provisions for his Descendants; at midnight, and
in the trouble of his sickness and circumstances of addressing death, still
kept a special sentiment and made confession of Gods admirable mercies, and
gave thanks that God had permitted him to live to see the blessed Restoration
of His Majesty and the Church of England, confessed his Faith to be the same as
ever, gave praises to God that he was born and bred up in this Religion, and
prayed to God and hoped he should die in the Communion of this Church, which he
declared to be the most pure and Apostolical Church in the whole world.

He prayed to God to pardon his frailties and infirmities, relied upon the
mercies of God and the merits of Jesus Christ, and with a singular sweetness
resigned up his soul into the hands of his Redeemer.

But God, who is the great Choragus and Master of the Scenes of Life and Death,
was not pleased then to draw the Curtains; there was an Epilogue to his Life
yet to be acted and spoken. He returned to actions and life, and went on in the
methods of the same procedure as before; was desirous still to establish the
affairs of the Church, complained of some disorders which he purposed to
redress, girt himself to the work; but though his spirit was willing, yet his
flesh was weak; and as the Apostles in the Vespers of Christ's Passion, so he in
the Eve of his own Dissolution was heavy, not to sleep, but heavy unto death,
and looked for the last warning, which seized on him in the midst of business;
and though it was sudden, yet it could not be unexpected, or unprovided by
surprise, and therefore could be no other then that (...) which Augustus used
to wish unto himself, a civil and well-natur'd death, without the amazement of
troublesome circumstances, or the great cracks of a falling house, or the
convulsions of impatience. Seneca tells that Bassus Aufidius was wont to say,
Epist. 30.
Sperare se nullum dolorem esse in illo extremo anhelitu, si tamen esset,
habere aliquantum in ipsa brevitate solatii: He hoped that the pains of the
last Dissolution were little or none; or if they were, it was full of comfort
that they could be but short. It happened so to this excellent Man; his Passive
Fortitude had been abundantly tried before, and therefore there was the less
need of it now; his active Graces had been abundantly demonstrated by the great
and good things he did, and therefore his last scene was not so laborious, but
God called him away something after the manner of Moses, which the Jews express
by Osculum oris Dei, The Kiss of Gods mouth; that is, a death indeed
foresignified, but gentle, and serene, and without temptation.

To sum up all; He was a wise Prelate, a learned Doctor, a just Man, a true
Friend, a great Benefactour to others, a thankful Beneficiary where he was
obliged himself. He was a faithful Servant to his Masters, a Loyal Subjest to
the King, a zealous Assertor of his Religion against Popery on one side, and
Fanaticism on the other. The practice of his Religion was not so much in Forms
and exterior Ministries, though he was a great observer of all the public
Rites and Ministries of the Church, as it was in doing good for others. He was
like Myson, whom the Scythian Anarchasis so greatly praised, (...), he governed
his family well, he gave to all their due of maintenance and duty, he did great
benefit to mankind; he had the fate of the Apostle S. Paul, he passed through
evil report and good report, as a deceiver and yet true. He was a man of great
business and great resort: Semper aliquis in Cydonis domo, as the Corinthian
said; There was always somebody in Cydon's house. Synes. ep. 57.
He was (...), he divided his life into labor and his book; he took care of
his Churches when he was alive, and even after his death, having left 500 l.
for the Repair of his Cathedral of Armagh and S. Peter's Church in Drogheda. He
was an excellent Scholar, and rarely well accomplished; first instructed to
great excellency by natural parts, and then consummated by study and
experience. Melanchthon was used to say that himself was a Logician, Pomeranus
a Grammarian, Justus Jonas an Orator, but that Luther was all these. It was
greatly true of him, that the single perfections which make many men eminent,
were united in this Primate and ma^e him illustrious.

At, at, Quintilium perpetuus sopor
Urget: cui pudor and justitiae soror
Incorrupta fides, nudaque veritas
Quando ullum invenient parem?
It will be hard to find his Equal in all things: Fortasse tanquam Phoenix anno
quingentesimo nascitur, (that I may use the words of Seneca) nec est mirum ex
intervallo magna generari mediocria and in turbam n^scentia saepe fortuna
producit: eximia vero ipsa raritate commendat. For in him was visible the great
lines of Hooker's Judiciousness, of Jewel's Learning, of the Accuteness of
Bishop Andrews. He was skilled in more great things then one; and, as one said
of Phidias, he could not only make excellent statues of Ivory, but he could
work in Stone and Brass. He showed his Equanimity in Poverty, and his Justice
in Riches; he was useful in his Country, and profitable in his Banishment;
for, as Paraeus was at Anvilla, Luther at Wittenburg, S. Athanasius and S.
Chrysostom in their Banishment, S. Hierom in his Retirement at Bethlehem, they
were Oracles to them that needed it; so was he in Holland and France, where he
was abroad; and, beside the particular endearments which his friends received
from him, for he did do relief to his brethren that wanted, and supplied the
Soldiers out of his store in York-shi^e, when himself could but ill spare it;
but he received public thanks from the Convocation of which he was President,
and public Justification from the Parliament where he was Speaker; so that
although, as one said, Miraculi instar vitae iter, si longum, sine offensione
percurrere; yet no man had greater enemies, and no man had greater
justifications.

But God has taken our Elijah from our heads this day. I pray God that at
least his Mantle may be left behind, and that his spirit may be doubled upon
his Successor; and that we may all meet together with him at the right hand of
the Lamb, where every man shall receive according to his deeds, whether they be
good or whether they be evil. I conclude with the words of Caius Plinius,
Equidem beatos puto quibus Deorum munere datum est, aut facere scribenda, aut
scribere legenda. He wrote many things fit to be read, and did very many things
worthy to be written; which if we wisely imitate, we may hope to meet him in
the Resurrection of the just, and feast with him in the eternal Supper of the
Lamb, there to sing perpetual Anthems to the honor of God the Father, Son and
Holy Ghost, to whom be all honor, etc.

THE END.
RULES AND ADVICES To the Clergy OF THE DIOCESE OF DOWN and CONNER, For their
Deportment in their Personal and Public Capacities.

Given by Jer. Tailor, Bishop of that Diocese, at the Visitation at LISNEGARVEY.

The second Edition.

LONDON: Printed by J. G. for Richard Royston, Bookseller to the Kings most
Excellent Majesty, 1663.

Rules and Advices to the Clergy.
I. Personal Duty. II. Of Prudence required in Ministers. III. The Rules and
Measures of Government to be used by Ministers, in their respective Cures. IV.
Rules and Advices concerning Preaching. V. Rules and Advices concerning
Catechism. VI. Rules and Advices concerning the Visitation of the Sick. VII.
Of ministering the Sacraments, public Prayers, and other duties of Ministers.
Rules and Advices to the CLERGY.
I. Personal Duty.
REmember that it is your great duty, Why take thou my Law into thy mouth,
seeing thou hate to be reformed thereby? He that lives an idle life may
preach with Truth and Reason, or as did the Pharisees; but not as Christ, or as
one having Authority.

Every Minister in taking accounts of his life, things may be lawful in them,
which he must not suffer in himself.





Be not over-righteous (says Solomon) that is, not severe in demanding, or
forcing every thing, though it be indeed his due.

you are willing to remit many things, but you must not wrong the Church: for
though it be true, that you are not to do prejudice to succession, yet many
things may be forgiven upon just occasions, from which the Church shall receive
no incommodity; but be sure that there are but few things which thou art bound
to do in thy personal capacity, but the same also, and more, thou art obliged
to perform, as thou art a public person.

Never exact the offerings, or customary

Avoid all pride, as you would flee from

Take no measures of Humility, but such Souls, in low opinion of your selves,
and in real preferring others before your selves, and in such significations,
which can neither deceive your selves nor others.



In the world ye shall have trouble; but in me ye shall have peace: and
consider this also, which is a great Truth; That every degree of love to the
world, is so much taken from the Love of God.

Be no otherwise sollicitous of your Fame

Remember that no Minister can govern

Be sure in all your Words and Actions to

Pray much and very fervently, for all your your Charges: Ever remembering that
you are by God appointed, as the Ministers of Prayer, and the Ministers of good
things, to pray for all the World, and to heal all the World, as far as you
are able.





II. Of Prudence required in Ministers.


Let no Minister be governed by the opinion Granata told the Governors of
Leria and Patti, like silly Animals they take burdens upon their backs at the
pleasure of the multitude, which they neither can retain with Prudence, nor
shake off with Safety.

Let not the Reverence of any man cause

When you teach your people any part of

In taking accounts of the good Lives of your selves or others, take your
measures by the express words of Scripture; and next to them estimate them by
their proportion and compliance with the public measures, with the Laws of the
Nation, Eccesiastical and Civil, and by the Rules of Fame, of public honesty
and good Report; and last of all by their observation of the Ordinances and
exterior parts of Religion.





The Rules and Measures of Government to be used by Ministers in their
respective Cures.
USe no violence to any man, to bring him

Suffer no quarrel in your Parish, and speedily

Suffer no houses of Debauchery, of Entertainment, take care that they observe
the Rules of Christian Piety, and the allowed measures of Laws.





all ways reasonable and pious, and is obedient to Laws, then take care of
him, use him tenderly, persuade him meekly, reprove him gently, and deal
mercifully with him, till God shall reveal that also unto him, in which his
unavoidable trouble and his temptation lies.

Mark them that cause Divisions among Scandals in the abstract; they are
Offenders and Offenses too. (...). Vide Romans 16.17 (...).
But if any man have an Opinion, let him have it to himself, till he can be
cured of his disease by time, and counsel, and gentle usages. But if he
separates from the Church, or gathers a Congregation, he is proud, and is
fallen from the communion of Saints, and the Unity of the Catholic Church.

He that observes any of his people to be

Strive to get the love of the Congregation; Cause them to love you and revere
you; to love with Religion, not for your compliance; for the good you do them,
not for that you please them. Get their love by doing your duty, but not by
omitting or spoiling any part of it: Ever remembering the severe words of our
blessed Savior, Woe be to you when all men speak well of you.





duty wisely, and according to the Laws: remembering always that a servant of
God can no more be hurt by all the powers of wickedness, than by the noise of a
Flies wing, or the chirping of a Sparrow. Brethren, do well for your selves: do
well for your selves as long as you have time; you know not how soon death will
come.

Entertain no persons into your Assemblies

Never appeal to the judgment of the people

Let no Minister of a Parish introduce any Ceremony, Rites or Gestures, though
with some seeming Piety and Devotion, but what are commanded by the Church, and
established by Law: and let these also be wisely and usefully explicated to the
people, that they may understand the reasons and measures of obedience; but let
there be no more introduced, lest the people be burdened unnecessarily, and
tempted or divided.

IV. Rules and Advices concerning Preaching.




the people to get Christ, to be united to Christ, and things of the like
unlimited signification; but tell them in every duty, what are the measures,
what circumstances, what instruments, and what is the particular minute meaning
of every general Advice. For Generals not explicated do but fill the peoples
heads with empty notions, and their mouths with perpetual unintelligible talk:
but their hearts remain empty, and themselves are not edified.

Let not the humors and inclinations of

Every Minister in reproofs of sin and sinners, besides this, it does nothing
but amuse the people in the faults of others, teaching them to revile their
Betters, and neglect the dangers of their own souls.

John the Baptist told the Soldiers what the Soldiers should do, but troubled
not their heads with what was the duty of the Scribes and Pharisees.



old Christians did, and the new should; to do hurt to no man, to do good to
every man: For in these things the honor of God consists, and the Kingdom of
the Lord Jesus.

Press those Gr^ces most that do most good, Cor. 13. For this grace is not
finished by good words, nor yet by good works, but it is a great building, and
many materials go to the structure of it. It is worth your study, for it is the
fulfilling of the Commandments.

Because it is impossible that Charity should After a good dinner let us sit
down and backbite our neighbors.]

Let every Minister be careful to observe, and pride, bragging, lying in
ordinary conversation, covetousness, peevishness, and hasty anger, and such
like. For the Word of God searches deeper then the Laws of men; and many things
will be hard to prove by the measures of Courts, which are easy enough to be
observed by the watchful and diligent eye and ear of the Guide of Souls.

To fear God and keep his commandments. Speak but very little of the secret
and high things of God, but as much as you can of the lowness and humility of
Christ.

It is enough that you reprove an Error; but what shall be the sentence
against it at the day of Judgment, thou know not, and therefore pray for
the erring person, and reprove him, but leave the sentence to his Judge.

Let your Sermons teach the duty of all

In your Sermons and Discourses of Religion, sends forth no medicinable herbs,
but store of Mushromes; and they give a demonstration that they are either
impertinent people, or else of a querulous nature; and that they are ready to
disturb the Church, if they could find occasion.

viz. Peace and Righteousness, Holiness and Mortification.

Every Minister ought to be careful that he England and Ireland, nor introduce
any Doctrine against any of the four first General Councils; for these, as they
are measures of truth, so also of necessity; that is, as they are safe, so they
are sufficient; and besides what is taught by these, no matter of belief is
necessary to salvation.

Let no Preacher bring before the people in

Let not the Preacher make an Article of





Mary; because these Feasts containing in them the great Fundamentals of our
Faith, will with most advantage convey the mysteries to the people, and fix
them in their memories, by the solemnity and circumstances of the day.

In all your Sermons and Discourses speak nothing God cannot be tempted,
neither tempts he any man. God is true, and every man a liar.

Let no Preacher compare one Ordinance with

Let no man preach for the praise of men; but Herod was for the omission of
this smitten by an Angel; and do thou tremble, searing lest the judgment of
God be otherwise than the sentence of the people.

V. Rules and Advices concerning Catechism.
EVery Minister is bound upon every Lords day Commandments, and the Doctrine
of the Sacraments, as they are set down and explicated in the Church Catechism.





their Minister in spiritual things, to an enquiry concerning all the parts of
their duty: for by preaching, and catechizing, and private intercourse, all the
needs of Souls can best be served; but by preaching alone they cannot.

Let the people be exhorted to keep fasting days,

Let every Minister be diligent in exhorting all excellency of Christian
Religion, the necessity and advantages of it, and of living according to it, be
fitted and disposed, and accordingly by them presented to the Bishop, that he
may pray over them, and invocate the holy Spirit, and minister the holy Rite of
Confirmation.

VI. Rules and Advices concerning the Visitation of the Sick.


seem so very late for the sins of our life; what time shall be left to repent
us of the sins we commit on our deathbed?

When you comfort the afflicted, endeavor to

In answering the cases of conscience of the sick

If the sick person enquires concerning the final

In order to these and many other good purposes, reported: and in all your
conversation be sure to give good example, and upon all occasions to give good
counsel.

VII. Of ministering the Sacraments, public Prayers, and other duties of
Ministers.


Adam.

are to be invited to a frequent Communion: and let it be given and received
with great reverence.

Every Minister ought to be well skilled and studied

Let not a Curate of Souls trouble himself with





In these and all things else that concern the Ministers duty, if there be
difficulty you are to repair to your Bishop for further advice, assistance and
information.

FINIS.

