A LETTER TO THE CLERGY OF THE Dioecess of Ely, FROM THE BISHOP OF ELY. Before,
and Preparatory TO HIS VISITATION.

CAMBRIDGE, Printed by J. Hayes. M. DC. LXXXVI.

Salutem and Officia in Christo Jesu.
Good Brother,
I. HAving last Year (the first of My Translation) Personally Visited your
Church, and every Parish Church within My Jurisdiction, to Administer
Confirmation, bringing it home even to your own doors, and to know the present
State of My whole Dioecess, before I would Enter upon My Triennial Visitation;
I thank God, I find no Cause to say upon the whole Account, He that increases
Knowledge, increases Sorrow; Since rather with a great deal of Joy I find my
Lot is fallen among a Clergy, for the generality of them, as Devout and
Diligent, as Learned and Studious, as Orthodox and Regular, as Able and Willing
to Rectify whatsoever is Amiss, as any Clergy Our Holy Mother the Church of
England can (I verily believe) show in any Dioecess.

And now I am very desirous to reap the Fruits of my last Year's Labors, to
see very good effects of that particular Inspection, whereupon, I suppose, you
Received a special Injunction, to Regulate several things that were out of
Order. And I am so full of Concern, that the General Review to be made ere long
at the Visitation, may be made effectual, that I cannot forbear Addressing my
self to you at this time, Beseeching you now to lend me both your hands, with
all your most Active and vigorous Brotherly Assistance; And (if I may presume
to use the Apostle's expression) Though I might be much bold in Christ, to
enjoin you That which is Convenient, yet for Love's sake I rather beseech you.

II. I Choose this Way of Communicating my thoughts by Letter, partly to
supersede the Necessity of my making any long speeches (when there will be so
much other and better work) at our Set-Meeting. May it please God to bless it
for the good of his Church! But chiefly I consider that several Advertisements,
which may now be useful Preparatives, would come somewhat too late, when
Presentiments were once Drawn and Brought and offered to us.

III. I do therefore in the first place entreat and expect it from you, as you
would not be a Partaker of other Men's Sins, That you be exceeding Careful at
this time to show your Churchwardens their Duty, and especially to make them
sensible how great a Guilt they contract, if they break the solemn Oath which
they must all take upon this Occasion.

IV. But besides thus giving them warning of their Duty and Danger in General,
I am in hopes you will not grudge to give them your best Advise, to compare my
Articles with the present condition of your Parish; and Direct them how to
Discharge a good Conscience by making a particular, sincere, and sufficient
Answer to each Article; and join your selves with them in the Presentiments, as
by consequence from the Canon you are Obliged to do, if need be (and Can. 113
sure there was never more need) when you cannot otherwise Root out Sin and
Impiety.

And your thus Joining with the Churchwardens in their Presentiments, and
subscribing them with your own hands, shall be Admitted and Accepted instead of
the Ministers presenting separately and by themselves, all those that do not
Communicate at Easter, whereas Orders shall Issue speedily to Require that
special Presentment (according to the Hundred and twelfth Canon) to be made by
those Ministers, whom Reason and This Request will not prevail withal to join
with their Churchwardens in this General One.

V. But further let Me prevail with you, that publicly by your Preaching at
this time, and professedly, with regard to the Approaching Visitation, you
would show the people, they are Obliged in Conscience now to make their just
open Complaints, instead of Odious Reflections behind our Backs, and that you
would make your Parish understand, what our Blessed Savior intended, when He
expressly commanded, Tell it to the Church, that none may be Detered by any
unworthy Censures, as if they were base Informers, from doing that Christian
Office.

VI. That as well in your Sermons, as in your private Conferences with your
Parishioners, you labor to make them deeply apprehensive of the great and
heavy load, which the just Censures of the Church do lay upon grievous
Offenders in any kind; and particularly upon such Officers of her own, as
Deliberately Forswear themselves; and that they may have no reason to bear any
Malice to such as do but their Duties in making Presentiments, you are seriously
and vehemently to Represent a well-deserv'd Excommunication's sad effects on
their Souls and Consciences; and besides those Spiritual, to put them in mind
of the Temporal ill effects, that in case of extremity may follow on their
Fortunes, and Liberties, at least on their Ease and Quiet, and Good Name.
Besides what the Laws against Perjury may do, if pressed against such men as
make no Conscience of giving in a known notorious Lie, with an Omnia Been under
their own hands, just after having laid them on the Holy Bible.

VII. But there is certainly another part of your Office, which in Order of
Nature and time should go before that of presenting Delinquents. And the part
which I mean is this: you are personally (and now most concernedly) to Apply
your selves in Order to the Convincing and Reclaiming such as stand liable to
Ecclesiastical Censures, so as (if it be possible) to prevent the Necessity of
using Rigor with them: you may Divide such Obnoxious Persons into three
Generals; those who are wholly out of the Churches Communion; or those who
pretending to be partly in it, yet Omit their Christian Duties of frequenting
the Divine Service, and the Holy Sacrament, from some Erroneous Principle they
have taken up; Or those, who are forward as the foremost to come even to the
Spiritual Feast it self, But without the wedding Garment, i. e. In their
Ignorance, or their Wickedness, still leading their Lives in Scandalous and
Notorious Sin, such as Common Swearing, habitual Drunkenness, Fornication,
Adultery. According to their special Exigences and several wretched
Circumstances you are to treat with these. If you cannot Obtain of them to come
and discourse with you at your own Houses, you must even go to Theirs;
remembering, who it was that went about doing good, and healing even at their
Houses where He knew they Watched him, and laid Wait to entangle him in his
Talk. And considering His express and most wise Appointment, First to tell the
Offending Brother his fault between you and Him; But if that do not gain your
Brother, then to take with you two or three Witnesses; As you may do your
Churchwardens or some other steady understanding Men in your Parish, and Try
again to Reduce and Persuade him to give satisfaction to the Church, before you
present him; Nay in Extraordinary Cases you may call in the help of some
Discreet and Worthy Neighbour-Minister: And if neither of these Courses
prevail, then your Third step must be Telling it to the Church, whose heaviest
Sentence of Excommunication ought not indeed to be pressed and passed without
such fair Admonitions, as I hope you now will give. And I should be glad, if
there be time at Our Meeting, to consult with you, and make some Proposals to
you, how more particularly to form our Methods of inflicting the Spiritual
Censures within this Dioecese so leisurely, orderly, and openly, that no Body
may pretend to be surpised, and it shall be long of his own Obstinacy, if any
one see himself in that Deplorable State, that He is to be as an Heathen to
other Christians.

VIII. Now to prepare us both for our preaching to the People on this subject
of Excommunication, and for Discoursing it among our selves, or designing the
means of managing it to Edification, not to Destruction, I Recommend it to you
(especially if you live not in the University but in the Country, where you
have not the use of many Books) to procure and peruse One instead of All, and
that is My Reverend Friend, Dr. Comber's late excellently learned, and no very
long Treatise of Excommunication.

In order to the Restoring of this, and several other parts of our lost
Discipline, I am resolved to Revive (if God bless me) that ancient, and useful
Custom of my Reverend Predecessors the Bishops of Ely, immediately before the
Great Rebellion (a Custom according to an excellent Ancient Canon of the
British Church) to have Synodical Meetings of the Clergy once a year at least.
At which Assemblies I will not fail (with God's help) when I can, to Attend
constantly. I also Design as often as I can to have inspection into the state
and condition of each Cure of Souls in the Dioecese.

IX. And that I may not then proceed in the Dark, and that you may be able to
give me, and your selves such Lights as are but Necessary for us, I do most
earnestly Desire you, and sure I need not say I require (the thing that I ask
being so very Requisite in its own Nature) that you will make, and bring in
with you to the Visitation (besides the Presentiments) fairly written in a Paper
by its self, a Notitia of your Parish; By Notitia I mean an Account of every
Family, expressing the Christian and Syrname of the Housekeeper, the Number
and Names of all Persons above Sixteen Years old in that Family by themselves,
and of all under Sixteen by themselves, setting for a Mark the Letters A. C.
overright the Name of every Adult, that is an Actual Communicant in each
Family, and C. A. for a Mark over the Name of every Child that has bin
sufficiently well Catechized; and Con. for a Mark over every One that has bin
already Confirmed: by this means, both you and I, shall be able to Discern at
one view, what is already done, and what there is yet to do. And I desire each
Minister carefully to keep a Copy by him of his Notitia, remembering it is One
part of the Character of the Good Shepherd, not only to Know his sheep, and be
known of them, But Joh. 10. 3, 14.
even to Call his own sheep by Name. And since he is even to lay down his Life
for the sheep, it is hard if he will not lay out a little of his time for them,
while his flocks pass under the Jer. 33. 13*
hands of him that Tells them. And his pains will be much for his Ease
afterward, and of great use to him as well as to me upon several Occasions.

For this being easily Revised and Produced at Confirmations, will also serve
to prevent the Common irregular practice of Men, and Women, and Children coming
over and over again to be Confirmed; and will presently show the Minister whom
he ought to instruct and prepare for Confirmation.

This List will be also very serviceable in order to those Personal
Applications to your Parishioners before the Holy Communion; and this List,
being filled up or altered (as your Parish changes) from time to time, will
always lay before you the State of that Cure of Souls, which in the Name of God
was at your Institution committed to your Charge.

X. Of some other things fit to be done, or at least begun before the
Visitation, and of some things at it, for the better and more Orderly
Management of it, I think fit to give you Notice and Intimation.

For such Matters as should be taken care of before we meet, I must observe to
you:

That having in the Circuit I made about this time Twelve Month, found very
many of the Chancells, and Churches, and Houses belonging to the Church, very
sadly Dilapidated, or at least mightily out of Repair, I have now so pleasing
Accounts from many places of the Care already taken, not only to keep up those
Fabrics, but to make them Decent, as I think my self Obliged to make these my
express Acknowledgements to those my good Brethren of the Clergy, and I desire
they will do it for me to those Worthy Gentlemen, that have bin forward to
promote so Good Works, and to show their Love of Decency in the house of God.

Yet being well informed, that in several of those places where I found things
most amiss, the Orders sent them have not hitherto found their effects, not so
much as to Begin the Repairs, I must and do Require it of the Ministers
themselves in those places, to press hard for the putting of things on the
Mending hand before our Meeting, or if they cannot prevail, then to meet me
with Presentiments in their hands against such Churchwardens as think to Wear
out their Year without doing any thing in their Office toward such Reparations.

And when you are set into the work for the due execution of those Orders sent
for Repairing and Adorning of Holy Places, I trust you will procure that your
Churches and Chancells be not only secured from Wind and Weather, but from the
coming in of Birds, and from all manner of foulness; considering the just
scandal it gives to such as are not in Communion with our Church, and that the
sordidness of so many Country-Churches must needs be one great Cause of the
slovenliness (so much to be Deplored) that too many show in their performance
of the Public Worship it self, the Common People hardly persuading themselves
to show more Reverence there, where they see less Cleanliness, than in their
meanest Cottages.

XI. Being extreme loath to find many Faults, and wishing all might be Rectified
by your selves without me, if in any Places there be not constant Catechizing
on all Sundays in the Afternoon (for to have it only in Lent-time, as in many
places, will never sufficiently Answer the ends of it) I do with all imaginable
earnestness call upon those that fail in this main point, to consider (besides
the Necessity of the thing) the new Obligation upon them from His Majesty's
late Royal and Gracious Letters for the Reinforcing of Catechizing, an Exercise
upon which I must always lay so much stress, as to exact it indispensably,
where I have to do.

And by Catechizing is meant and intended (as plainly appears from His
Majesty's said Royal Leters, as well as from our Canons and Rubricks) not only
your Examining the Children, and Teaching them the words of the Catechism, But
instructing them, and others of riper years (who yet may need Instruction and
receive no small advantage) by your Explaining it publicly, so as in a short
time, all, if they be not to blame, may understand their common Christianity.

XII. But there is one thing more which I do exceedingly long to see
introduc't, and would fain obtain; that which the Rubric in the true Intent of
it still exacts of you, to have Morning and Evening Prayer every day of the
week in your Church, if you live upon your Cure, or keep a Curate upon it, and
not extreme far from your Church; And if by any means in the world you can
prevail with at least a few of your Parishioners, which sure cannot be wanting
in most Parishes, where there are either some devout Gentry, and Persons of
Quality, or at least some piously disposed People; and to all such I could
almost kneel, most earnestly begging of them as they love God, and their own
and other Christian souls, that they will do their parts toward the promoting
so good a Work, perhaps the Best, and the most Public Good they can ever do in
the places where they live: and where there are either poor Widows, who may
well afford to be at Prayers, for those whose Pensioners they are; or where
there are Children taught by a Schoolmaster, or Mistress, there it is very
hard, if some little Daily Congregation might not be found, would but the
Minister attempt, and labor it with as much Application and Zeal, as the thing
it self mightily deserves. Nay better the Minister with, or without his Parish
Clerk, and with but some of his own Family, that He may say When two or three
are gathered together in thy Name, than not to begin this worthy Design of
Prayers twice a day in your Churches; But where that cannot be for the Distance
of your houses, there to have them without fail in your private families.

But on Holy-day-Eves and Holy Days, on all Litany-days, and all the Fasts of
the Church, in the time of Advent and Lent, Ember-Weeks and Rogation-days, I
live in good hopes, and great Expectation, you will by Degrees gain such ground
upon them, that you will bring so many to Church, as shall make up a numerous
Congregation.

XIII. I should not Doubt to see such very considerable good effects in a short
time, if you could and would either your self bestow, or prevail with any your
Parishioners of Ability to bestow, and disperse about the Parish among your
People Copies of Dr Beveridge's excellent Sermon concerning the Excellency and
usefulness of the Common Prayer, (a Sermon which now We have Reprinted of the
seventh Edition) Or the second Edition of that devout Laick Mr Seamour's most
pious little Book of Advice to the Readers of the Common Prayer, and to the
People Attending the same; to which let me add that small piece, but very well
and Wisely Designed, and lately published at Oxford, Entitled, The Common Prayer
Book the best Companion in the House and Closet, as well as in the Temple, with
a particular Office for the Sacrament: Which last Collection, if it be once
commonly Received, and Reverently used, will at the same time secure the
keeping up sober Religion in private Families, and in Closets, while it also
brings the People to a good liking, pious using, and easily remembering of those
same Prayers, which at other times they shall hear Read in your Churches.

But having touched accidentally on the Devotions of the Family, and on those
that are more Private and Particular, both which I assure My Self you will
always Preach up, and that most effectually, by letting your Light so shine
before Men, that they may see your Good Works, and Good Example of devout
Practice; let me Recommend to you, for the sake of the Poorest and Meanest sort
of your people, the short Directions for Prayer taken out of the
Church-Catechism and Printed in one single sheet by my honored Dear Friend,
and Brother, The Right Reverend Father in God, The Lord Bishop of Bath and
Wells; And for the use of those that are more Capable, His Revised Exposition
on the Church Catechism, or the Practice of Divine Love; By the Distribution of
these few short cheap Treatises I have seen a World of Good has been done
already, and though these may seem but small things to fill a Letter withal,
yet they are such things as without them the Greatest things can never be
Compassed.

XIV. I must also insist, and enjoin you to insist from this time forward upon
that Rubric for Bringing Children to Public Baptism in your Church; which as
it will keep up the Solemnity, and secure the Decent performance of the thing,
so the Office it is self being Excellent will very much edify the people. And
in case of the Child's sickness, or extraordinary weakness, though you yield to
Christen it at home with the Office for private Baptism, yet you are by no
means to do it with Godfathers and Godmothers, except in the Church; But when
it gathers strength, then you are strictly to require that it be brought to
Church, and it is Baptism published there according to our Rubricks and Offices;
which if Parents refuse to Observe, you are to refuse entering their Childrens
Names into the Churches-Register, and to see such Parents proceeded against in
the Spiritual Court.

XV. I do also Recommend it to your effectual care and pains, to procure the
due Execution of that wise and useful Rubric (however Disused) that so many
as intend to be partakers of the Holy Communion shall signify their Names to
the Curate at least some time the day before; through the Inobservance of which
Rule some Excommunicated Persons, or that richly Deserve to be so, and some
that have cut themselves off from the Church, may surprise you, and be
Admitted. And as I hope you will never fail on Wednesday, Friday, and Saturday
in the afternoon before the Communion-day, to have prayers in your Church, so
methinks I ought not in Charity to Doubt, but All such as intend to be
Communicants will at least at some of those times (if They cannot at all of
them) be present at the Prayers, and then, and there may they give in their
Names most conveniently in the Church, where to their inexpressible advantage
they may be Discourst separately without shaming any grown persons, who still
may need some Instruction, or exposing any one, that requires either Counsel
or Comfort; in either of which Cases, the Church of England Invites and
Injoynes their coming to the Minister of their own Parish, or some other Godly
Minister, for ghostly Advice.

XVI. And having in my last years progress found no fault so common, and almost
General, as the Careless making up and Keeping of Parish Registers, (whereas
great care should be taken of those Records, which may be brought for Evidence
in Law) you are to make them up exactly, and at this next Visitation to bring
them in so perfected to the Matricula of the Dioecese, i. e. the Bishops
Register, and to see them kept hereafter under three locks and keys according
to the Canon.

XVII. And whereas many of the Old Terriers have been lost in the Great
Rebellion, and perhaps not Renewed since the Happy Restoration, and the Names
of Places, by which their boundaries were Adjusted and set forth, must needs be
much changed in so long a Time, let every Incumbent, that has any Glebe, bring
in a New Terrier made upon the best Information he can get, between this and
the 25th of next March, and let those who have certain Modes and Compositions,
set down a particular Account of them, that the poor remains of the Churches
Patrimony may not be Devoured.

XVIII. For our more orderly proceeding at the Visitation it self, endeavor I
pray to bring your Churchwardens with you by 10 of the Clock in the Morning to
the Beginning of Divine Service, on Monday the sixth of September, the day of
Visitation for the Isle, at Ely; or as you are respectively concerned, by 9 of
the Clock in the Morning on Wednesday Sept. 22. and Friday the 24th, at
Cambridge, for the Visitation of those parts of the Dioecese lying in the
County; which Wednesday and Friday being days of Abstinence, and like to be our
most busy Days, it will be proper, decent, and most convenient to Dispatch All
e're We Rise, and then have Evening Prayer together, before we of the Clergy
take our short Evening Refreshment, time enough for all to go home (if they
please) that Night, not having more than 10 Miles to ride.

XIX. Lastly though it may seem altogether foreign, and no way preparatory to
the Business and Enquiries of an Episcopal Visitation, to say any thing of
Ordination; yet in this Dioecese I Am sure there is need to give Warning, and
settle the Measures of giving and receiving Holy Orders before our Meeting; not
only because one of the stated times for Conferring Orders is near, but also,
because several of your Curates lately were but Deacons, who must therefore
immediately (if they be found worthy) come into the Order of Priesthood, or
quit their Employments; wherein they can neither officiate throughout at the
Common Prayer, having no power to give the Absolution, nor Consecrate the Holy
Sacrament in case any be sick, and dying unexpectedly. I shall therefore set
down some Rules, which I will inviolably Observe in my Ordinations, that I may
at least keep my own hands clean then when I am to lay them on others, and That
I may lay them suddenly on no man, the Rules I shall offer are such, as have
been Agreed upon at Lambeth, and subscribed to by several of the Bishops.

I will Ordain no Man a Deacon unless he be 23 years of Age, none Priest unless
he be full and complete 24, as it is indispensably required in the Preface to
the Book of Ordinations; nor unless that Canonical Age be Attested by a
Certificate under the hands and seals of the Minister and Churchwardens where
the Person was born.

I will Ordain none who has not taken some Degree in One of the Universities
of these Realms, unless there appear such extraordinary Qualifications in the
Person, as move the Lord Archbishop of the Province to Grant his Faculty; nor
without such a Faculty will I Ordain any Man but upon the Lord's Day
immediately following One of the Fasts of the Four Seasons; And none (of what
Qualities or Gifts soever) both Priest, and Deacon, without Interposing some
time between the two Orders.

I will Ordain none but such as have lived in my Dioecess for 3 years last
past, and are either personally known to me, or recommended by a Certificate of
3 Neighbor Ministers at least, such as I shall think fit to Rely on, and by
Them under their hand and seals declared in their Judgment worthy of what they
desire, or pretend to; or else do bring sufficient and authentic testimony
from the Bishop or Bishops within whose Dioecess they have resided, or from
some College in the Universities in which they have been Gremialls.

And I desire that each College, and all the Clergy would please to procure and
observe My Lord Archbishop's Letters of Direction sent us, I think in the year
1678, for the forming of Letters Testimonial for Holy Orders, for I can
hereafter Admit no Certificates in any other Form than as His Grace there
Directed most prudently, and very particularly.

I will Ordain none into Holy Orders, but such as are Presented, or Entitled to
some Ecclesiastical Preferment, then void in my Dioecese, or have some Title
specified and allowed in the 33d Canon, among which a Curacy during pleasure
under a Parson or Vicar (which is the common abuse) is not to be accounted; nor
any Curacy, unless that Parson or Vicar does under his hand and seal, and
before witness, oblige himself to accept of the Person to be Ordained, and
allow him such a Salary as I shall approve of; and lastly, not to put the
Person away, unless for reasons and cause to be by Me approved.

I will Ordain none but such as shall a full Month before the day of
Ordination, bring or send to me, or my Register, notice in writing of their
desire to enter into Holy Orders, together with a Certificate of their age, and
such Testimonials of their Conversation as aforesaid, to the end that I may
inquire into all particulars, and also give public notice, and monitions to
all Persons to except against such as they may perhaps know not to be Worthy,
as is expressly required in the Canon 1564. Moreover I shall Ordain none but
such as shall repair to the place of Ordination, at latest upon Thursday in
Ember week; to the end that there may be time for the strict and careful
Examination of every Person not only by my self and my Chaplains, but also by
the Dean and Archdeacon, who are by the Canon required to assist; as also that
the Persons to be ordained may be present in the Cathedral, and observe the
Solemn Fast, and join in the Solemn Prayers which are at that time to be put up
to God in their behalf.

XX. If your setting to work for the gaining of so many good points Oblige you,
or a sufficient Able Curate for you, not only to a strict Residence between
this and the Visitation, but after that to an extraordinary Diligence; Consider
I beseech you, that the Life of a Christian, especially of a Clergyman, is
compared to a Warfare, a Husbandry, a Fishery, a Building, a Trading, a
Pilgrimage, all full of Pains, and Toils; but then your Labor is the Labor
of Love. If any one still thinks I take too much upon Me, and put too much Task
upon Others, let him but attentively read over those two excellent Offices, the
One for the Ordination of Priests, the Other for the Consecration of Bishops.
And I heartily wish that once a Week at least, We all of Us would Revise, and
Reflect on those our Sacerdotall Obligations; I wish it as heartily as I do
that every Layman, and every Christian would make it a piece of his every-days
Devotion, to Repeat and Renew his Baptismal Vow. Consider pray how we solemnly
plighted our Faith to God, and his Church, before we Received Imposition of
hands, and the holy Sacrament; And to what we promised all our Endeavors in
those engaging words, I will do so, the Lord being my Helper; Then you will
Discern what I must needs acknowledge, that I have done hitherto but the least
part of my Duty, and that I could do no less than call you to Do yours; and
you will grant me that you, as well as I, have a great deal more to do for the
freeing of our own Souls, and for securing to our selves any Title to that
conditional promise, in the words of St Paul to Timothy his beloved Son, In
doing this, thou shall both save thy self, and them that hear thee. Which that
we may All do shall be my daily hearty prayer, in which I beseech you
earnestly to join with, and for

Your Affectionate Friend and Brother in Christ, Fran. Ely.
Dated from my House at Ely, August 4th 1686.

