Modest Observations ON The Present Extraordinary FROST: CONTAINING I. A Brief
Description thereof, and its Natural Celestial Causes inquired into. II. An
Account of the most Eminent Frosts that have happened for many Hundred years
past, and what followed thereupon. III. Philosophical Presages of what may be
feared now to ensue, viz. Scarcity of Corn and Victuals, General Sicknesses,
and Pestilences in the next, or within some very few Succeeding years; with
Cautionary Preventions. IV. The Cries of the Poor; and an easy Way Proposed how
there may be Twenty Thousand Pounds a Week, at least, raised for their Relief,
about LONDON, and all Wanting People Plentifully Provided for, During this and
the like hard Seasons, yet no Man be a Penny the worse in his Estate.


By T. T.

Entered According to Order.

London, Printed by George Larkin, at the lower End of Broadstreet, next to
London-Wall, 1684.

OBSERVATIONS ON THE FROST etc.
THe present Wonderful Frost, which is the General Theme of Discourse, and
under the sad Eff^cts whereof so many Thousands of Poor Cre^tures Shiver and
Pine, and L^nguish; began about the midst of December 1683. at first by mean
and ordinary Degrees, but toward Christmas b^came v^ry Sharp; The first Week
of January the River of Thames was so F^ozen, that People began to Walk over;
On Monday January the 7th, on the Change of the Moon in Aqu^ry, there were
Expectations, and some Likelihood, of a Thaw; but p^esently after it Fr^ze more
violen^ly, and on the 10th and 11th in the morning, a Co^ch Plied between the
T^^ple and the Old Barge house; yet toward Night the 11th (the Moon having
been in Opposition to Jupiter) it Thawed a little; and the 12 and 13th was fine
Gentle Weather, yet not much Thawing; the Wind con^inuing still at North-East;
On the 13th it Froze gain briskly, till the 17th, when a great Snow fell; the
18th high, most sharp, and peircing Winds, and on the 23d the Air was more
severely Peircing than ever, and more Snow fell; And being the first day of the
Term, Coaches Plied at the Templ^-Staires, and car^i^d the Lawyers to
Westminster on the Ic^; and thence for^ards the same Continued, and whole
Streets of Shedds every where ^uilt on the T^ames, T^ousands Passing Buying,
Selling, Drinking and Revelling, (I wish I could not say on the Lords D^y too,)
and most so^ts of Tr^des-Shops on the Ice, (and amongst the rest a
Printing House there E^^cted) Bulls Bai^ed, and Tho^sands of Spectato^s; all
which still continues at the Writing hereof, being January the 29th 168^/4.

Nay, b^low the Bridge, hundreds daily pass; The River H^mber (as I am (...)
informed) where it is several Miles broad, is Froz^n over, and V^st Flakes of
Ice are seen Flo^ting in the Downs, of Diverse Miles in Length, and
proportionable Breadth.

As for Celestial Causes of this unusual Coldness, though undoubtedly they
were not wanting (For God generally Governs Inferiors by Superiors) yet I find
not that any of our Common Pretenders had the least Apprehension, or gave any
Hints thereof. Not that I wholly Explode Astrology; I believe there is
something in it, and that it may not be unfit for a Wise and Modest Man to
Study: but our Annual Prognosticators are generally Men of little Learning, and
less Philosophy, and (what is worse) many times very irregular in their Lives;
The God of Purity, who Communicates his Secrets to those that fear him,
Illuminates not Debauche^s, Sordid Flatterers, and Timeservers, (whose whole
end is to make a Noise, and Cheat People of their money,) with the knowledge of
Supernal Mysteries; Nor can it be expected, That those who neither know things
past, by History; nor take Notice of things Present, by any steady Judicious
Observation, should yet foresee things to come.

Whether from any of the Late Tripple Conjunctions of the two Superior Planets,
Saturn and Jupiter, or from some of the late unusually frequent Comets,
particulary the last in August 1682. which in 20 days with a Rapid motion,
making its appearance in Leo, hurried through all the Signs Virgo, and Libra,
and disappeared in Scorpio, A Sagacious Artist might not have given some Items
of this Strange Weather, I will not Determine: But if Comets be only (according
to Aristotle's Notion, which I question) hot and dry Exhalations drawn up from
the Earth, it would not be difficult to Judge that Severe Colds should ensue
here below: For Extremes in Nature, if they are not Causes, are at least
Forerunners of their Contraries* Nor have there wanted Grand Configurations of
the Superior Bodies; During the time of this violent Frost, As a Trine of the
Sun and Jupiter, an Opposition of Saturn and Mars. But leaving the Disquisition
of these to the Curious, having not Room to Enlarge here, upon them; I hasten
to satisfy the Common Reader with an Historical Review of former Occurrences of
this kind; which may check that Vulgar Cry of Ignorance, That Never, O Never
was known the Like.

Livy in his fifth Book tells us of a Winter so hard, That the River Tyber was
frozen over, a matter very strange in such a Climate as Italy. In the year 1234
the Adriatic Sea was so frozen, that the Venetians went over the Ice thereof
with Carts. Zonaras assures us, that in the Reign of that Emperor Constantine
(who for a Nasty Reason in his Christning, was called Copronymus) about the
year 750. the Pontick Sea, was so Congealed, That people for many miles
traveled it on foot: And Horses and Carts ^oaden, passed over the Fretum, or
Narrow part of it; But withal he adds, that the Summer following was so
excessive hot and dry, that great Rivers and most Fountains were wholly dried
up, and People and Cattle perished for want of water. In the year 821. the
^greatest Rivers of Europe, as the Rhine, the Danubius, the Elb, and the Sein,
were so incrusted with Ice, that for the space of above 30 days, Carriages
freely passed along on them, as on the Land.

But to look nearer home -- In the year of our Lord 1365. and 49th year of K.
Edward the 3d, A Frost lasted from the midst of September to the Month of
April; but though so tedious, the Cold was nothing so intense or violent as
now. In the 15th year of the Reign of K. Henry the Eighth, after great Rains
and Winds, there followed so sore a Frost, that many dyed for cold, and some
lost Fingers, some Toes, and many their Nails: [I follow the very words of Sir
R. Baker, fol. 297.] The same Author tells us, That in the seventh year of Q.
Elizabeth, on the 21. of December, began a Frost so extreme, that on
New-Years-Day-Even people passed over the Thames on foot, some played at Foot
Ball, some shot at Pricks, as if it had been firm ground; yet this great Frost,
the third of January at night, began to Thaw; and by the fifth day, there was
no Ice to be seen, but great Inundations followed.

In the year 1609. [which it is not impossible, but some Living might remember,
being but 74 years ago] a Frost began in December, which continued till April
following, with such violence, that the Thames was so frozen that Carts laden,
were frequently driven over it, most Fowls and Birds were destroyed. In the
year 1637. was another Frost, which rendered the Thames passable; so in the year
1664 immediately followed by the Great Sickness; And the like toward the
latter end o^ the year 1676.

Some of the Consequences of these extreme F^osts, I have mentioned, more I
might, all are not Convenient; those that consult Chranology, may e^sily
satisfy themselves; a man may soon err in assigning E^^ects to such or such
pa^ticular Causes, or adapting Events to Significators; Modes^y is the first
Lesson in Wisdoms School. Therefore as we have been studious in matter of Fact,
past; but sparing as to Sequels; so we shall retain the same becoming
tenderness as to Futures; wherein we shall steer our Course rather by the
Guidance of Nature in her usual Operations here below, than by curious
Researches into remoter influential Causes above; though not neglecting them
neither, For the Universe is Entire, Harmonical, and Sympathetical, and he that
does not competently understand the right Tone of the whole, and the true Key
of ^very part, will make but bad Music wherever he lays his Clumsy Fingers.

First then I say, This Extremity of Cold presages many Calamities and Evils to
attend Mankind, and the rest of their Fellow Creatures; for as the Innocent
Inhabitants of the Air, or expanded Suburbs of Heaven, viz. Birds and Fowls,
are endangered by the Elements denying their usual Benefits and Provisions
(wherein another fourth part of the Creation, viz. Fishes, are somewhat
Concerned) so deg^^^d man, taking advant^ge of this Cruel Weather, does for
profit, or pleasure, or vanity, destroy many thousands of them: Now this great
destruction of them, is but a Fore runner of Mo^tality amongst Creatures of
gre^t^r value, and even of men themselves. Would you know the reason? I told
you but now, Universal Nature is Sympathetical.

2^l^. This immoderate Cold locks up the Pores of men's Bodies, and drives the
natural Heat more Central, which occasions great Appetite and Dr^^g^t, whence
follow^ much and excessive Eating and Drinking of gross, fa^t-succulent Foods,
and strong Drinks; in all that have wherewi^^al to procure them, which the
voracious desires do at present seem abl^ to bear and digest, yet really Nature
is not able to do it, and so by deg^ees there are seeds sown and Foundations
laid for Diseases. On the other hand, amongst the Poor, Necessity of feeding on
unfitt and unusual V^^nds, for their support at present, or defect of due
Nourishment, must to them do as much mischief; For want is as great (tho I
think not so Common) an Enemy to Nature as Su^erfluity; The way ^o prevent
these mischiefs is, for the Rich to obs^rve Sob^iety and Temperance, and for
the Poor to use Dis^^etion in their Diet, for a pint of M^lk with a quarte^ of
a pint of Water, thickened with on^ Spoonful of Flow^r, and heated just ^o
Boiling, and then putting into it a few Crumbs of Bread, (all which will not
co^^ ^bove a Penny) shall give any person as n^uri^hing a Meal as the best
Surloyn of Beef or Capon. I mention not this to prevent Be^^volences toward
the Poor, which all that are able are bound to Afford, but only to Advise them
how to supply themselves when they meet not with other A^comodations, but find
Rich M^n^ Charity more Frozen than the Thames.

3dly. This Excessive Frost Condenses the Air, and renders it Sulphurous and
Vnheal^hy, especially in such Ci^ies as London, where S^a coals are generally
used for Firing, and most People (especially Women) creep close to those
fulsome Fires* without using themselves to proper Exercis^s, where^y their
Bl^od stagnates, and becomes th^ck and foul, whence are Gener^ted the ^curvy,
stoppages of the Bre^st, Coughs and shortness of Breath; the ill eff^cts
whereof will more mani^est themselves next Spring and S^mmer.

4thly. This Dish^rmony and In^quality of the Elements, portends a dry hot
Summer to ensue, for all Ex^remes (as before o^serv'd) produce their
Contraries, which will not only Enc^eas^ Distem^ers, but I f^ar some Epidemical
Disease, and it is also a Forerunner of Dearth and Scarcity, and the latter,
is the more to be apprehended, because we have had several pl^ntiful and
Fruit^ul Years, and very few of us (scarce any) have Improved them to that End,
for which they were given us by the Lord, and his hand maid, N^^u^e; Bu^ most
that abound in Plenty, have Gratified their Lusts and P^ssions, and such as
have not had wherewi^h to comm^t the same Intemp^rances in Act, have done it in
their W^lls and desires; And shall no^ our God visit us for these and other
crying Abominations, daily exhaled from our (...) s^reets and Dwellings? I will
not take upon m^ to averr a Pi^^ue o^ Scarcity shall be the next Year, Jehovah
the All-Wise, is the Limiter of Times and Seasons for Ex^raordinary Judgments:
But I may say, that pro^a^ly, accordin^ to the prosp^ct of Natural Causes, such
Calamities seem not far off, and 'twill concern every Man living to prepare
for it; Qui sapit Ille animum Fortunae praeparat omni
-- Praevisumque potest, (...) (...) juvare (...)

A Wis^ Man fits his mind for ^very C^^nce,
And whilst he does in (...) Advance,
Each promised Good, Encre^s^th by his Skill,
And kindly L^ss^ns every threatened Ill.


But to proceed. Great and no l^ss Just are the Cries of the Poor in such a
sh^rp and pinching Season as ^his; For f^w of them h^ve the Opportunity, or at
least the Prudence and Fo^e-sight, to lay up any thing to support them in a
necessitous Times. How many ^housands of ver^ many Trades about this populous
City* and e^^ewh^re, cannot now possibly follow their Callings, or ge^ any
thing whereby to sustain themselves and Per^shing Families with Br^^d? And can
you* whom God has but entrusted with plentiful Est^tes, gorge your selves with
overcharged Tables even to a su^feit, and Rio^ wi^h excessiv^ Bo^^les of Wine,
whi^st your Brethren thus languish and Dye for want of Necess^ri^s? Can you but
think that God at such a Juncture calls upon you for his Q^it-R^nt out of those
vast Revenues which you hold me^rly by the Tenure of his free and undeserved
Gift?

Great and truly R^y^l has our gracious Sovereigns Bounty and Charity, sh^w'd
it self on (...) occasion, as well by bestowing a Consider^ble Sum Himself as
C^mmanding the Officers of every Parish to Importun^ the Charity of (...)
Inhabit^nts

Pursuant to ^hi^ Great and Generous Example, M^thinks all you that are Loyal
Subjects, and would be thought good Chr^stians, should be forward to Contribute
to the Common Necessities; And what if you should resolve for one Day in a
week, (at least during such an hard time) to restrain your selves from large
Eating and s^t Meals, and wholly on that day forbear Bibbing of Wine and strong
Liquors (I dare promise you, it shall be never the worse for your Health, but
the better, as also for your Business) and Employ what you so Save, in
Charitable Uses to the Relief of the Poor? Such a thing has been done on a
worse occasion within our Memory, and therefore is not Impracticable. By this
only means within Londons Bills of Mortality might easily be raised Twenty
Thousands pounds a week for the Poor; And no Man a Farthing the worse, but even
in his Estate the better (and much more in his Health, which is more Valuable
than the greatest Estate in Christendom) for without dispute there are within
that Circuit more than an Hundred thousand Families whose Dinners each Day Cost
them (one with another) more than three Shillings each, I mean ext^avagantly,
in Flesh, Fowls or Fish, when a little Bread and Cheese, Milk or the like,
might as well, (nay I am sure would better) for once at least in a Week, supply
Nature; Now one hundred thousand three Shillings is Fifteen-thousand pound; and
then it is not to be doubted (since in this Age Generally more is spent in
Drink, than Victuals) but tha^ there are above one Hundred thousand Persons
that daily lavish away above twelve pence a Day in Wine, Brandy, Ale, or some
strong Liquors, which they forbearing but for one day in a week, and bestowing
as aforesaid, thereby may be raised ^ive thousand pound more, and so in the
whole twenty thousand pounds a week, which justly distributed, would bravely
supply Four-score thousand Families, at Five shillings a week a piece, or
afford an hundred and threescore thousand Poor People half a Crown a piece
every week. And will you suffer such a Number of Souls to perish, for want,
rather than abridge your wanton Palates and Insatiate Paunches of unnecessary,
nay pernicious Danities, one only Day in a Week? Look up thou Sottish Epicure
that Denyest it, and call thy self Christian hence forwards if thou Dare.

ADVERTISEMENT.
There is lately published, A Treatise very Useful, Entitled -- The way to
Health, long Life, and Happiness etc. To be Sold by Andrew Soul at the Crooked
Billet in Holloway-Lane near Shore-Ditch.


