PYTHAGORAS HIS Mystic Philosophy REVIVED; OR, THE Mystery of DREAMS UNFOLDED.

Wherein the Causes, Natures, and Uses, of Nocturnal Representations, and the
Communications both of Good and Evil Angels, and also departed Souls, to
Mankind, are Theosophically Unfolded; that is, According to the Word of GOD,
and the Harmony of Created Beings.

Night unto Night shows Wisdom, Psalm. 19. 2.

To which is added, A Discourse of the Causes, Natures, and Cure of Frenzy,
Madness or Distraction.

By THO. TRYON, Student in Physic, and Author of The Way to long Life, Health,
and Happiness.

London: Printed for Tho. Salusbury, at the Sign of the Temple near Temple Bar
in Fleet Street. 1691.

THE CONTENTS, OR CHIEF HEADS of the Two Ensuing Treatises.
Of Dreams.
Chapter 1. IS by Way of Introduction, showing the Difficulty of this Work; its
Usefulness both in Physic, morral Philosophy and Divinity.

Objections against the Observations of Dreams, Distinguished and Answered.

Those that have hitherto Treated of this Subject, have done it imperfectly,
because they understood not the true Radix of Dreams.

The Vain or Superstitious Conceits of many People about their Dreams, no
Argument but a Wise and Good man may still regard his, with great profit to
himself.

from Page 1. to p. 11.

Chapter 2. Gives a Definition of Sleep, and shows its Causes, Natures and End.

The Mischief when it is too long.

Also a plain Description of the Nature and Uses of the inward Sence's
Faculties of man. Viz. the common Sense, Fantasy, Judgment, Memory, and where
each of them Reside.

Why we sometimes remember our Dreams, and sometimes not.

Of those that Talk, Rise, Walk, etc. i^ their sleep; the Causes thereof, and
ho^ to prevent it; as also of those that ar^ troubled with the Nightmare; it^
Causes and Cure.

from Page 11. to 26^

Chapter 3. Lays open the general Cause or Radix of Dreams, whence they are
derived; viz. from the ever active proerty of the Soul, that really we never
sleep without Dreaming, and the reasons why we do not sometimes perceive it.

That there is no standing still in the ways of God or Nature; whence
occasionally is discoursed, why young Converts, very zealous at first, do
afterward decay in Grace and Knowledge: the Advantages of being sober and
serious, and pressing on after greater Acquisitions and Seize.

from Page 26. to p. 47.

Chapter 4. Treats of the Causes of Dreams more particularly; where seven
Causes are assigned: viz.

1st. The Constitution.

2dly, The Profession or Course of Life.

3dly, The influx of the Planets.

4thly, Diet or Medicine.

5thly, Evil Spirits.

6thly, Good Spirits and Angels.

7thly, and lastly, Extraordinary Visions from God; all which are severally
handled, and the whole reduced into a threefold Radix; viz. either 1. from the
outward Principle of this World; or 2. from the dark wrath, or 3. from the
friendly Divine Principle of Gods Love and Light: and how by your Dreams you
may know which of these three Principles do predominate in your Souls; with a
distinction of the several kinds of Dreams, arising from each Complexion,
Sanguine, Choleric, Melancholy and Phlegmatic; as also, of those that flow
from each of the seven Planets

from Page 47. to p. 58.

Chapter 5. Contains a deep and serious Discourse; proving that Dreams are a
Figure or Resem. blance of the Condition of Souls after Death.

The representations in Dreams are real to the Soul, whilst we sleep, tho they
seem fantastic to us after we wake, by reason of the vast difference between
the material and immaterial Worlds.

from Page 58. to p. 68.

Chapter 6. Shows how departed Souls Communicate with persons living, in
Dreams, and sometimes in Apparitions.

What kind of Bodies such Apparitions have, and whence taken.

How long such Bodies can endure.

Burning of dead Bodies a means to prevent the appearing of their Spirits, and
why.

A necessary Note for Midwives.

That it is easier for departed Souls to communicate with us in Dreams, then by
Apparitions.

Here is likewise discoursed of the Communications of Angels with men.

How Spirits either good or evil are attracted by sympathy or simile, and their
effects, whence the vanity of men's imaginations and desires do in a great
measure proceed

from Page 68. to p. 89.

Chapter 7. Treats particularly of the Offices rendered to men by good Angels.

The Ground of mixed Thoughts and Actions.

The Shapes wherein good and bad Angels appear, and the Reasons thereof.

from Page 89. to p. 125.

Chapter 8. Rehearses in order several Scripture-Examples and Testimonies
touching Dreams, and discants thereon; illustrating thereby many difficult
Texts.

from Page 125. to p. 143.

Chapter 9. Discourses of Angels-Guardians of Countries, and particular
Persons, and their Offices toward men, mentioned in Scripture; and how men do
conciliate their assistance (not by invocation or worship, which is not due to
them) but by simile, as they increase in Faith, Holiness and Innocence

from Page 143. to p. 176.

Chapter 10. Why man cannot communicate with Spirits in his outward Senses, but
in Dreams and Ecstasies.

It also treats of strange material Figures represented, Calls heard, Blows
received, and the like before Death.

Of middle Spirits.

Against telling of Dreams.

Why Dreams are always represented in coopereal Forms, and in what sense men's
Works are said to follow them after death.

from Page 176. to p. 202.

Chapter 11. Offers reasons why we are not to think that these Communications
from good Angels by Dreams, and the like, so frequent in former times, are not
now wholly ceased.

Together with the Reasons why the same are so Rare and Seldom.

from Page 202. to p. 219.

Chapter 12. The causes why Dreams are always represented actually present.

As also of the means tending to promote intellectual Communications, the
Excellency of Temperance, and a regular Diet, and sober virtuous course of
Life; and that it does mightly advance true significant and profitable Dreams,
and helps to make an honest useful Emprovement thereof.

Also a Conclusion of the whole, exhorting to Piety, Holiness and Innocence.

from Page 219. to p. 249.


Of Madness.
Section 1. DEfines the several sorts of Distraction, that the same arises not
so much from Excess of any of the Humors, as from irregular Passions of the
mind, and poisonous Ferments. Page 249, 250, 251.

Section 2. The particular Passions most apt to cause it. Page 251, 252, 253.

Section 3. The manner how they disorder the Soul. Page 253, 254, 255, 256.

Section 4. Pride the general cause of several sorts of Madness. Page 256, 257,
258.

Section 5. Madness is a bringing forth of all conceptions or imaginations, as
fast as they arise, without any choice. from Page 258. to p. 261.

Section 6. They have no Vail to cover or disguise themselves with. Page 261,
262.

Section 7. Most of the actions of men are worse, and more mischievous and
silly, then those of common Madmen; proved by particular instances. from Page
262 to p. 267.

Section 8. The several species of Madness; and ho^ by their Carriage you may
know wha^ Principle is most predominate in each. Page 267, 258, 269*

Section 9. A description of Madness, according to the seven Planets, that the
Stars, especially the Moon has great Power over such distempered People. from
page 269. to p. 274.

Section 10. The humors of Drunkenness and Frenzy compared. from Page 274.
to p. 279.

Section 11. Why Mad people are stronger, and can endure more Cold and Hunger,
then when in their Senses. from Page 279. to p. 284.

Section 12. Of the Original Seat or Spring of Madness in the Body, that it is
the Spleen which first disorders the Brain. Page 284, 245, 286.

Section 13. Of External Causes of Madness, as by the bite of a mad Dag, eating
Jarantula, Hanbane, and the like. Page 286, 287, 288.

Section 14. Of the Cure of Madness, why no more succesfuls Humble Advice to
the Governors of Bethlem, to restrain their Officers from admitting swarms of
people to come in and prate with the poor distracted people; showing the
several mischiess thence arising, and intimation of the right method of Cure.
from P. 288. to p. 296.

Section 15. A fine Experiment of Curing such as are bitten by a mad Dog,
recommended to Trial in all other sorts of inveterate Madness* And Concludes,
with advice for preventing disorders of mind. Page 296, 297, 298, 299.


A DISCOURSE OF Dreams AND Uisions, etc.
The INTRODUCTION,
Showing the Difficulty, and yet Usefulness of this Subject; and how
Imperfectly the same has hitherto been Handled by Others.

THE matters we propose to handle in this Treatise, are abstruce, various,
profound and mysterious, since man has so far Eclipsed those glorious
Intellectual Beams planted in his nature by the Father of Lights; since he has
interposed such a Chaos of gross Imaginations and Earthly Affections, and
Clouds of Bituminous Smoke, fetched from the Infernal pit, so that he seems
altogether inveloped with a pithy Darkness, Dismal as that of Egypt, which
might be felt, and is forced (as the Prophet speaks) to grope even at noonday,
being become almost an utter stranger to himself, and all the mavelous Works
of his Creator, insomuch that the most Towering Mortals, that call themselves
Philosophers, feed their halffamisht intellectuals with Airy Notions, instead
of Solid Speculations; blunder on, Hoodwinckt by Tradition, in a constant
flesh-pleasing Rood of Error, and a Contentious Sophistry of Words, whilst in
Truth, they know nothing, as they ought to know of Themselves or their Maker;
of the principals themselves are composed of, or what makes them Men; much less
are they acquainted with the Sympathetical Harmony of the Universe, that true
Music of the Spears, that Golden Chain which unites Heaven and Earth; nor
indeed do they ken the Reason of the most obvious operations of Nature. Now
it is no wonder if a Discourse of such sublime Subjects, as the Entertainments
of our Souls (during the Body's Nocturnal repose) when they having shaken off
for a time the Fetters of the Senses, are upon the Wing, in the Suburbs of
Eternity; of the secret Intercourses of Spirits with Humanity, and the
wonderful Communications of the divine Goodness to his Servants in Dreams and
Uisions. It Is nothing strange, I say, if such discourses seem very uncouth and
extravagant to their unprepared Apprehensions; nor is it unlikely, that (as
pride is always a Companion of Self Conceited Ignorance) they should scoff at
and deride the very mention of such things with the highest Contempt.

But as we write not to such Spirits, that like the deaf Adder, will not hear
the Voice of the Charmer charm he never so wisely, people full of themselves,
that is of Noise and Vanity; so to the meek and modest souls, that in humility
daily wait at the Gates of Wisdom's Temple, have some hopes that this discourse
may be both acceptable, and in some kind useful.

I acknowledge, it is very difficult, and not to be undertaken by such a weak
unlearned unworthy Worm; it is not therefore on any Confidence of Self-Strength,
Wisdom or Knowledge, but in, by, through and under the Assistance of that
illuminating Spirit, which reveals Secrets to Babes, and gives both the will
and the deed, that I with fear and trembling begin this disquisition, according
to the proportion of Light he has, or shall be pleased to grant unto me; and
therefore as the wise and holy Ancients commend every important Enterprise with
Humble Prayers (for the fear of the Lord is always the beginning of Wisdom) so
with an entire Resignation, on the bended knees of my soul, at his adorable
Footstool, I beseech His All (...) to supply my Weakness, His Truth to sustain
my Error, His Wisdom to enlighten my Dullness and ignorance, that I may, in some
measure, comprehend and explain those condite M^steries, and the knowledge
thereof increasing, be serviceable to his Glory and the profit of those that
fear his name, and desire to live unto him, and be partakers of his blessed
Kingdom of Love and Glory.

Yet it is not unlikly that some good and very well-meaning persons being swayed
with popular opinions, and possessed with certain narrow principles, which they
have long imbibed, without ever thoroughly examining, or so much as inquiring
into; nay, never in their Lives having deliberately thought upon the nature of
the things here treated of, may think our pains very superfluous, and that the
whole subject of Dreams is altogether Vanity, or perhaps, as some may conceive
Superstitious, and unlawful to be taken notice of. But if these honest souls
will be pleased but to consider,

First, That Physicians generally agree, that the natural temperament or
complexion, and consequently many times the secret Diseases of persons are as
soon, or better found out by then Dreams, than by any outward signs.

Secondly, That since the Heart of man is deceitful above all things, therefore
for him that would truly know himself, it has by the wise ^octors of Morality
been always advised to take notice (amongst other things) of his usual Dreams,
there being scarce any thing that more discovers the secret bent of our minds
and inclinations to Virtue or Vice, or this or that particular Evil, as Pride,
Covetousness, Sensuality or the like, then these nocturnal sallies and reaches
of the Soul, which are more free and undisguis'd, and with less reserve than
such as are manifested when we are awake.

Thirdly, If they shall call to mind (which I more especially advise them to
do) that as Dreams are one of the clearest natural Arguments of the Immortality
of our Souls, so they were one of the usual ways, whereby God vouchsafed of
old to Reveal his commands and secrets to the Prophets and holy men; and that
it is one of his gracious promises, touching the Glory and fuller
manifestations of the Gospel dispensation, that then their young men should See
Visions and their old men Dream Dreams. And if withal they shall without
prejudice read over what we have heartily written touching all these
Considerations, and many other Remarkable matters relating thereunto in the
following Treatise. When, I say, in a true Light they have seriously laid to
heart all this, I am apt to think they may find cause to entertain other
Conceptions, and more favorable Sentiments, and judge this hitherto too much
neglected study, well worthy of their future Regards: I call it neglected
study; for though not few of the Ancients, and some of latter times have
written concerning Dreams, as Aristotle, Themistius, Artimedorus, Carden, etc.
yet did they not sufficiently comprehend the true Nature, Sourse, Original or
Radix thereof, nor the real Distinctions that are to be made of them, and
whence each kind do proceed; but have treated of the same so Darkly, and at
Random, with so little assurance and probability, that amongst a Thousand
Significations by them assigned, we shall hardly find two or three true, having
no more sollid Root or Experience for what they advance, then Conjectures or
Imaginations, whereof they have made large Volumns, which do but render those
that mind them, more anxious and perplexed than before.

And though abundance of ignorant People (foolish Women, and Men as weak) have
in all Times, and do frequently at this day make many ridiculous and
superstitious Observations from their Dreams, which for the most part arising
from the mere sensitive brutish nature, do indeed signify no more than those
of Beasts (as we shall more fully demonstrate in the following discourse) yet
still the Essential nature and use of Dreams, may justly be said to be
neglected, because instead thereof, vain and idle notions are embraced, just as
if a body should go to chop with a Saw, or to saw with an Ax; he uses indeed
those Instruments, but absurdly, and to no purpose but his own Detriment. And
yet ought not this common abuse of misconstrued Dreams, at all to derogate from
the worth of the thing it self, duly regulated, any more than because some men
are drunk, therefore we should with Licurgus, cut down all Vines; or because
many greedy people surfeit themselves with Victuals, or rashly prejudice their
Health, by Tampering with Medicines they do not understand, therefore we should
abandon Food, and all sorts of Physic. It Is certain every thing has two
Handles; and so much is man degenerated, that he generally lays hold on the
worst. Thus he turns Religion into Superstition, and the most useful things
into the most destructive. But all this still happens through his own ill
conduct and Error.

CHAP. II.
Of Sleep, its Causes and Natures: The internal Senses described: With a
digression touching those that walk in their Sleep; as also of the disease
commonly called, The Nightmare.

TO Discourse Effectually of Dreams, it will be requisite to premise some brief
Considerations touching Sleep, which is the stage whereon those Phantasms and
Representations are acted, and the time in which our souls are taken up with
the business of Dreams.

Sleep is the natural Rest of a living Creature, or a partial temporary
Cessation of animal Astions, and the functions of the external Senses, caused
(immediately) by the weakness of the Animal Faculty, proceeding from a sweet
and stupifying Vapor, arising from the Concoction and Digestion of the
Alimentary Food Exhaled from the Stomach, and thence ascending to the Brain and
watering and bedewing it with unctious Fumes whereby the operations of the
Senses are for a time obstructed, to the end the powers both of the Mind and
Body may be recruited, ref^eshed and strengthened. But besides the Exhalations
from the Concoction of the Food received, and the native frigidity (or
coolness) of the Brain, congealing those exhaled Vapors, there are many
accidental Causes, which by consuming the Spirits, occasion Sleep, as overmuch
Labor, Weariness, immoderate Heat, intense Cold, overmuch Evacuation; things
which pleasingly amuse or charm the Spirits as Music, the murmurs of soft
falls of Waters, profound Cogitations, Darkness, or the departure of the Sun
from our Horizon; for all Light is both active and actuating; so the Sun being
the Vehicle or mage of ^ntellectual Light, and Fountain of Light Natural, not
only heats and vivifies, and communicates a certain briskness and cheerfulness
to all Creatures by his presence, but also by the consequence of his
withdrawing, or absen^e, strikes a certain occult and dolesom sense of sadness
on the spirits of all animated ^reatures, by reason of the defect of his
exhilirating Beams: Lastly, There are certain stupifying Medicaments drawn from
Somniferous Herbs and Plants of the Vegetable Kingdom, as Poppies, Lettice,
Opium, and the like, which are easily able by their vapourous Quality to
overcom the Brain, and thence occasion Sleep.

Whence it appears that the material Cause of Sleep is a vapor exhaling and
ascending the (...), which vapor sometimes proceeds from diseased corrupted
Humors, and then the Sleep is not natural, but unsound, troublesome, and the
symtom of a disease. The natural vapor is that which either arises from the
Concoction of the aliment in the Stomach, which generally causes a man's first
Sleep, which therefore is more sound, deep and vehement, by reason of the more
gross Exhalations, and more turbulent, by reason of the impurity of the
vapors, or else it is the Ebullition, or Boiling up of the more fervid Blood,
which commonly causes morning Sleeps, which are more sweet, light and apt for
Dreams, by reason of the more pure vapors, and the more rare and perlucid
Exhalations; but when the same is too long continued, it is apt to fill the head
with vapors, which being so over filled, is disturbed, and Aches, and occasions
Rhumes, Catarhs, Consumption of the Lungs, and many other inconveniences,
which all people should take special notice of, and endeavor to prevent,
especially the nice and Sloathfull Dames of the Female Sex, who both by their
Constitution and want of Exercise, and ill customs in this kind, do more abound
with moist Humors, and consequently are more obnoxious to those Mischiefs. The
Form of Sleep consists in a free and willing cessation of the external Senses;
for when the first Censorium (which is called the Organ of the common Sense) is
bound and obstructed with a soporiferous vapor, the external Actions of the
animal Functions cease.

Here is to be noted, that as the outward Senses are Five in number, viz.
Seeing, Hearing, Feeling, Tasting and Smelling, of which, if any one remain
free, and not affected, sleep cannot be perfect, as where any one of them, in a
person that has the use of them all, happens to be affected, such person cannot
be said to be composedly vigilent: So there are also Four other Senses, called
Internal, because seated within the Brainpan, and whose objects are not only
the species of things present, but they perceive the sensible species of things
absent, past, and to come.

1st, The first, called the common Sense, where all the diverse Objects
apprehended, or rather communicated by the outward Senses, are assembled, and
gathered together, to the end they may afterward be compared, distinguished
and discerned the one from the other, which the particular Senses could not do,
being every one attentive to his proper object, and not able to take cognizance
thereof, or of his Companion; for to speak properly, we know not what we see
simply by our Eyes, or hear by our Ears, but by our common Sense, which judges
rightly thereof, the other being but the Organs to bring the representations of
things thither to be censured and judged of, whence properly all their Objects
and Offices may be said to be his.

2dly, The Fantasy does more fully examine the species perceived by the
common Sense, whether of things present or absent, keeping them longer, and
thence making new and compounded Images or Conceits of its own. Its Objects
are, all the species communicated thereunto by the common Sense, whereby
(especially in the Melancholy People) it fancies many other things, as
Centaurs, Chimaera's, and a thousand odd Forms which never really had being in
the Nature of Things; yet it is to be noted that the parts thereof must always
consist of such thing of which we have ^een, read, or heard of; it is (or ^ught
to be) in men Governed or ^egulated by Reason, but in Beasts ^t seems to be the
highest Faculty their nature is endued with.

3. Judgment (or Reason) is a Superior Faculty in man, appointed to Rule over
all the rest, the Guide of Actions, or judge of the little world, to approve of
what is good, and reject what is Evil.

4. Memory is a Retentive Faculty of the Soul, whose Office is to Register up
all the species which the other senses have introduced, that they may be
forth-comming, or ready when occasion shall serve, or they are called for by
the Phantacy or Reason; whence some to illustrate the use of all these powers,
have compared them to a Court of Judicature, the outward Senses being as
Solicitors that bring the Causes; the Common Sense, as the Master of Requests
who receives all their Informations; the Phantacy like the Lawyers and
Advocates, that bandy the business to and fro in several forms, with a deal of
noise and buffle. Reason as the Judge, that having calmly heard each parties
Pretentions, pronounces, an upright Sentence; and Memory as the Clark records
the whole proceedings.

Whether these several Faculties have distinct Seats, or Cells in the Brain,
has been much disputed by Anatomists, Physicians and Philosophers: The great
Argument of those that would have it so, is that it is certain by Experience
(which they confirm by many Instances) that sometimes one of these may be hurt,
and the other remain sound, as that the Phantacy may be impared, yet both
Judgment and Memory remain unhurt: The Judgment cract, yet Phantacy and Memory
active, and the Memory Spoilt, yet Phantacy and Judgment (as to things present)
good. But as in the Stomach by several distempers, several Faculties are hurt,
as by moist diseases, the Retentive; by dry, the digestive; and yet it will not
thereupon sollow, the digestive and Retentive have distinct Organs or Seats; So
it may possibly happen in these Faculties of fle Brain, without assigning to
each a distinct Cell, though the common Opinion (and for ought I know it may be
true) is, that the Fantasy resides in the foremost, the Judgment in the
middle, and the Memory in the hindermost Ventricle of the Brain.

But to reduce what has been said of these internal Senses to our present
Subject; you are to note, that the Imagination is ever busy, and (as far as I
can perceive) never Sleeps; the Judgment or Reason for the most part, is
impedited from acting, especially after its common way or outward Fashion, when
a man sleeps. The Memory sometimes is more, and sometimes less clouded and
obstructed, according to the nature of the fumes sent up; and hence it comes to
pass, that we have sometimes a clearer, sometimes a more confused, and
sometimes scarce any Apprehension or Remembrance of our Dreams when we awake.
But of this we shall have occasion to speak further, in the following Discourse.

And in the mean time shall conclude this Chapter of Sleep with a brief Account
of two strange accidents that are wont to happen to some people therein; that
is to say, of such as walk in their Sleep, and of such as are troubled with
that which is commonly called, the Incubus, or Nightmare.

As touching of the first, that some people there are, who whilst they are
fast asleep, leap our of their Beds, unlock Doors, go into the Streets, and
sometimes on Tops of Houses, or other dangerous places, where they would not go
waking, and if not interruped, will again return to their Beds. The matter of
Fact, I say, is so notorious, that I need not spend time to prove it by
instances, since I think there are few but know, or have been most credibly
informed thereof, among some of their Acquaintance: But the Cause or Reason of
all this is more occult, which I shall endeavor to discover, as it occurs to
my present thoughts.

It Is observable, those that have these Vagaries, are generally (and I think I
may say always) young people, in the flower of their years, and strength, of
Sanguine Complections, active, sprightly, and full of Blood; I am therefore of
opinion that this comes to pass by that abundance of Blood swelling, and as it
were frothing out, boiling and active spirits, which ascending to the Brain,
stirs up and stimulates its Faculties, whereby it performs its actions to these
strange motions and effects; so that the Body, by the impulse of the animal
spirits, which contains in the Brain, the strength of the Nerves and Muscles,
that is, the Instruments of Motion is carried forth, and even in Sleep excited
to those actions. For persons of this condition, are of a thin and curious
contexture, small bulk, but of great agility and a servent mind, whence, if
they can but take hold of any thing with their Fingers and Toes, being then
void of all fear, because incensible of any danger, they sustain themselves
thereupon, and accomplish such things, as waking they would dread to attempt.

But if in such Bodies the Humors shall be fermented to a lesser degree, and a
smaller ardor and agitation of the spirits, then they only talk, cry out, move
and fling themselves about, as if they would jump out; but yet still contain
themselves in their Beds, because the spirits are not strong and violent enough
to raise the body: and the proper Cure of this I conceive will be to use a
spare diet, and perhaps, in some Cases Blood-letting, and especially to
endeavor to keep their minds in a cool temper, without inflaming it with
passions.

As for the other sort, Viz. those that in their fleep are troubled with the
Incubus or Nightmare, they seem to be of a temper contrary to the former,
Melancholy, of few gross spirits, and abounding with Phlegm, and in children
and young people through Fear, and sleeping supine, and lying on their backs:
And tho the Vulgar, when they are thus affected, conceit it some external thing
comes and lies upon them, which they fancy to be some Ghost, or Hob-Goblin, yet
the truth is, it proceeds from inward Causes.

This Discease being an obstruction of Motion, or an interception, especially
of Breathing and Speech, with a false apprehension of some heavy thing lying
upon their Breast, and as it were stiffling them, occasioned, by means the free
penetration of the Spirits to the Nerves is hindered, the passages being stopped
by a surcharge of the aforesaid Humors.

This happens most to such as use to lie upon their Backs; and whilst it is
upon them, they are in great Agony, being unable to speak, but strive to do it
with imperfect groans, but if any person speak to hem, and call them by name,
the animal spirits being excited, force their way, and the oppression ceases;
or if they can move, or turn the body on one side, and especially if the Breast
be rubbed to dissipate the Humor. The Cure is to be effected by a regular diet,
and such as may generate good spirits, and prevent the increase of Melancholy
and Phlegm; avoid full Suppers, and excess in Liquors, which often occa^ion the
Disease; use convenient purging, and sometimes breathing a Vein may be
expedient, especially in Women, in certain obstructions peculiar to that Sex:
the black Seeds of the Male Piony are much commended in this Distemper.

Thus much (though it be a digression from our main Subject) I thought fit
(having this opportunity) to say of these two Nocturnal disturbances,
conceiving it might be of use and satisfaction to some Readers.

CHAP. III.
Of the General Cause of Dreams, or Radix, whence they are derived in Nature.

IT is a Truth generally acknowledged, but feldom so well considered as it
ought to be, that Man is the complete Image of God and Nature, and contains the
Principles and Properties of all things Corporial and Incorporeal, that he is
endued with an Elemental or Palpable body, actuated, enlivened or informed by
an etherial spirit, and so answers to the great Body of the World, from whence
the same is taken, and is an Abridgment or Epitome thereof, or if you please,
its Son, or Offspring; and as it does contain all the true Properties of the
gross Elements, viz. Earth, Air, and Water, which are as it were the Mothers of
the Body that nourish and sustain it: So he has also the Principle of Fire and
Light, that is, Soul and Spirit, which gives Life and Motion to the Body of
Flesh, and answers to the Soul of the great World, or that mighty Spirit which
is moving, vivifying and most wonderful creative and conservative Power in
this vast Systime of things, which we call the World, and which does preserve
and sustain it, and every part thereof, in Beauty, Splendour and Harmony, which
living and creating power does never stand still or cease from generating and
operating; for if it should, the whole Systime or Body of this World, would
immediately fall and perish, as the Apostle Paul says, without the Spirit, the
Body is dead, and profits nothing.

The like is to be understood in the little World [Man;] all lively Motion,
strength, vigor and beauty resides in the Spirit or Soul, in which there is no
standing still, Idleness or Cessation, no more than there is in the great
world; and as the universal spirit or power of the Lord is always forming,
shaping, and bringing to manifestation the hidden mysteries of Eternity and
clothing the various Spirits with Elemental Bodies, the like does the Soul and
Spirit in Man, it is always in motion and generating, and as the Scripture
says of the wonderful and ever-blessed Creator, That he slumbereth not, nor
sleeps: for sleep does truly signify death and weakness, and nothing
sleeps but what is mortal and finite. So the soul and spirit in man sleeps
not, as being the Breath of God and Eternal; for in God there is no Time, nor
Seasons, or divisions of Time, as nights, days, years or the like, nor any use,
as to himself, of Sun or Moon, but they are Creatures made by him for the
Accommodation of this lower World, and the Inhabitants thereof, as St. John in
the Revelations does declare, speaking of the new Jerusalem, or
Super-Caelestial Paradise, There was there neither days nor nights, nor Light
of the Sun or Moon, but the divine Power and Spirit of the Lamb was the Glory
and Light thereof: And this Glympse of the ineffable Splendour he saw upon the
Lord's Day when he was in the spirit, not in the operations of the senses of the
external Nature or Body of this world, unto which the properties of the natural
sleep do belong; but the Soul or Spirit cannot sleep, for then it could not be
eternal, but when the Body and Senses lie locked up fast in the Arms of
Merpheus, then is the soul or spirit as it were unchain'd or unbound, as being
freed from the continual Interruption of the senses and Earthly dispositions,
which whilst they are waking, and in full strength and vigor, do captivate the
soul, and hinder its generating and progress in that manner, as it does when
the body is a sleep or dead; for the soul of man has so great Power, when
freed form the Earthly Quality and heavy sensual power, that it can make
something where nothing is, and from the Representations of Swords or Guns,
Fire or Water, as real, when and where there is indeed no such palpable
substance, but it is real and substantial in the spirit, even as the good and
evil words and works of men, shall be unto them in Eternity; their works do
follow them, not after the manner of this world, but in the Spirit, yet real
and essential. Now it is from the Soul or Spirit in man, which is the Image of
the divine Eternal Spirit, and never stands still, Sleeps or Slumbereth,
whence Dreams and all Nocturnal Visions do arise and proceed; for whilst the
Senses and Powers and Faculties of the outward Nature do sleep, rest or cease
from their Functions, the Soul and Spirit cease not from its operation, but
goes on forming, figureing, and Representing of things as real, and
substantial; for in truth (though ofttimes we perceive it not) and more often
cannot remember particulars, yet when ever we sleep we dream; for you may as
well imagine Fire without heat, Sun without Light, as to conceit that an
Intellectual Immortal Soul, can for one moment cease from Actions suitable to
its Nature,

But here some will be apt to object and say, This is a strange Paradox; for if
we always Dream in some kind or other, as often as we sleep, how is it that we
but seldom perceive, or are sensible of it? Sure if the Soul and Spirit be as
you teach, evermore busy in framing and representing of things, we should
remember somewhat of the matter whereas we sleep soundly for several nights
together sometimes, and cannot remember that we had any Dreams at all.

To this I answer, That the thoughts of worldly Affairs, and the intemperances
most men commit in Meats, Drinks, Labors, Exercises and Passions, do not only
becloud the Soul and Intellect, and over-whelm their power and operation, so
that they cannot se^ or perceive any Celestial things with Clearness (as
Experience daily proves they do the same things when we are awake) But also
they cause Indispositions, breed bad Blood, impure Spirits, and beclouded
senses, as well internal as external, and thereby enfeebles and destroys the
brisk lively apprehensions, and stupifies all the Faculties of Nature, and
particularly the properties of the Memory and retaining Power are so dulled and
rendered fluid and oblivious, so as not to concerve any Impressions made
thereon, as we see in drunken men, the next day remember none of those loud
Vociferations and man pranks they played overnight. And you may as well argue,
That such lewd people did not commit any such Extravagancies, because very
often they are not sensible of them, after they came to be sober, as to think
you do not dream, because sometimes ^ou cannot remember it when you wake. As
the Disorders you commit are greater or lesser in respect of your particular
Constitution, so is your perception of your dreams more or less, whence
sometimes you can repeat a whole long story of the Representations in your
sleep, with the several senses, words and discourses, etc. all clearly and
distinctly; other times you have a more imperfect and confused Apprehension of
particulars; and sometimes there does remain only a bare memory that a dream
you had, but the particulars are quite lost or forgot; which was the case of
King Nebuchadnezer, Dan. 2. 5.

It is also to be noted, That the Spirit and Soul of a man by such
Intemperances as aforesaid, is so debilitated and eclipsed, that the creative
and generating Power thereof, does, as it were, loose its strength and vigor
and thereby is made more gross and stupid; so as that its sight is not clear to
perceive, so neither is its generative Faculty strong and powerful enough to
make such deep Impressions on it self, and on the Memorative properties of
Nature as otherwise it would do; for the perfect memory of, and advantage to be
made by Dreams does chiefly consist in the cleanness of the Microcosmical
Temple and the brisk livelyness of the Spirits of Nature, as well as an
unpolluted Soul; for no man can behold with a clear sight, and remember such
sublime matters as those of Dreams and Visions, but such whose souls are strong
and vigorous and do powerfully Tinge or impress the natural Spirits; and also,
they must be such as do abandon Superfluities and Passions, which Nebuchadnezer
not doing, he therefore after he had seen a Dream or Vision, could not remember
it, but said, the thing was gone and departed from him. Therefore such as would
remember and understand the Circumstances of their Dreams, and make a due use
of them, let them depart and separate themselves, from Intemperances, and
Uncleanness, and as much as in them lies, from all the Furies and Passions of
Revenge, Hate, Sorrow, Love, etc. which are apt to debauch and pollute the
Intellect, that it cannot foresee any Celestial thing; for none but such as
have experienced it, can know the wonderful power and virtue of Separation and
Self-denial from Evil, not only in its gross Acts, but also in its
Protiatartick Causes or first springs and occasions, and how by degrees it
opens a door, or gives advantage (if I may so speak, after the manner of men,
in so sublime a matter) to the Spirit of God to open, show and manifest the
hidden Mysteries of his Kingdom, which does always teach every one according to
their respective capacities; and as each man does continue in Separation from
the Impurities of the Flesh, the World and the Devil, and is found proceeding
in and pressing on by self-denial toward the price of our high-calling as it
is in our ever-blessed Jesus.

This is most apparent in the first work or beginning of each Christtians
Regeneration, or new birth, whereby he Infrancheses himself from the world, and
all its ways, works, words and desires, and begins to aspire toward a City
made without hands, and to be Endenizon'd, or made a proprietary in the new
Jerusalem; as every one upon a Conviction in his Conscience of Evil, does
actually close with that Conviction, and Separate himself from his former ways
and practices, so his Eyes become opened more and more to see the hideousness
of that evil, or as the Apostle spakes, The sinfulness of Sin, whereas before
he was not able to apprehend it to be so gross and Evil.

Hence it is that most men in the beginning of the work of Gods Spirit on their
souls, are much more humble, more fearful and thoughful of committing Evil, and
far more zealous than afterward. The Reason whereof is clear, viz. so long as
they remained truly sensible of their former Evil state, and keep continually
pressing on toward Virtue daily denying themselves of their former Superfluity
and subduing their sensual Appetites and Affections, keeping both Body and
Spirit cool and clean by Abstinency, Temperance and Purity in Meats, Drinks,
Exercises and Communications they there by feel and find a daily Growth and
Increase of Virtue and Manfestations of Grace. But if once such shall set up
their rest in External Forms and Modes of Riligion, and therein begin as it
were to stand still and satisfy themselves with their former Seize and
Separations, which might be excellent in their day and time, and the only means
the Lord then used to lead the soul to virtue; I say, when any shall fall into
such a slothful state, they will in a little time find that saying verified in
their souls, That not to go forwards, is to go backwards and lose all their
inward spiritual strength, which is divinely signified by our Lord in that
parable of the Servants, and the entrusted Talent, he that care esly laid it up
in a Napkin, set up his Rest with such a portion of Grace or Light, and
endeavored not to augment it, is condemned; and it is added, that from su ^an
one shall be taken, even that which he seemed to have, and so Christians came
to wither and languish, like a Tree that is sapped at the Root; and then they
sensibly decline and Apost^ize, or at best do only retain the Complemental
outside of Religion, and do indeed keep in memory their first good state, which
can no more nourish their Souls to a Spiritual Life and Growth, then a man's
bare thinking upon or boasting of a good wholesome meal he made a week or
fortnight agon, can support his outward Body in strength and vigor.

Whereby it is evident there is no such thing in God, nor his wonderful
workmanship [Nature] as standing still or Cessation from working; and therefore
the illuminated Apostle admonishes the Ancient, Christians, and in them all
others in succeding Times, to press on toward the mark of their high Calling,
and greater discoveries of the divine Vision. And this was after they had
separated themselves from gross Evils and several Vanities of the world, and
observed many of the Commands of God, and lived in the Forms and Rites or
Ordinances prescribed unto them by the most holy Spirit of God, yet all this
was not Sufficient; Tabernacles were not here to be built or rested in, though
Moses Elias and our Lord Jesus Christ himself, by a wonderful Transfiguration
had imparted a peculiar Glimps of Glory, they must still zealously press, or
else their estate would become degenerate, and so they have need to enter into,
or lay again their first principles, or outward Forms, whence it appears there
was still as much need of Self-denial, Separation and progression, as there was
the very first day on which they inclined or hearkened to the Voice of Wisdom;
for want of which, many, after 20 or 30 years Separation from the world (as
they call it) contenting themselves with their first beloved Forms (which in
their time were (...) are not half so good Christians as they were the first
month they entered into such or such a Religious Profession or Society.

The Reason whereof is, because as men by Abstinency, Separation, self-denial,
and pressing forwards after Virtue, do by degrees obtain Strength, Wisdom,
Understanding and Clearer Sight, as every one is obedient and capable; so on
the other side, such as give way to Evil, are by degrees and the continual
workings of the Spirit of Error, made more strong in Evil and Wickedness. And
as the former by Virtue and Purity give advantges to the good Angels and
Spirits to have communications with them, who are always ready to unfold the
Mysteries of their Kingdom to the sober and clean of Heart; so the latter do by
their Voices powerfully attract the bad Angels and Spirits, which do teach and
strengthen them in Evil. And therefore those that would have the company of the
good Spirits and Angels by day, and their Commumications by night in Dreams and
Uisions, and desire to retain the Forms and Figures represented, with the
Interpretations thereof, and not to be subject to forgetfulness and stupidity,
let them observe the Rules of Cleanness, selfdenial and Separation, and
contially, even as at the first dawning of the day, press on toward
perfection, having always a wellprepared Temple to receive the sweet influence
of Gods Spirit and company of good Angels, or their Communications after a
Spiritual way; for as those blessed Intelligencers are administrating Spirits
to God primarily, so in the second place, their delight is to do good Officers
to all the faithful Servants of God, thereby advancing the praise and glory of
the great and Alcreating Jehovah Aelohim, Blessed forever

This is a Lesson which every one ought to be sensible of, and endeavor to
learn, and which, if duly regarded, then most people, whose faces are looking
Sion-wards, would have more serious thoughts, and greater esteem for the
Visions of the Night, and the most wonderful and hidden Conversations thereof;
for if mankind were sensible of these sublime Truths, and the wonderful power
of their own souls in such cases, it would beget an awful Dread, or sober and
Tremendous Considerations and Contemplations, which would not only invite the
Courteous Communications of Benevolent Spirits, but so still and prepare the
inward Man, and all the noble Faculties of Nature, as to render them capable of
retaining such abstracted sights and Manifestations, whereby they would take
some Root in the understanding, and so make Impressions on the Spirits, and
thence blossom forth, and grow up to very happy fruits, both for increasing
good and eschewing Evil. So great is the power of Sobriety, Temperance,
Cleanness and Self-denial, as being most sublime and elevating Virtues, and a
great help to make men happy, both in this World, and that which is to come.

Therefore it is highly convenient for every one that applies his Thoughts to
this Science of Dreams, or indeed to any sort of Knowledge, that is truly
Philosophical and Divine, to be serious and sober, and to learn first the
mysteries of his own World, before he lets his Eyes and Imaginations ramble
into, or gaze after the Wonders or Vanities of the great External World, being
certain of this, That if he do not in some competent measure know himself, and
continually endeavor the Advancement and Increase of that Knowledge, he will
never come to understand any thing without himself, as he ought to do, much
less enjoy the participation of those Mysteries of which we treat in this
Discourse.

CHAP. IV.
Of the particular Causes of Dreams, how they proceed from a Threefold Radix:
Of the several Kinds of Astral and Complexional Dreams.

IN the former Chapter I acquainted you with the General or Universal Reason of
Dreams, viz. Because the Soul or Spirit of Man, being the Image of the Immense
Creator, and Epitome of the whole created Bulk of Nature, it so far resembles
Him that never slumbereth or sleeps, as to be always active; for in the
adoreable divine Architype though there be no variation, or shadow of change,
yet there are perpetual Emanutions of Beneficence, and reflected Ideas of Love
and Complacency.

But now from this prime procatartick or original first Moving Cause, we must
descend to others more particular and Immediate which influence the Soul this
or that way in its Formative Activity, and individuate its operations. And
these occasional Impressions, as they Cause very different Representations to
us in our sleep, so they are in themselves very various, For,

1. Some Dreams proceed from the Constitution or Complexion of each particular
person.

2. Others from his profession or course of Living; those things which he is
most earnestly intent upon, or concerned about in the day time.

3. Others are occasioned by the influx of the Planets predominate in his
Nativity, or at such or such times by Direction, Transit, or the like, if we
may believe the notions of Astrologers, whose science as far as modestly it
contains its self within the Bounds of Nature with a Resignation always to the
overruling Pleasure of Omnipotency, seems not altogether to be contemned.

4. Other (Confused) Dreams may arise from unfit Diet, or Medicines, which
sending up abundance of Vapors to the Brain, (the Throne of the Understanding)
and beclouding the Spirits, (the proper Vehicles of the Soul) it follows, that
abundance of vain Images must be represented, but these are always disorderly,
and without Connection, as is experienced by drunken and gluttonous persons, and
men in Fevers and the like.

5. Others are injected by Evil Spirits, who as they are malicious and envious
to the highest degree, so being Angles of Darkness, where they meet with
Darkness, both internal and external, that is, a Body clogged with supersluity,
and a Soul contaminoted with Vices and Enormous Affections, as with Lust,
Covetousness, Revenge, etc. they are thereby strengthened to an advantage of
instilling their suitable Temptations.

6. Some Dreams are by courteous Visits of good Angels who that way (most
suitable to their Spirituous Nature, and ageeable to their next Neighbors,
human Souls, who seem to differ from them gradually, rather then Specifically)
choose to Communicate with us, thereby often forewarning us of impending
dangers* or instructing us to some eminent advantage, if we have the discretion
to make use of those precautions.

7. It sometimes pleases Almig^ty God, in a special and extraordinary manner to
reveal his secrets to those that fear him, (...) Representations in Dreams,
which then are more usually called Visions, to difference them from the other
kinds.

Now though we shall occasionally here handle each of these, yet to avoid
prolixity, I do conceive we may more briefly reduce all Dreams to a Three fold
Radix, or Original, according to which the three fold grand Principles carry
the upper dominion in the Center of Life, or Will-Spirit, in each person, that
is to say, they proceed either from the Sidereal or outward Principles of this
world. Or secondly, from the dark Wrath or fierce fiery Life. Or Lastly, from
the meek friendly divine Principle of Love, which of these three does
predominate, of a suitable Nature and property shall your Dreams be. As for
Example:

1. If the dark, wrathful, fierce, kee^ principle bear sway, then the nocturnal
Representations are Dark Melancholy, Fierce, Frightfull, and the like.

2dly If the middle uniting Nature, or Friendly qualifying Fountain of divine
Light do hold the chief dominion in the Life's Center, then the Dreams are more
Essentially pleasant and delightful to the Soul, and oft-times many wonderful
Secrets are revealed, and impending Dangers foretold in (...) Figurative way,
easily deciphered or understood by a well prepared mind. But,

3dly, If the principle of this outward world, and the Business or things
thereof do bear sway and carry the supreme Government, as it generally happens
amongst men, that lead a mere bru^tish and sensual Life, and iudulg^ themselves
in Vices, Superfluities, and the Vanities of the world, the the Dreams are full
of Idle Fantasies: confused Mixtures of outward, Affairs and things belonging,
or relating to what each man is concerned in, or busied about, and these are
apt to be forgotten, or so darkly represented, and imperfectly remembered, that
they administer very little use or benefit to those that receive them, unless
they were before hand made sensible of that ill Conduct of their Lives which
occasions them, and thence would be persuaded, by a total change of their
Manners and Conversations, to improve and fit their spirits for better and more
advantageous Communications.

As for Complectional Dreams, they proceed from vapors flying up from that
Humor which is most predominant in the Body, unto the Brain, and thence
Imagination with Representations suitable to such humor; As persons of a
Sanguine Complexion, or in whose mass of humors the Blood bears sway, have
generally pleasant cheerful and delightful Dreams, They they are in Merry
Company, Entertained with Music, Conversing with Persons, fine, beautiful and
obliging, dressed in splended Robes, and the like divertive objects.

Persons of Choleric Complections dream of Anger, Wrath, Brawling; of
Qua^relling or Fighting; that they use some violent motion or struggling; that
they meet with Bears, Lions, Dogs, or the like, and are in danger to be hurt by
them.

Such in whom Melancholy abounds, are continually disturbed with frightfull
Fantasies and Ideas full of Horror, of being surrounded with Daakness, or
confined to some close Dungeon, left alone in a Wilde^ness, oppressed with
Poverty, Want and Despair, ready to be torn to pieces with evil Spirits.

Lastly, The Phlegmatic person is less apt to remember his Dream, but they are
generally about water, fear of falling from on high down into some great River,
and being drowned, or the like.

As these several Humors are more or less mixed or prevailing in any persons
Constitution, so his or her common ordinary Dreams will be diversified
accordingly.

The same in effect is to be observed in Dreams that are the effects of
sidereal Influences, they carry with them the resemblances of that Planet from
whence they proceed. As,

1. If the Saturnine Property carries the upper dominion in earthly Signs, then
the Dreams are sad, dull, heavy and frightfull, filled with fear and sorrow.

2. If the Martial, or fierce Fire have the chief Government, then the Dreams
are Fierce, filled with Wrath, Passion, Fear and Trembling, Amazing and
Affrighting the outward Body, insomuch, that not unfrequently, such Dreams do,
by their Horror, awaken the person from his Sleep, and cause all his Limbs to
tremble for fear.

3. If the Jovial nature do predominate in the Center of Life, then the Dreams
are more mild, grave and moderate.

4. If Venus carries the dominion in the Complexion, then the Dreams are
pleasant, delightful and amarous.

5. If Mercury have rule, then your Dreams are mixed, various, and oft-times
confused.

6. If Sol bear sway, then your Dreams are apt to be of great Light, Honors
and Dignities, or of Splendid and Magnificent things.

Lastly, If the Moon predominate, the Dreams are confused, unconstant, mixed
with Truth and Falsehood.

So that if men would but turn their Eyes inward, and learn to know themselves,
and the Principles and degrees of their own nature, every one might in a great
degree understand from what Radix, and Property of nature each Dream proceeds,
and takes its Birth, and consequently know their own Complexion, and likewise
what Principle or Quality, Good or Evil does carry the upper dominion in them;
so that there would be much teachableness in Dreams, as they are derived from,
and demonstrate what property of the sevenfold nature has dominion in the Soul.

CHAP. V.
That Dreams are a Figure or Resemblance of the Condition of Souls after Death,
etc.

BY what has been said it partly appears, That although by the degeneration of
Mankind, instead of observing and noting the nature of those things, Dreams are
become a Byword; and serve only to be derided and scoft at, yet essentially,
and in themselves unto the wise, and well-minded, they may discover great
Secrets, both of Time and Eternity; which will further appear, if we modestly
consider, that there is scarce any thing that yields so true and great a
figure, or similitude of the condition of the Soul after Death, or in the state
of Separation, as Dreams.

For as Death is a full Period to all the Senses and outward Faculties of the
Humane Life, the very same is Sleep, during the time thereof; for if a man
should sleep seven or eight days, nay, if possible seven years, when he
awakes, it would be no more to him then one night: By this it does plainly
appear, that Sleep is a Temporary Death to the Senses, where no distinction,
length or shortness of Time is measured. Therefore in Sleep all men are, as it
were totally dead, as to the sensitive and distinguishing power of Nature and
the time passes away as if he were in Eternity, insensibly to all the outward
Properties; for what happens to the Soul in Dreams, is somewhat like, or a
notable Resemblance of that which attends it in its separated estate, whether
in the Good or in the Evil.

Thus in Dreams the soul enjoys a more complete and unmixed pleasure and
delight, than is possible for any person to enjoy when awake, and in the use of
the perfectest Senses; for then in the height of his Complacency, fears and
apprehensions of losing the pleasing objects, or jealousies of others sharing
with him therein, or one thing or other is apt to crowd in and interrupt his
Joy. But in many Dreams the Horizon is all Light, and clear, no Cloud to be
seen, and the whole seems to be so real, that nothing we possess in this world
can for the time be more; insomuch, that these Joys, and delightful Transports
do often times awaken the sensitive power of the outward Nature, the thoughts and
Consideration thereof is very delightful to the mind even after the waking of
the Body. As on the other side, Evil Dreams cause strange Trouble Fear and
Horror to the Soul, it apprehends it self to be in real danger of drowning,
falling, killing, being run through with Knives, Swords, and the like; falling
down from precipices, being in pain, anguish and agony, and many other things
of that kind, which do all arise from the awakening or kindling of the wrath
and fierce poisonous Nature or Central Fire, which cruel fears and pains are
real and essential to the Soul, as the Body or Senses are dead or asleep (which
is as it were, all one) and yet there is no material thing near them. that can
wound or hurt them. So great is the power of the Soul when it has either
wholly, or in part, for a small time, quitted it self from the operation of the
Senses, that it can make something where no thing is, and create either Grief
or Sorrow, all according to that Principle or Form that is chief in the
Government of the Soul. For as that is quallified, such is the nature of those
Ideas that are generated, and the Fantasies arising either of joy or fear, as
the Radix stood in Equality or Inequality, for in the separated state, whether
in the Bliss or the Curse, there is no Matereal thing, that can hurt or afflict
the Soul, but only its own Imaginations or Turba; and what it forms unto it
self in the principle of Evil, in which it self is comprehended, being the Root
and Fountain, whence all sorrow and fear takes its Birth. As on the contrary,
those that are comprehended in the blessed Fountain or friendly principle of
Light and Love, their Joy and Pleasure does arise, and is continually generated
from the same principle in the Spirit, and is real and essential, beyond all
outward Enjoyments, or what can be apprehended, because none in the Body can
have the full enjoyment or true sense of it. For that property or principle man
has precipitated himself into, and which has gotten the upper dominion in the
Soul, From the very same principle after death does proceed, and is generated
either his Joy or Sorrow according to the degree and nature of that Form, and
as it is more or less kindled in the good or the Evil, whilst the Soul remained
in the Body.

Which is a great Figure and true sign, that the Souls and Life's-Spirit does
burn or quallifie between the wrath, and the noises and bussle of this world,
and acts or Suffers as it is tinctured and impressed; for every property and
principle does contain the true nature of the whole, and therefore has
wonderful power and efficacy to generate and form strange unheard of things to
the Imagination.

For which cause many persons dream of, and see such strange things in their
sleep, as they never beheld nor thought of when awake, for the formings of the
predominate principle in man's soul are beyond all humane Number: Now let us
suppose a man in a terrible Melancholy frightful Dream, were never to awake,
but to continue eternally in this imagined Agony and Dread, what a
disconsolated State and Condition would this be to the soul, where all these
fears and troubles are apprehended to be Essential, as indeed they are during
the Sleep of the Senses. But when the Soul is thus perplexed, and in this
terible fear and horror, it violently seizes on the Body, as its Natural House,
and with its fierce motion awakes it, and causes the very flesh to tremble, and
then the Soul or Spirit is glad and rejoices that it has escaped those dangers
it apprehended; whereas if it had not been clothed with an humane Body, it
would have been destitute of any such refuge to ease its self, as Soul are
after Death.

Dreams and Visions are incorporeal, like the Soul or Spirit, and the Joy,
Pleasure, Trouble, or Sorrow that is apprehended, is as Essential to the Soul
as any sensual pleasure, fear or grief is to the Body: And what we have said of
the Kingdom of Darkness, Sorrow and woe, the like is to be understood in the
Light and Blessed Kingdom of Heaven, where the Paradisical Ioys are
incorporeal, or else the beautified Inhabitants could not have any pleasure in,
or Simile with them; for when the body is dead, and the Soul separated from it,
then all incorporeal things became as substantial as material things do to the
Body; and the Seeing, Hearing, Smelling, Tasting and Feeling is as real and
essential to the Spirit, as all sorts of gross substances are to the outward
senses; and during sleep, the Soul is as it were separated, and as if it were
in Eternity, does really enjoy pleasure or pain, according to that principle
that predominates therein, whilst the Body lies at it were dead, and also all
the senses not at all concerned with, or capable of those sights, pleasures or
sorrows; but oft-times the Soul or Spirit being affrighted with hideous
apprehensions, and dangers, o^ too highly lifted up with Joy and Delight, does
return and seizes the Body, and awakens the outward senses, which immediately
puts a period to the Joy or Sorrow, Gri^ or Pleasure, and they seem to the
outward Sense and Reason, as i^ there had not been any such thing but all had
been a Romance or Illusion, for so it may well be apprehended by the senses;
for the immatereal world, and the wonders thereof are as nothing to the
material, there being such a vast gulf or difference between the internal and
external principle of each, and yet they are very near each other; but one is
Corporeal, the other Incorporeal, therefore the latter has no Simile with the
outward Senses; but on the other side there is a great Analogg and Similitude
between the internal World, or Incorporeal Beeings, and the Soul and Spirit of
Man.

CHAP. VI.
How departed Souls Communicate with Persons living in Dreams, and sometimes in
Apparitions; The Converse of good and bad Angels with men, how promoted, etc.

BY reason of that Affinity or Similitude between incorporal Beeings, and the
Soul of man, mentioned in the last Chapter, it comes to pass, that Souls
departed or separated from their Bodies, (which divorce, we call Death) do
often Communicate their desires, and reveal various Secrets unto their Friends;
for Dreams are Incorporeal, and the Souls deceased have no other way to impart
their Secrets that is so amiliar as this, except some few, who at their Death
are greatly affectionated to Wife and, Children, or the like, and dye with a
strong desire of revealing something that lies hid, or to manifest their
affections to their surviving Friends, and these sometimes do it by assuming an
aireal Body, and appearing Affections; being the chief general Cause of
Apparitions of Souls departed. But then the will and desire must be very strong
and powerful at the departure of the Soul from the Body, or else it cannot
cloth it self with a sidereal or Elemental thin Body, for the External Eye
cannot see any thing but what is like is self, or compounded of them same
Elements, and there is great difficulty for any Soul to cloth it self with a
material Body, neither indeed can it be done, if the Affections and desires be
not wonderful strong and powerful.

Which shadow or thin Body continues no longer than the Radical moisture in the
deceased Body does in some degree continue; for as the moisture and matter of
the Body does waste, so the Apparition or Ghost does grow weak, and at last
vanish.

For the Soul clothed it self by the help of the matter contained in the Body,
which is done by a sympathitical Operation between the External, and Internal,
for there is some likeness or Relikes of the Spirit remaining in the deceased
Body so long as it continues moist and full of matter, for if it were not so,
it were impossible that any Soul should appear in any Body or shape either
humane or Beastial.

Therefore it was that some of the Philosophical Ancients commanded the Bodies
of the dead to be burni, to Ashes, which did totally destroy the Humor
Radicalis or Spirit of the external elemental Nature, thereby perventing such
Apparitions, as w^ are speaking of, and hindering Souls from Clothing,
themselves with thin Aireal Bodies, which they can do only by a Sympathetical
agreement between themselves and their old Houses, the deceased Bodies. For if
the Soul departs from the Body, filld with Affections to external things, be
they what they will, then finding it discomposed and disquieted, it longs after
its old Body or House, and by Simile, and help of the Fluid Humors and Spirits
yet remaining in the Body, it attracts a subtle matter, in which having vested
it self, it becomes to outward view Corporeal.

^ut if the body should be consumed by Fire then the Spirit or Soul would be
prevented wholly of matter for this sidereal Clothing; And therefore this way
of burning the dead bodies, was practiced, as in diverse other Nations, so also
in England in former Ages; for then it was more frequent for departed Souls, as
also for diverse other sorts of Spirits to appear to the living, than of late
years (for some Reasons which I shall not stand to insist upon, or explain in
this place) And therefore they did consume their dead Bodies with Fire, by
which there was an immediate and full Separation between the Body and Soul, and
no simile remained, and consequently no matter could be attracted or coagulated
for the formation of such Spectre's or Apparitions.

For the like Reason (we may note by the way) that the first Midwives, and
Directors of Women, after Delivery, ordered the Afterbirth, with Consumption
by Fire, to put a period to the Atoms or subtle Spirits that can and do
powerfully penetrate all Bodies; for they are so subtle and quick, that nothing
can hold or hinder them from returning to their Centers, but only the
Annilation of the whole. But it is further to be observed, That all Midwives
ought to let the After-Burthen be through cold before they burn it, or else the
fierce surprisal which the Fire makes upon the Spirits, will force them back to
their Center whence they proceed, with a Rapid motion, and carry with them the
hot sulpherous Atoms and Particles of the Fire, which in some Complections
will wound the Health, and ofttimes cause Fevers, and unnatural Heats and
Indispositions, and more heat the Milk by simile; These things are seldom
considered, and therefore the Evils thereof are the ofter felt.

But to return from this Digression (wherein we thought it not unfit to point
out briefly the Nature, Causes, and Manner of Souls appearing after Death,
which sometimes happens where the affections are exceeding violent, as
aforesaid) it is far easier, and more familiar for the deceased Souls to
communicate their secrets to their living Friends in Dreams, then to appear
thus in external Forms, by clothing themselves with thin Elemental Bodies; for
men in Dreams are nearer unto the condition of departed Souls then when awake;
and therefore they can with ease, and great familiarity discourse, and reveal
their minds unto them, more especially, if there were a simile between their
spirits, or if there was a hearty Love and Affection whilst they lived: For all
the time the Body sleeps, it is as it were dead, and ten hours is but as one
minute, but the spirit and soul lives and acts, and sees and apprehends
things as if it had not any earthly Body, but were already in Eternity; for
near and afar off is all a like unto it, it can as easily visit remote
Countries and Regions beyond the Equinoctial or Tropicks, as a man's own House
or Garden; it can sink it self into the deepest of Depths, and also sore aloft
and range through all the Celestial spears; the Etherial Spirits of men being
thus volatile, and busy when the outward body or senses are dead, or, (which
is all one for the time) asleep, the Immaterial Beeings, or separated Souls
being of an homogenial Nature, and like state, can easily hold communication
therewith by such means as are proper for the intercourse of such spirituous
Essences, especially if before the Death of the Body there was something
strongly impressed on the Spirit of the deceased, which proves very burdensome
until they have by some means revealed it to those to whom they had a desire to
impart it before their Death, but by some accident were prevented, or where
there is some great sympathy or similitude between the Soul of the deceased,
and the Living, and for this last reason, the Souls of strangers sometimes do
make application to such sympathizing Souls of the Living whilst the Body lies
asleep, and reveal great secrets, or foretell them of things sometimes good, and
sometimes evil, that are likely to befall them.

But there is such a vast disproportion between the Incorporeal Beeings, viz.
Souls departed; Spirits and Angels on the one side, and our outward material
Senses and Reason on the other, as makes all these Wonderful mysteries that
happen to man of this Nature appear but as mere fantasies, shadows or Vanity,
and therefore this secret spiritual converse, and real Communications of Souls
are de^ided in the highest degree, which unbelief and contempt does drive away
and cause a separation of the Souls of the deceased, as also of all good
Spirits and Angels, which otherwise would be more prompt and ready to such
Communications, as being forward to serve, help, and enlighten those that are
sober, and well-minded, and such as believe, and are sensible of those
wonderful things, and mysterious Impartments; for a strong Faith, firm desire
and belief, viz. when the Spirit or Soul is delighted in the Consideration of
this spiritual discourse and converse, does naturally attract and draw the
internal powers, Souls, and good Angels, and causes them to delight to
accompany men, both sleeping and waking, defending them from various dangers
and troubles, and ready at all times to reveal and foretell them of future
things, but on the contrary Incredulity with vain despising Discourses do
potently drive them away, and causes, as it were a total separations, so that
there seems to the outward senses and Reason of most men that there is no such
thing, but all idle vain Conceits; so greatly is mankind depraved, having by
vanity and carnal apprehensions put out the inward Eyes of his intellectuals,
so that they are to him but as idle immaginations.

But the Records of sacred Truth do assure us, that most of the Sober
enlightened men in former Ages, were sensible of this secret converse of Angels
and Souls, and had mysteries revealed to them from God, and his ministering
Spirits, in Dreams and Visions, as appears in the holy Scriptures, of which we
shall take a particular survey in a Chapter by it self.

But now mankind's frowardness intemperance and incredulity have so estranged
those holy powers, good Angels and Spirits, that they cannot come near man, to
reveal unto him the secret mysteries of their Beeings and Conditions, o^
foretell him either Good or Evil that shall happen unto him; for a firm Faith in
God, and frequent meditation on those sublime things have a wonderful power
sympathetical inclination and attraction on good Angels and Spirits of all
offices and kinds; for all things both in the material and immaterial worlds
ha^ that secret communiction and opperation by likenesses? for the nearer we
resemble, and become like the good Angels, they are the more ready and prone to
serve us, this being the simpathetical drawing, which is the way of God in
nature, for every thing does incorporate with its likeness, and by a secret
agreeable power, each thing is ready to strengthen its own Property, having the
Key in its self, that can open the Gates of its own Principle in all other
things, both Heavenly and Earthly; for they all flow from the two grand
principles, viz. Good and Evil, and which soever of these two a man suffers his
will to enter into, that property or principle gets the dominion and chief
government in the Soul; and if it be in the evil or fierce wrathful principle,
then the Spirit and Soul by way of desires and imaginations penetrates all
Elements, and things both external and internal, and wheresoever it finds
matter capable, or disposed to receive them, it incorporates, and with highest
diligence endeavors to destroy its contrary, viz. all Goodness and Virtue. And
thus men are rendered fit and capable to be the companions of, and have society
or secret communication with evil Angels and spirits, there being often
internal agreement and compacts bewteen the Souls of men and evil Angels by way
of Imagination and desires in the very center of their lives; which very few
persons are sensible of, though subject unto, and consequently cannot
comprehend from whence those multitudes of evil suggestions, desires and vain
imaginations, wherewith they find themselves incombred, do proceed; for
whosoever suffers his will and strong desires to enter into the fierce violent
envious wrathful original spirit or property, has unity with, and becomes a
Companion of all evil angels and spirits, whence do proceed those wonderful
troops and numberless swarms of vain thoughts, imaginations, desires, words and
actions, being the very dictates of Devils.

And from the same black Stygian fountain do arise that wonderful subtilty and
cunning, and those strange unimaginable inventions of evil words, acts and vain
plays, so various, a sober man would think it impossible for men to be so
strong, ready and cunning in the doing of evil; hence the old deceiving Serpent
is said to have been more subtle then any beast of the field, Genesis 3. 1. And
our Lord Christ tells us, that the Children of this world (the race of Cain and
sons of Belial) are wiser (that is, more crafty and full of inventions) in
their Generation then the Children of Light, and so the Apostle Paul calls
Elinas the Sorcerer, O thou full of all Subtilty, and all Mischief, thou Son of
the Devil, and Enemy of all Righteousness, Acts 13. 10. for as man is various
in his central ground as to inclinations, dispositions, love, hate and the
like; so various also are the evil angels and spirits; whence we read their
name is said to be Legion, because they are many; so that whatsoever a man
inclines to, or awakens in his will and desires, whether good or evil, there is
presently a spirit or angels of the same property, ready and prompt to execute,
and put into practice such his imaginations, and to incline, and urge him
forward in the thing.

But these sublime Matters are understood or considered but by very few; and
therefore I would entreat my Friends, and all that are of humane Race,
seriously to ponder in their Minds, from what Fountain, Principle and Ground
that great Variety of Dark Vain and Evil Thoughts, Imaginations, Words and
Actions do proceed; of which, some few I shall set down for an Example, or
Looking-glass to the considerate Reader. As first, in Childhood, for to wish
to be Kings and Emperors, to have brave Houses, and costly Furniture; to have
gay Clothes, and think that whoever meets one, does, or at least ought to
admire an Ass for his golden trappings; to desir^ f- live idly, and spend all
ones time in eating, drinking, sleeping and playing: And as people attain to
maturer Years, to wish and desire, a great deal of Money and Liberty, to have
Variety of Women; to exceed all others in Evil Mischievous Arts and Sciences,
to Hurt, Kill and Murder all such as shall Offend them. For a Man secretly to
wish his Wife dead, that He might have another with more Money, to contrive how
to Circumvent another in a Bargin, or Defraud him of his Inheritance or Right,
by color of Law, and then to boast of our Wit and Cunning in doing it, for a
man to design himself an Universal Empire, or the Government of the whole
world, as some Princes have done, and sacrificed millions of men's lives to that
conceit. These and the like strange Evil, and most abominable Thoughts,
^inations and Desires bubble up in, and have possession of most men's Minds,
even to the day of death, which do all arise and proceed from the poisonous
Root, by the Promptings Instigations and Ingections of the evil Genij, which
are like swarms of Pees in and about man, if he suffer his will and desires to
enter into their Principle and Property, which is to do Evil, and only Evil,
and that continually: Others there are, whose desires are not so far engaged
upon Notorious Wicked Objects, but rather amuse themselves with Vanities, and
Things which they conceit to be Innocent and Indiferent, as an over care of
being well spoken of in the World; and therefore studying Complements, and
Civilities, to procure Esteem, pleasing themselves with fine Buildings, and
dilicate Walks, and Gardens, doting upon a brave Horse, or a Dog, or placing
all their Affections, Delight and Joy, in some one particular Child, or the
like.

Now when any one does thus inordinately take pleasure in such things, he or
she will continually be encouraged, and prompted forward by evil, Angels, and
Genij, of a middle Nature, that are endued both with the property of the inward
and outward Principles, having as it were an equal mixture, of both which
diligently attend the Motions, Actions and Inclinations of each people,
encouraging and making them strong, and fixed in their way of Vanity, and when
ever they go about to do an Action that in it self is good, they suggest
something that may mar and spoil it by circomstances: As when they give an
Alms, they tickle them with a conceit of Glory, and so they do it not for God^
sake, that has commanded it, but to be seen, and praised if men; if they are
abstemious, these ill spirits recommend it, not as a necessary Virtue, but as
it saves their money, or preserves their credit, and so in all other like cases.

Others by Complexion, or Education devout, having entertained, and suffered
their desires to enter into Superstitions or limmited sour harsh forms of
Religion, immediately they are attended with an evil Genius, or Angel, that
increases their peevish mistakes under a notion of Zeal, so that at length,
for a Lie and vain superstitious idle Fancy of another man's, they will both
suffer death themselves; and when they most cruelly murder their Brethren that
will not, nor cannot believe as they do, they think they do God good service,
witness the daily Practices of many Turks, and others.

So Great, Strong and Wonderful are the simpathetical opperations of evil
Angels, and Spirits, on the souls of men, that whatsoever any person inclines
to, or what Principle or Property soever is awakened, or gets the Government in
the center of his Life, or that the same does naturally invite, or attract, a
Genius or Angel of a suitable property, which does diligently wait upon him, or
her, so long as they shall continue in that state; But if the will (which
indeed is the Primum mobile in man) turn it self away from that, and enter into
another thing, then the Government of that Genius, or Angel, grows weak, and
another takes his place, according to the nature of that thing the man is
inclined unto; for no sooner can a man fix his thoughts and desires strongly
upon any thing, but a genius is presently at his Elbow, and ready to suggest an
increase of the same longing, and prompt him to put his Imaginations into
Action.

CHAP. VII.
Treats particularly of the Offices rendered to men by good Angels: the grounds
of mixed Thoughts and Actions: the Shapes wherein Good and Evil Angels appear,
or represent themselves; and the Reasons thereof.

What we said of the Evil Genij, is likewise to be understood of good Spirits
and Angels, in a contrary manner, for they are no less ready and diligent to
attend all people that are soberly and innocently inclined, and do dictate to
them Virtuous Things and Ways, and do mightily strive for, and defend all the
Children of Virtue and Piety, against the assaults and stratagems of evil
Angels, not only in an incorporeal way, but also outwardly, as to the Body,
preserving them from being Drounded, falling from High Places, being Killed,
Robbed, Beaten, Mislead, and an hundred such like Mischances.

Also it is to be noted, that there do arise great Tempest and Troubles, in
men's Souls and Minds, through the strife and Contending of the good and evil
Genij, and Angels, for Superiority or Government; whence do proceed that
strange and otherwise unaccountable Variety of mixed thoughts and imaginations
of both good and evil, so that sometimes, when a man has as it were just
concluded to do an evil action, the good Genius, or Angle, comes in with a
powerful admonishment, but with a gentle soft, and as it were still voice,
saying, Do not this evil thing, and this does prevent many great outrages and
cruel mischiefs amongst men, for all men that are not as it were seared up, and
as it were captivated in the fierce Wrath, and poisonous Principle, when they
incline or attempt to commit evil, do find some checks, or reluctances, and
experience the effects of a struggling, or counter ballanc^ in their Souls,
between the good or evil Genij, or Angels, and which soever of the two the will
gives up its assent and consent unto, that carries the day, and proceeds as in
triumph to the Action, whether good or evil.

Thus sometimes a man going about his occasions, shall have strange, and most
wicked thoughts and imaginations injected, or darted as it were into his mind,
without any premeditation, consideration or sensible occasion, and then
presently he shall have an opposite thought beamed in from the good genius,
which does Moderate, Allay, and put a stop to the evil Ones; and thus a
multitude of surprising imaginations, both in good and evil, attend mankind, by
the dictates, Gleams, Rays and Influences of Genij or Spirits which are of
very wonderful consideration and moment.

But although those restless Spirits always busy, yet the most dangerous time
of all, and that wherein evil Angels most certainly accomplish their
mischievous designs, to the destruction of men, is, when men give themselves up
to any Intemperance, or Disorder, as Passion, Drunkenness, Gluttonny, Swearing,
Lying, Cheating, Envy, Debauchery, Violence, Oppression, and the like, for by
these Evils men do secretly awaken their own Fountain or Principle, and give
the evil Spirits great Power and Authority over their Souls, so that they are
led into Captivity and Bondage, and ensnared in a Thousand Evils and Miseries,
and from this impure Fountain, which men awaken, by their Intemperance and
Uncleanness, proceed the multitude of vain Dreams, and lying Visions; for
according as the more central parts are awakened, and suitable to that Principle
that governs in the life's-Spirit, such are the Dreams,

Yet it must be understood that no man's dream is wholely, and altogether evil
and vain, for that cannot be, except men were mere Devils, which also cannot
be, so long as we live in the humane Nuture, for man's fall was not like the
fall of the evil Angels, for these latter fell into the dark Abiss, or original
Wrathful Principle, without, or beyond Nature and Creature, and therefore there
was for them no help, nor recovery; but on the contrary, men fell into the
knowledge of Good and Evil, that is into Nature and Creature, which is his
inexpressible happiness, as being not left destitute, or incapable of the
Blessing, or Regenerating Seed of the woman; for there does centrally dwell in
the humane Nature that which the wise man calls, The Voice of Wisdom, that
continually calls man to Repentance, and Reproves him for his evil Ways. This
is the Genius Optimus, the Soul of the Soul, and the Eye of the Mind, that has
power, and is always willing to defend man from all the Assaults of ev^l
Angels, and unto this holy Principle, and friendly Fountain, the Dictates and
Voices of all good Angels and Spirits do concur, it being a great part of their
work and business to assist man, and preserve him from the inward incursions of
the multitude of malignant Spirits.

And as men's Thoughts Imaginations Words and Works are mixed, viz. Good and
Evil, but generally the evil does much overbalance the good; the very same is
to be understood of their Dreams, and night Visions; whence it comes to pass
that the far greater part of men's Dreams proving, so false frivilous vain and
impertinent they are become infamous, and a Reproach is unjustly brought upon
Dreams in general; whereas indeed the fault is in themselves that their Dreams
are no more certain; for the streams cannot asord good pure water, if the
Fountain be defiled; neither can any expect true delightful and pleasurable
Dreams and night Visions, when the unequal Forms and Properties of nature have
gotten the upper dominion in the heart and soul? Or who can hope for the
friendly Visits and Communications of good Angels, when both Soul and Spirit
are captivated in evil, and lives as it were in another Country or Region,
which is as opposite to that wherein they delight, as Light is to Darkness, or
the Zenith to the Nadar? And therefore they cannot come there; for Angels and
Genij have power only in their own respective principles, and mankind cannot
draw near, nor have any Communication with them, not they with him, except he
immerseth his will and desires into their principle.

This is clearly manifested by all things in this external world, which is a
real and true Figure of the internal, from whence it proceeded; for here we see
how every thing desires to accompany its own kind, as proceeding from the same
Matter and Element, and when the same properties have the chief dominion in the
Center of Life: And therefore those men whose predomnant Qualities are alike,
have a great affinity with each other in their Dispositions and Inclinations,
and and do often heartily love and desire each others company; and the same is
to be understood in many other things where they agree in number, weight and
measure, there they powerfully incorporate and rejoice together, and with
united Forces endeavor to cast out their Contraries. A pregnant Example of
this we have in sounds, If two Instruments of Music of one sort be Tuned to an
equal pitch, strike one of the strings, and the same string on the other
Instrument will Shake or Tremble, as I my self have experienced. The very same
attractive and sympathetical Inclinations have all other things, though in some
it be more occult: what man in the world would believe the Attractive Virtue
and Power which the Loadstone has upon Iron, if it did not appear to his Eye?
For the wise and wonderful Creator has endued all things with an influential
virtue and attractive Inclination, and Certainly, if Nature has such Great
Power, and Secret Energy in inanimate Things, much more there is in the Living
Power, or Highest Graduated Spiritual and Immortal Beeings, of which these
Outward Things are but Figures; if man did but know, or were but sensible how
Wonderfully he is Made, and Excellency of his own Composition, and that in him
is Contained the True and Real Principle both of Time and Eternity, then would
he be ashamed of his condition, and ever Praise and Admire and Serve his
Blessed Creator in Fear, and endeavor to immitate Him and all Good Angels, in
Innocence and Well-doing, which would more powerfully attract the Sweet and
Blessed Influences of all Good Spirits, and the Intrinsic Virtue of every
other Thing, whereas Discord and Evil do as Powerfully drive away all Good
Intelligences, and make men altogether incapable of Divine Visions, so that he
being Defiled and Polluted with Violence, cannot soresee any Celestial Thing,
but becomes as it were wholly Blind as to those Sublime Mysteries, and Holy
Virtues, which is a Woeful Condition, and very Deplorable, for then, they call
Evil Good, and Good Evil, not being Capable to make any Distinction of their
Properties, or the Principles of their own Nature.

On the other side, a firm Faith, and a continued Contemplation or Meditation
on the wonderful variety of Separated Beeings, and the Immortal World (whence
all material things take their Birth; the inward Being the Life, and the
outward, but as the Body) for men, I say, to be sensible of these Sublime
Opperations does Facilitate forward, and promote true Visions; more especially
if Temperence, Cleanness and Innocence be observed in Meats, Drinks, Exercise,
Words, Works, and Communications, for these Virtues are Divine Gifts; he that
obtains the Knowledge and Government of himself is endued with a Glimps or Ray
of Divine and Universal Understanding, both of the Material and Immaterial
Creatures, together with the Fear of the Lord, and the inward Workings of his
Holy Spirit, and Divine Power; therefore it is said, That the Spiritual man
discerns all things, even the deep things of God; that is, both things
Internal, as well as External, wherewith agrees the Apostle, teaching, That
what ever may be known of God is manifest in man; who is the only Creature in
this Visible Material World, that is capable of all Spiritual and Natural
Learning, and as he shall give way and be obedient to the inward voice of
Wisdom that continually cries in the Gates of his Microcosmical City, so shall
he be endued by degrees with a True Sight, and Spiritual Apprehension according
to the use he makes of, and the Advantages he puts his entrusted Talents unto.
For the Foundation of all Wisdom, and Right Knowing is within, in our own
Apartments; therefore there is a Necessity for every Man first to know himself
in some Measure, before he Think or Presume, to Know or Understand any other
Thing Truly, be it either Natural or Spiritual; and those that with an Holy
Humility do Aspire to this Sublime Knowledge, Viz. of God, Nature, and
Themselves, ought by all means to be in good earnest, and Zealous for Cleanness
and Innocent Living; for Abstinence, Sobriety and Temperence do wonderfully
fortify the Observers thereof, against the Assaults and Temptations of Evil
Spirits and Angels, and make the Body Lightsom, Pleasant and Healthy, thereby
enlarging all its Functions, and also Prepares the Soul for Celestial
Irradiations, rendering it more fit to become the the Temple of God, and
Associate of Holy Powers; those Pure Abstemious Virtues do in a wonderful, but
secret manner attract the good Angels and Spirits, more especially to such
Persons as by an insight into these Mysteries, shall be satisfied of the
possibility of such Spiritual Visits and Communications, which are always
ready to reveal the Secrets of Time and Eternity, to such as believe and
imitate them.

For no man can open the Gate of that holy and friendly principle in which they
live, but those only who have obtained the right Key through obedience to the
heavenly voice of Wisdom in themselves; for this is the strait Gate, and the
narrow Way that leads into the holy City; all things are moved by Concord and
Equality, which all the Prophets and renowned Lawgivers were truly sensible of
from the beginning of the world, being wonderful for their strict observance of
Sobriety and Temperance, as Moses, Elias, etc. who were so given to fasting,
that their Faces are said to have shined; that is, the divine principle and
voice of Wisdom was so resplendent in them, that they had, and held the measure
and reins of Government over the Body, as if they had been a Spirit; indeed all
holy men endued with divine understanding, and such as obtained of the Lord the
great Blessing of Intelligences, and the free Communication of good Spirits and
Angels, have been remarkable for Sobriety, Temperance, and innocent Living, for
men's minds cannot be any otherways preserved free and potent.

The Prophet Daniel was highly sensible of this, when he and his Companions,
were both courted and threatened with the displeasure of the King and his
Servants, touching eating of the unclean Superfluities, both of Flesh and Fish
that came from the Kings luxurious Table, which he and his fellows refused to
defile themselves with, choosing rather to adhere to wisdom's voice, than fuffer
themselves to be seduced out of natures pure simple and innocent way, by either
the Flatteries or Menaces of the Court; and therefore according to the Law of
their God, and the Dictates of his Handmaid Nature, contented themselves with
clean and harmless Foods and Drinks, viz. Herbs, Fruits, Seeds and Grains; for
those things had not only a real Affinity with the innocent Principle in man,
but also they could be procured without Violence, Oppression or Dying Groans,
and likewise without any trouble or hazard to Body or Mind; Properties which
the Kings royal Delicacies could not boast of.

Were not the Rachabites ennobled by the Recommendation, even of the ^lessed
Creator Himself, to all Posterity, for their Abstinence and Temperence? The
truth is, none can preserve their Spirits Clean and Pure, but such as Extenuate
the Gross Superfluous Humors by Parity and a Spare, Frugal Innocent Diet, by
which the Body becomes more easily Penetrable, it being a Maxim that may pass
amongst the things undoubtable, that if the Body be not fitly preserved and
ordered, the Spirit whilst it is linkt there-unto, and as it acts, so it
suffers by it too, cannot conveniently Exert its Functions for Abstinence and
Temperance do dignifie men, and render them fit for the Exercise of all Virtue,
being the Root of Strength and Fortitude.

For this cause the Mother of Sampson, was commanded in Vision, or Dream, by
the Angel of the Lord to abstain from Wine, and Strong Drinks, and so was
Samson her Son, who was endued with wonderful Strength; for wheresoever the
Virtues of Temperance and Cleanness are Practiced, other Holy Virtues may be
expected to follow, because by its power, no Superfluous Matter is Generated;
that may dull or indispose the Fantasy, or other intellectual Power of the
mind; and so the Soul being freed from burthensom Vapors, becomes watchful and
soberly active both in Words and Works; for the Body and inferior Earthy
Spirits, being kept under, the Soul is thereby adopted to the Superior Powers,
and their sweet influences: Did not our Forefathers live to great Ages in
perfect Health and Strength of Body and Mind, enjoying many heavenly
Privileges by Virtue of their temperate and innocent Course of Life? Now the
Reason why Cleanness Temperance and Sobriety have been so much praised by all
good men, is because they proceed and are streams that slow from the benign
and ever-blessed Fountain of true Light and Love; and all that espouse them in
good earnest, are powerfully drawn into the same Principle, strengthening and
defending the observers thereof, against all Kinds of Superfluity and Madness
of Riot. Hence it was that the Wise Seers of old abstained from unclean Foods,
and the Flesh and Blood especially of such Animals, whose predominant Quality
and Ascendent chiefly stood in, or proceeded from the wrathful and defiled
Nature; they being thoroughly sensible what a base depraved thing it was that
the noble Faculties of the Soul and Humane Nature should mix, join and
incorporate with the Brutish Nature, and unclean wrathful properties of
Beasts, especially such as by Natural inclinations, desire to eat the Flesh and
Blood of others their Fellow Creatures; it being concluded on all sides, that
such Carnivorous Bloodsucking Creatures, are Radically unclean, and not sit to
be eaten: which being a known Truth, that scarce any will deny, I do thence
further demand by parity of Reason, how then Mankind can be clean, either in
Soul, Body or Spirit, that now are so far generally degenerated as greedily to
desire and devour the ^lesh of all the Inhabitants of the sour Worlds or
Elements? What great Matters or Heroic Acts, or spiritual performances can be
expectted from such as defile themselves both in Quantity and Quality of Foods,
which renders them incapable of seeing, judging or understanding any thing as
they ought to do.

Therefore whoever would know God, and the wonderful Faculties of his own Soul,
must be conformable to the wholesome Rules of Sobriety, Temperance and Cleanness
in Meats, Drinks and Communications. For all the great Seers, and holy
Prophets, every one, according to his respective Gift and Manifestation, was an
immitator of God, by living in the practice of those good Virtues, which fitted
and prepared them for every Good Work.

Temperance, being the Captain of the Guard, and chief watchman, that suffers
not the Soul to sleep, or be overcome with the sensual pleasures of Gluttony
and Uncleanness, but frees it from burthensom dullness and indisposed
Dispositions, and makes it see things, even as they are in their Naked
essential Verities, and attracting the Celestial Quires for such
Manifestations, both sleeping and waking, as their Companions that delight to
communicate with the undefiled in Mind and Body.

But on the Contrary, Uncleanness and Intemperance defiles both the Body and
Soul, depraves and stupifies all the intellectual Powers, and renders them
incapable of having any Converse with good Spirits or Angels; for Disorders do
as Naturally drive away and dissipate them, as virtue and sobriety do attract
their happy Company: But Superfluity and Debauchery have a powerful inclination
and sympathetical force over evil Doemons, and causes a near affinity between
the soul and them, whence do proceed such a multitude of vain Thoughts, Dreams,
Words and Works. And therefore the Scripture says of the evil Angel, That he
goes about like a roaring Lion, seeking whom he may devour, being a great
Prince of the wrathful evil part of the world, but not in the humane friendly
or good part, for that is separated from his Principle, beyond the Sphere of
his Activity, so that he has there no power.

And although nothing can be more prompt and ready than these dark spiritual
Beeings, to assist and carry on all evil designs in the hearts of men, that
incline to do the works of their principle; yet still they cannot annoy nor
injure any but only such as draw near unto or awaken their fierce wrathful
Fountain, by means of Uncleanness, Superfluity, and Intemperance, which are the
grand Inletts of the Devil, that give him power over the Soul and Spirit;
whence arise innumerable vain Thoughts, Imaginatious, corrupt Words and Works,
and all kind of Violences and Oppression. Nay, further, a secret Compact or
Confederacy between the evil Genius and man's Soul in an insensible way, so that
many are Drowned, and as it were totally captivated into this dead Sea, or
Fountain, of wrathful Darkness, and they knew it notthemselves, but others, who
have adhered unto the voice of Wisdom in themselves, and live in the power and
Virtue of Temperance, do clearly perceive and know it; for those that are
afflicted and inslaved, do make demonstrations of their wretched condition, and
what Angels or Spirits are their Guardians, by their Vile and Blasphemous
Words, Wicked Works, Cruel Violences and Oppressions to those of their own
kind, and also to all the inferior Creatures; which does sufficiently manifest
whose Children they are, and what Angel is their Captain and Conductor, to wit,
he who in the Scripture is styled. Abbadon, or Apolyon, the Serpent, the Enemy
of all Goodness and Righteousness, the False Accuser, and the Destroyer.

And as their daily practices are, so also suitable are their nightly Visions,
that is to say, Vain, Turbulent, Lascivious, Hideous or Frightful; For the
Thoughts Imaginations, Ideas, Figures, Shapes, Forms, and the like, that
proceed, or are generated from the dark Center, or wrathful Kingdom, are
Impertinent, Lewd or Monstrous. For this cause, some Saturnine, and Martial
people are Afflicted, with Hideous, Frightful, Malancholy, Dolorous Dreams;
especially if they do not vigorously Endeavor through the Virtue and Power, of
Wisdom and Temperance, to moderate the Inequality of those Astreal Forms, which
has had the chief Government in the Complexion.

The like is to be understood of the Shapes or Forms, wherein deceased Souls
appear or represent themselves; for the same are either hideous and frightful,
or pleasant and humane, according to what Property or Principle they are fallen
into, or captivated under. Therefore those that have precipitated themselves
into the divided Forms, into Beastiallity, and the savage Nature having cast
off and abondon'd the humane Property, and grown Hardhearted, Cruel, and
Sordid, without Mercy, Compassion and Innocence; such, I say, as live and dye
in this Savage, Brutish State, do fall into the dark, Fierce, Hellish
Principle, which had already in their Life time captivated the Soul, as may be
understood by the unclean Words and Works, that Proceeded from them; Now
according to what Property or Form has gotten the chief dominion in the Soul,
such a Shape and Form is the Soul and Spirit Clothed with. For in the Dark,
Wrathful, or Hellish Fountain, there is as great a Variety of Shapes, Forms and
Figures, as there is in the Paradisical or Divine Principle of the
Light-Kingdom of Love; for every Soul shall be capable to reinvest and attract
matter out of all things of the nature of the property that carries the upper
dominion in the Spirits; for such seed as men do sow, such a Body, Viz. of that
Nature is generated, and of a suitable Shape and Form: for so the great and
illuminated Apostle speaks of the Resurrection; God gives to every Seed its
o^n Body: Wherefore if men sow hellish Seeds in their Lives, no wonder if they
be clothed with suitable shapes in the next World. But on the contrary, those
that in earthly Pilgrimage have freed their Souls and Spirits from Oppression,
Violence, Uncleanness and Intemperance, and separated themselves from the giddy
Crowd, and vain Ways of the Multitude, and introduced their Wills and Desires
into the Friendly Principle of Gods Eternal Love and Light, and have been
guided by its Counsel, their Souls shall after Death arise, and be clothed
with a more Perfect, Beautiful, and Glorious, Humane, Shape and Form; of whom
our Lord Jesus Christ was the first: For after He had Vanquished Death by his
Resurrection, He Appeared in the same Shape, Form and Body, as he had before in
his Life. Likewise the good Angels, and all separated Souls of Saints, have in
all Ages appeared to the Prophets, and holy ^n in humane Shapes and Forms
exceeding beauteous.

For it is not to be doubted but that in the beginning the blessed Creator made
Man in this very Form and Shape (as to his Body) which he does retain, though
not now altogether so beautiful, by reason of his Degeneration and sordid
Intemperances, which have in some degree defaced the lovely Majesty of his Body
and Countenance; for though Man through Transgression, and giving way to vain
Imaginations, has lost the Government of the divine Principle, and so is fain
from his first illustrious and innocent Estate, yet neyertheless he has in some
measure preserved still his outward original shape or form of Body; for the
Lord endued every Body with a Seed in it self, to beget and produce its own
Species, in all particulars; and if it had not been for this great and
undefeazable Law of the Creator, Man by his great Lusts, Intemperances,
Violence, Oppression, Cruelty, Vanities, and other evil Courses, would long
since have destroyed, and lost his beautiful humane shape and form, as well as
that Angelical form of his Soul: But it was not in the power of his will to
alter Shapes, and change one Form into another, so long as his Soul is clothed
with Humane Nature; for the truth is, he has done what he could to be a Beast
outwardly as well as inwardly; nay, he is become far worse than any of the
savages of the Desert, internally in the Spirit; and therefore the illuminated
Prophets, called men by the names of the worser sort of Beasts, in whom the
fierce, cruel, wrathful nature is most predominant; as, Generation of Vipers,
Lions, Foxes, Wolves, etc. and also the evil separated Spirits, or Souls of
Men, as well as fallen Angels, have always been resembled and likened unto savage
Beasts, and represented accordingly, when ever they appeared in brutish, or
fierce hideous forms.

Therefore when departed Souls shall appear to their surviving Friends, either
clothed with sidereal thin Bodies, or in Dreams, in beastial shapes, and
hideous frightfull forms, it is but a bad sign or token of their Condition and
State in the other World, and that they have not retained the humane property
in the time of the Souls being in the Body; for according to what property of
the wrathful Principle man has suffered his Will and Desires to enter into,
that same Quality or Property gets the Dominion and chief Government in the
Center of the Soul; and if men live and dye in the power and strength of that
predominating wrathful Nature, and do not weaken or change it by Repentance and
Regeneration, then from that very property is generated a new Body, and fealed
with its proper Signiture; for every Spirit has, and is endued with an innate
power; by which it can attract suitable matter out of all things for a
Covering, or Body, suitable, or of a proportionable form and nature to its
self; for, as at the beginning, when the eternal sole Self-Existent Essence
moved Himself to the Creation, or Manifestation of all external Beeings and
Creatures, then according to the qualification of the seven Fountain-Spirits,
and what property, degree and nature of the Spirit such matter was capable to
attract out of all things, for a Covering or Body, such was the external
nature, form or shape proportionable to the inward Life or Spirit.

Therefore the outward Signatures or Forms, Shapes and Complections of each
Creature, both in the Animal, Vegetable and Mineral Kingdoms, does clearly
manifest what form or property in the seven, fold ^ture carries the uppermost
Gov^ent therein: But none can rig^ distingush this but only the un^led Eye,
though every one may more or less perceive it, since in Animates it is most
clearly manifested by the eyes of each Creature.

For the Eyes are the open Gates and Light of all the natural Faculties,
through which continually pass the most subtle spirits of life, and have there
their free egress and regress. For which Reason the disorders of nature, and
the strength, weakness, liveliness, and dull, heavy, indispositions both of Man
and Beast may easiest be perceived by the eyes and face. And hence also it
comes to pass, that the wishful looks of some saturnine people, whose souls are
captivated in the astringent bitter, wrathful nature, do sometimes wound the
pure spirits and health, of those they wish evil unto, which the Ancient called
Fassination, and our Vulger say of such as they conceive to be injured, that
they are bespoke. Yet it is to be noted that the wishes of those bad people,
without their fight or looking upon one, has not that power to hurt the
health, or any thing of that nature, as seeing and wishing both together; nor
yet can either of them, or both conjoined, hurt or wound the health of any, but
only such as are under the dominion of their Spirits, and live under the
government of the same evil Properties, though in a lower degree; for those
that are higher exalted then themselves in the Wrathful Bitter Saturnine
Nature, they cannot injure, much less can they touch or hurt others, who live
in any degree of Regeneration, and acknowledge the holy Fountain, and eternal
Light and Love of Jesus Christ to be Guide and Governor of their Souls, there
being a wonderful difference, and vast Gulf between the Principles they live
in, the one being Light, and the other Utter Darkness.

Now as the extern Signature of all material Bodies is an intelligible
Character, or Index of the internal Spirit or Virtue, so separated Souls, when
they assume aierial Bodies, or represent themselves in Dreams, do it in Shapes
and Figures Analogous to the state they are in, and that Principle which bears
sway over them.

I shall conclude this Chapter, with two observations delivered by two learned
men.

The first Trythemius, who asserts, that never any good Angel appeared in the
shape of a woman. The other Van Helmon, who in his ninty third Chapter has
these words; If an Angel appear Bearded, let him be accounted an evil one, for
a good Angel has never appeared with a Beard.

The truth is a woman is the weaker vessel, and was first in the Transgression,
so that Sex is an emblem of weakness; and therefore there is no reason, why the
good Angels, amongst a ^om there is no difference of Sex. sh^d choose to appear
as a fem ^e but ^tue being of a sp^ above (...) ^d, assumes the sha^ of the ^t
excellent of that (...), (...) for the same reason they man appear without
beards, both because hair is an excrement, and verges somewhat in resemblance
to the brutish Nature, as also more especially, thereby to denote their
perpetual Youth, Beauty and Vigor, wherein those intellectual beeings, which
keep their First, Glorious, and Happy estate, do always remain. And the
contrary, in all those particulars is to be understood of the evil Genij, who
by their fall rendered themselves liable to weakness, imperfection, and
continual Transgression, and consequently allied to the savage nature, which
they often resemble, in being all over hairy, as is storied of the Satires and
Fawns, a sort of corporial Demons, mentioned by the Ancients, and one of which,
the great Augustine testified that himself saw.

CHAP. VIII.
Scripture Examples and Testimonies, touching Dreams.

HOw highly Dreams were esteemed by the holy Ancients and Prophets, appears by
many Testimonies of Sacred Writ; The ever blessed Creator, frequently sending
his Angels and good Spirits, to tell and reveal unto his People, and Sons of
Wisdom, his Divine Pleasure, sometimes to admonish them of future things, and
sometimes of their own evils, and at other times, to avoid and prevent the
evils that evil men threatened them with, as Genesis 20. 3. God came to
Abimeleck in a dream by night, and said unto him, Behold, thou art but a dead
man, sor the woman which thou have taken, for she is a man's wife, This
Angelical admonishion and reproof, proved very profitable to Abimelech; for
hereby he repented of his evil, which otherwise he would ignorantly have
committed, and saved himself and his people unviolated, and safe from the
severe Judgments, so near impending and threatened, so Genesis 31. 10, 11. The
Angel of the Lord appeared to Jacob in a dream, and bad him return, into his
own Land; and when in obedience to that Vision, he had stolen away unawares
from Laban, and Laban with his Brethren, persued him seven days Journey,
designing as it seems, to fall upon him with Violence, it is said in the 24th
verse, that the Lord came to Laban the Assyrian, in a Dream by Night, and said
unto him, Take heed that thou speak not to Jacob either good or bad; that is,
offer not any Violence to him, as appears verse 29. By which means the rage of
Laban was restrained, and Jacob preserved from danger. Did not Joseph, whilst
yet but a Child, receive intimation of his future advancement, in a Dream,
Gensis 37. 9. Which Dream was repeated, or doubled unto him, for the greater
assurance of the truth and cetainty of the thing. Of Pharoh's chief Butler and
Baker it is said, Genesis 40. 5. That whilst they were in Prison, they dreamed a
Dream, both of them, each man his Dream in one Night, each man according to the
Interpretation of his Dream: And when Joseph their Fellow-Prisoner came unto
them, in the morning, and sound them sad, and enquired the reason, they told
him, we have dreamed a Dream, and there is no Interpreter thereof: To which he
did not reply as many of the People that would be counted wise men in our Day
would probably have done in such a Case, viz. All Dreams are Vanities and
Fancies, you should never regard them, they signify nothing, and therefore
never trouble your heads about the Interpretation, etc. But on the contrary, he
tells them; Do not Interpretations belong to God? Tell me your Dreams, I pray
you, verse 8. And having heard them, proceeds to give a true Interpretation
thereof, That the Butler should be Restored, and the Baker Hanged in three
days space, which was exactly accomplished.

In the next place, Genesis 14. 1. We read of a Dream that Pharaoh King of Egypt
had, first, of seven fat Kine, devoured by seven lean ones. And afterward of
seven full ears of Corn, devoured by seven thin, and blasted ones, which the
aforesaid illuminated, young servant of God, Joseph interpreted to be a Vision
from God; for, says he, verse 25. God has showed Pharaoh what he is about to
do; there shall be seven Years of Plenty; and afterward seven Years of Famine;
Therefore he advised to lay up the fifth part of all the increase, during the
seven fruitful Years; by which secret admonition of the good Angels of the
Lord, King Pharaoh was put into a way to preserve himself and his people, and
particularly to be a shelter, and maintianer of the Patriarks of Jacob, and all
his offspring. And as well, this Dream of Pharaohs, as the o. ^er of Iosehps
was doubled, or set sorth twice under several representations, but still to one
and the same purpose; for which Joseph gives the reason, verse. 32. For that the
Dream was doubled unto Pharaoh twice, it is because the thing is established by
God, and God will shortly bring it to pass; whence we may learn, that when
Dreams are represented to us under several Forms, we ought to take more
especial notice of them, and may be assured both of a certain and speedy coming
to pass of the things thereby signified.

Dreams and Vision, were the usual Ways, whereby the Lord revealed his
Councels to his Servants and Prophets, to be communicated to his people, for
which there is a plain express word of promise, Numb: 12. 6. If there be a
prophet among you, I the Lord will make my self known unto him in a Vision, and
will speak to him in a Dream.

So Saul, Sam. 28. 15. complains to the deceased spirit, or soul of Samuel,
(whom he had caused to be raised up) when he asked him, why he had disturbed
him from his stilness, and quiet rest, Saul answered him, saying, I am in great
distress, for the Philistines make war against me, and God is departed from me,
and answered me no more by prophets, nor by Dreams; which shows that Dreams
were one of the most usual ways, whereby God was wont to signify his pleasure,
to the Sons of men.

When Gideon warred with the Amalekites, and was somewhat dismayed at their
vast multitudes he was encouraged by over hearing one of them relate his Dream,
and another giving the interpretation; as you may read in Judges 7. in these
words; And it came to pass the same Night, that the Lord said unto Gideon,
Arise get the down unto the host of the Amalekites, for I have deliverd it ^to
thine hands; and thou shall hear hear what they say, and afterward sha^ thy
hands be strengthened. Then h^ went down with Phurah his servant unto the
outside of the Armed men, the were in the Host; and the Midianites, and
Amalekites, and all the Childr^ of the East lay along in the Valey like
Grass-hoppers for multitude, and their Camels were without number, as the sand
by the Sea side: And when Gideon was come, behold there was a man the told a
dream unto his Fellow, and said; Behold, I dreamed a dream, and lo^ Cake of
Barley bread tumbled into the Host of Midian, and came into a Tent, and smote
it, that it fell, and overturned it, that the Tent lay along; And his Fellow
answered and said; This is nothing else save the Sword of Gideon the son of
Joash, a man of Israel; for into his hand has God delivered Middian, and all
the Host: And it was so, when Gideon heard the telling of the Dream, and the
Interpretation thereof, that he worshipped, and returned into ^he host of
Israel, and said; Arise, for ^he Lord has delivered into your hand ^he Host of
Midian.

It was in a Dream that God was pleased to Grant Solomon a promise of Wisdom
and Understanding, 1 King. 3. 5. In Gideon the Lord appeared to Solomon in a
Dream by Night, and God said; Ask what I shall give thee: And Solomon said,
Now, (...) Lord my God, thou have made thy ser^ant King instead of David my
Father, ^d I am but a young child; I know not (...) to go out, or come in; and
thy ser^ant is in the midst of thy people, which ^ou have chosen, a great
people, that ^nnot be numbered, or counted for mul^tude; Give therefore thy
servant an ^derstanding heart, to Judge thy people, that I may discern between
Good ^d Bad; for who is able to judge this (...) so great people? And the
speech ^ased the Lord that Solomon had ask^ this thing; and God said unto him,
^cause thou have asked this thing, and have not asked for thy self long Life,
nor Riches, nor the life of thy Enemies, but has asked for thy self
understanding to discern judgment of things; Behold I have done according to
thy word; lo, I have given thee a wise and understanding Heart, so that there
was none like thee before thee, neither after thee shall any arise like unto
thee; and I have also given unto thee that which thou have not asked, both
Riches and Honor; so that there shall not be any amongst the Kings like unto
thee in all thy days; And if thou will walk in my ways to keep my Statutes,
and my Commandments, as thy Father David did walk, then I will lengthen thy
days; and Solomon awoke, and behold it was a Dream.

Hear we see what a large communication, or converse the Lord i^ pleased to
hold with the Spirit of Soloman in a Dream; and as the request was nevertheless
real on Solomans part; nor less acceptable to God, then if it had been made
waking; nay, probable, was more acceptable, because the more pure, free and
undisturbed desire of his Soul, not then seduced by the senses, or beclouded
with corporeal objects; so what the Lord promised him in this vision, was
punctually made good and performed. But though God speaks frequently in
Dreams, yet many times man by his Dullness, Corruptions and Depravedness renders
himself insensible of those illuminations; whence holy Job affirms, God
speaks once, yea, twice, yet man perceives it not; in a Dream, in a Vision
of the night, when deep sleep falls upon men, in slumberings upon the bed,
then he opens the ears of men, and seals their instruction, Job 33. 14 15,
16. And as those Dreams and Visions are sometimes matter of joy and comfort, so
at other times, they are terrible and frightful; and therefore the same pious
Author complains, Job. 7. 14. When I say, my bed shall comfort me, my couch
shall case me; then thou scarest me with Dr^ams and terrifiest me through
Visions.

It Is the duty of the Prophets and Servants of God to have a due regard to
their Dreams; and though some pretended Dreams, when they had none, or made use
of them to seduce the People to Idolatry, yet still the true Prophets were not
to slight Vi^ms and Dreams; because of Idolatrous Impostures; and such as were
guilty of the latter were by Mose's Law to be put to death Deuteronomy. 8. 1. If there
arise amongst you a Prophet, or a Dreamer of Dreams, and gives thee a sign or
a wonder and the sign or the wonder came to pass, whereof he speaks unto thee,
saving, Let us go after other Gods, and let us serve them; thou shall not
hearken unto the voice of that Prophet or that Dreamer of Dreams; for the Lord
your God proves you, to know whether you Love the Lord your God with all your
Heart and with all your Soul -- And that Prophet or that Dreamer of Dreams
shall be put to Death. So the Prophet Zachariah chap. 10. (...). complains; The
Idols have spoken Vanity, and the Diviners, have spoken a Lie, and have told
false Dreams, they comfort in vain.

And so Jeremiah, chap. 23. 25. I have heard what the Prophet said, that
Prophec lies in my Name; saying, I have Dreamed, have Dreamed. How long shall
this be in the Heart of the Prophets that Prophecy Lies? Yea, they are Prophets
of the deceit of their own hearts; which think to cause my People to forget my
Name, by their Dreams, which they tell every man to his Neighbor, as their
Fathers have forgot my Name for Baal.

All these Texts against the Abuse of Dreams, when they are forged, and
wickedly made use of to promote Idolatry, but make nothing against the lawful,
humble, pious and most profitable use of Dreams, as appears by what follows in
the 28th verse of the same chapter, viz. The Prophet that has a Dream, let him
tell the Dream, and he that has my Word, let him speak my Word faithfully;
what is the Chaff to the Wheat, says the Lord?

The knowledge of Visions and Dreams is reckoned among the principal Gifts and
Graces immediately bestowed by the Lord on them that fear him: So it is said of
Daniel and his three Companions, That God gave them knowledge and skill in all
Learning and Wisdom, and Daniel had understanding in all Visions and Dreams.
Dan. 1. 17. And therefore when King Nebuchadnezzar had Dreamed Dreams, and his
spirit was troubled because the thing was gone from him; that is, he had forgot
what he had seen, but only retained a general remembrance that he had a strange
and wonderful Dream; when all the Magicians, and Astrologers, and Sorcerers,
and Chaldeans were so far from being able to recall his Dream, that they told
him, There was not a man upon the Earth could do it; This holy Prophet Daniel,
not only showed the King the Dream, but also the Interpretation thereof; (the
same being revealed unto him in a Night Vision, Dan. 2. 19.) whereupon he
acquaints the King, that there is a God in Heaven that reveals secrets, and
makes known to the King Nebuchadnezzar, what shall be in the Latter days; As
for thee, O King, thy thoughts came into thy mind upon thy Bed, what should
came to pass hereafter, and he that reveals secrets makes known unto thee
what shall come to pass; and so proceeds to tell him the particulars of his
Dream, and the meaning thereof, being a Declaration of the most eminent
Empires, and Monarchies, that should succeed in the Earth, and their Qualities,
Splendour and Conditions.

The same King Nebuchadnezzar, was premonished in a Dream, of the Judgment
that was coming upon him, for his presumption and forgetfulness of God; he was
driven out of his Kingdom, and from amongst men, and did eat Grass with Oxen,
etc. Also in the 7th of Daniel we read, how the Lord by his Angel showed that
holy Prophet the things that should come to pass in the world in the Latter
days.

Nor was this Method of God's, (whereby he revealed his secrets by Dreams)
peculiar to the legal Dispensation, but seems more especially to be extended
unto, and enlarged under the Gospel, according to that prophecy of Joel, chap.
2. 28. And afterward (says the Lord) I will pour out my Spirit upon all
flesh, and my Sons and my Daughters shall Prophecy, your young men shall see
Visions, and your old men shall dream Dreams; which is repeated and applied to
the Illumination of the holy spirit, by the Apostle Peter, Acts. 2. 17.

So in the new Testament we read, That when Joseph thought to put away the
Virgin Mary, whom he had espoused, because he perceived her to be with Child;
The Angel of the Lord appeared unto him in a Dream; saying, Joseph, thou son of
David, fear not to take Mary to thy Wife; for that which is conceived in her,
is of the holy Ghost, and she shall bring forth a son, and thou shall call his
Name Jesus; for he shall save his people from their Sins, Mat. 1. 20. And in
the second Chapter, when the wise men came out of the East to visit him that
was born King of the Jews, and were sent by Herod to Bethlem, bidding them,
when they had found him, to bring him word, that he also might worship him;
they were warned of God in a Dream, that they should not go again to him; and
therefore returned into their own Country another way: After whose departure,
verse. 13. Behold, the Angel of the Lord appeared again unto Joseph in a Dream,
saying, Arise and take the Babe and his Mother, and flee into Egypt, and be
thou there till I bring thee word; for Herod will seek the Babe to destroy him.
And in the same Chapter verse. 19. When Herod was dead, behold an Angel of the
Lord (once more) appeared to Joseph in Egypt, saying, Arise, and take the Babe
and his Mother, and go into the Land of Israel, for they are dead that sought
the Child's Life.

CHAP. IX.
Of Angels Guardian of Countries, and particular Persons, and their Offices
toward men, mentioned in Scripture.

BY the numerous Examples mentioned in the foregoing Chapter, we see how common
and frequent it was in former Ages, for the Lord to appear unto his people in
nightly Visions and by Dreams; and in that secret way of Comunication to reveal
unto them many wonderful things; insomuch that they did account themselves as
it were abandoned, or separated from the presence of the Lord, and his holy
Spirits and Angels, when the Lord did withdraw or supercede this method of
Nocturnal Illuminations, as is evident by the forementioned Complaint of King
Saul. But in this our Rude and Blind Age, instead of complaining for want of
the presence of the Lord and his holy powers, most people make a
Laughing Stock, and Derision of Dreams, and all things of that nature; so great
is the Degeneration of Mankind from all sublime Truths and heavenly Converse of
good Spirits just as though there were no Angels or Genij, or that the blessed
God of Truth had not granted any of them to be our Guardians and Assistants in
our Necessities, and under his supreme providence, to protect and defend
mankind, from the many snares and inventions of evil Spirits, which continually
seek how they may devour and destroy man, and lead him captive into perdition:
But the Word of Truth assures us, That the God of all Power and Glory has made
his Angels great and powerful ministering Spirits, to aid and assist those that
fear his Name, and advance the Kingdom of Innocence.

So in former Ages we read, That he sent his good Angels, as Messengers of his
favor, and to defend his people from incursions of the evil ones; for they do
continually fight against the Malicious degraded Legions.

Thence Abraham, when he sent forth his Servant to Mesopotamia, to fetch a wife
for his Son Isaac, did by Faith assure him, The Lord should send his Angel
before him, and prosper what he went about, Genesis 24. 7. and 14. So the Lord
promises the Children of Israel, Exodus 23. 20. Behold, I send an Angel before
thee, to keep thee in the way, and to bring thee into the place which I have
prepared. Beware of him, and obey his Voice, provoke him not, for he will not
pardon your Transgressions, for my Name is in him. But if thou shall indeed
obey his Voice, and do all that I shall speak, then I will be an Enemy to thine
Enemies, and an Adversary to thine Adversaries; for mine Angel shall go before
thee in unto the Amorites, etc. Chapter 23. 24. Therefore now go, lead the
people unto the place of which I have spoken unto thee: Behold, mine Angel
shall go before thee; which is repeated again, Chap. 33. 2. I will send an
Angel before thee, and I will drive out the Canaanite, the Amorite, etc.

When Balaam went with the Princes of Moab, to Curse the Israel of God, it is
said, The Angel of the Lord stood in the way for an Adversary against him; and
the Ass saw him, and turned away several times; but the Prophet could not see
him, till his Eyes were opened, and then he reverenced him, and received his
message, Numb. 22. 23. and 31.

An Angel of the Lord came up from Gilgal to Bochim to accuse the Israelites of
their disobedience and trangression, whereupon they repented and humbled
themselves Judges 2. 1.

Another Angel appeared to Gideon, and encouraged him to deliver the people of
Israel out of the hands of the Midianites, Chap. 6. 11.

So likewise to Manoah, the Mother of Samson, promising her a Child, and
directing her how he should be Educated in Abstemiousness, and Temperance, that
he might be fit for those mighty Atchiefments of delivering his people, which
the Lord had designed him for, Judges 13. 3.

As Elijah was in the wilderness, and ready to starve, an Angel of the Lord
brought him provisions, and said to him, once and again, Arise, and eat; in the
strength of which he traveled forty days, and forty nights, 1 Kings 19. 5.

David also teaches us, That the Angel of the Lord encampeth round about them
that fear him, and delivers them, Psalm 34. 7. And again, Psalm 91. 9, 10,
11. Because thou have made the Lord my Refuge, even the most high thy
Habitation, there shall no evi. befall thee; neither shall any Plague come nigh
thy dwelling; for he shall give his Angels charge over thee, to keep thee in
all thy ways; they shall bear thee up in their hands, Jest thou dai^h thy Foot
against a Stone.

When the Prophet Zachariah had a vision by night from God, there was an Angel
that talked with him, and declared to him the things which he saw.

The Angel Gabriel was sent to the Virgin Mary, to acquaint her with the joyful
Tidings of her being overshadowed with the holy Ghost, and bringing forth a
Savior, Luke 1. 26.

The pool of Be^hesad had its Senative Virtue communicated to it by the
ministry o^ an Angel for so the Text expressly tells us, John 5. 4. An Angel
went down at a certain Season, and troubled the water, whosoever then first
after the troubling of the water stepped in, was made whole of whatsoever
Disease he had.

When the Apostles were committed to Prison for preaching the Gosple, Acts 5.
19. The Angel of the Lord by Night opened the Prison Doors, and brought them
forth; So an Angel of God appeared in a Vision to Cornelius, the devout
Centurion, requiring him to send to Ioppa fe^ Peter, who should teach him what
he should do, Acts 10. 3.

And when afterward the same Peter was imprisoned by Herod the King, behold
the Angel of the Lord time upon him, and a Light shined in the Prison, and he
smote Peter on his ^e, and raised him up, saying, Arise ^uickly; and his Chains
fell off from ^is hands, and the Angel said unto him, Gird thy self, and bind
on thy Sandals; and so he did: And he said unto him, Cast thy Garment about
thee, and follow me; and he went out and followed him, and wist not that it was
true, that was done by the Angel, but thought he saw a Vision. When they were
past the first and second ward, they came unto the Iron Gate that leads unto
the City, which opened unto them of its own accord; and forthwith the Angel
departed from him; And when Peter was come to himself, he said; Now I know of a
surety, That the Lord has sent his Angel and delivered me, Acts 12. 7, 8, 9,
10, 11.

And when Paul, in his Voyage to Italy, was in danger of shipwreck, an Angel
visited him, and assured him, That none belonging to the Ship should be
drowned; for, said he, There stood by me this Night the Angel of God, whose I
am, and whom I serve; saying, Fear not Paul, Tho^ must be brought before
Caesar; And (...) God has given thee all them that sail with thee, Acts 27. 23.

Thus manifest it is, that good Angels, both by the appointment of the
Sovereign Creator, and the excellency of their own Natures; are always
Sedulous, ready and diligent to serve, assist, succor, and illuminate good and
virtuous men; especially in their distresses, or when they are in danger by the
malice and subtilty of wicked men; And it is the Doctrine of the wise Ancients,
that not only every person, man or woman, from his or her first coming into
this world, has in an especial manner, a particular good Angel deputed; which
therefore is called his or her Guardian Angel, or good Genius, and that another
evil Angel also of a direct contrary nature and property is always attending
us, thence called Catademon, or a man's evil Genius, but also that Communities,
Nations and Countries have also particular Angels assigned to their government,
or super-intendency: And therefore in some Translations that eighth verse of
the thirty second chapter of Deuteronomy is thus read, -- when the most high
divided to the Nations their Inheritance, when he separated the Sons of Adam,
when he set the Bounds of the People according to the number of the Sons of
God; that is allotted to all the several Nations, distinct Rulers, and
Supervisors, amongst the Holy Angels, here called the Sons of God.

Thus as all Contention Hate, Malice, Strife, Oppression, Violence, Fighting,
Killing, Murders and Wars, both Private and Public; are first conceived in the
Spirit, and have their Foundation from the Wrathful, Poisonous Principle, so
when men by their sinful vanity have awaked or kindled this direful Principle,
which threatens destruction and Ruin to both private Families and public
Societies, States or Governments, then there begins a great Combat, and as it
were open Wars between the Guardian Angels of each person or Country; and which
soever of them gets the Victory, that King, Country or People succeeds in its
Wars here below, and subdueth the other.

This I conceive is plain, and undeniably evident from the 10th chapter of the
Prophet Daniel, where an Angel comes to Daniel (who had spent three weeks in
mourning, fasting and praying) and said unto him, O Daniel! greatly beloved,
understand the words I speak unto thee; for unto thee am I now sent, for from
the first day that thou did set thy heart to understand and to chasten thy
self before thy God, thy words were heard, and I am come for thy word sake; but
the Prince of the Kingdom of Persia withstood me one and twenty days; but lo,
Michael, one of the chief Princes came to help me, and I remained there with
the Kings of Persia, now I am come to make thee understand what shall befall
thy People in the latter days; for the Vision is for many days -- And having
strengthened the Prophet, proceeded thus; know thou wherefore I come unto
thee, I will return to fight with the Prince of Persia; and when I am gone
forth, lo, the Prince of Grecia shall come; but I will show thee that which is
noted in the Scripture of Truth, of Michael your Prince; thereby to understand
the several respective Angel Guardians or Titular Intelligences of those
Nations, and that every particular person (as well as Nation or Country) has a
peculiar Angel Guardian, seems to me very plain from the Scripture, especially
those two undeniable Texts, Mat. 18. 10. Take heed that ye despise not one of
these little ones; for I say unto you, that in Heaven their Angels always
behold the Face of my Father* And Acts 12. 15. when the Maid came and told the
Brethren that Peter (whom they supposed to be in Prison) was at the Door, they
not believing her, said, It is his Angel; which plainly argues what a firm
opinion and belief the faithful Christians of old had in this matter.

The like stirvings and oppositions are to be apprehended of the Guardian
Angels, and chief Princes of other Countries, Places and People; there is
frequent struggling between the Internal Princes, but still the prime
occasions, or first motives, are generally given to them by men's sinful
vanities, which do move the inward wrathful Principle of nature; whence all
those judgments and cruel Miseries do proceed, and which do give oppertunity
and advantage to the evil Angels to ensnare man in a thousand Mischiefs,
unheard of Debaucheries, Idle Dreams and Lying Visions.

For the Lord, who is a God of Holiness and Purity, and loves Truth in the
inward parts, does not visit any with heavenly Dreams or Visions, but such as
call upon, fear and believe in his sacred Name; such whose Temples are
undefiled with Blood and Uncleanness, and their Hands unstained with Oppression
or Violence; such in all Ages he has admitted into his holy presence, and
granted unto them his good Angels to Teach, Guard and Defend them from Sin and
Evil; but we do not read that in former times the Lord did ever so visit the
froward and perverse of heart, or granted them the help of these noble
illuminated Companions, viz. the blessed Angels and good Genij, for alas! tho
these blessed and good-natured Intelligencers were ready to attend them, they
instead of accepting and attracting such their assistance, do by wicked
practices and intemperate lewd habit of Life, and continual Violence, drive the
good Spirit away; and on the contrary, conciliate to themselves evil Genij,
whose work it is to suggest and dictate Lies, in a spiritual way both night and
day; and such persons Dreams and Visions are generally Lying Fantasies,
according to the nature of their attendance.

For every man in the world has either a good or evil Internal Companion, or
Genius, that he adheres unto, of the nature of that property that he has the
chief Govenrment in the Life; and this Genius does mightily prompt and froward
all such things as his principle, quality or Complexion inclines him unto; and
as men alter in inclination, either to good or evil, so their Genius grows
either stronger or weaker, according as they shall enter with their wills into
good or evil, and became strong therein, it may also be noted, that what
Employment, Art or Science soever a man strongly inclines unto if he continues
therein, and becomes fixed, he shall obtain a proper Genius, which will
mightily assist him in that Art; and the very same is to be understood in both
virtue and vice, for as any one becomes wedded unto, or practices either with
strong inclinations; so his Genius, or good or evil Attendant becomes strong
and powerful, and if it be virtue, than such a person becomes great in the
mysteries of Goodness, Virtue, Wisdom, and the secret knowledge both of God,
and of himself, and of universal nature, according as his Temper and Complexion
is capable; For constancy gives strength, and great power, both to the Genius,
and all the faculties of the Soul; And the like is to be said of vice, as is
most apparent in such as continue long in the practice of Evil, they every day
grow much worse, the Custom takes away the Conscience of sinning, and they
become Seared as with an hot Iron, as the Apostle fitly phraiseth it, that is,
locked up as it were, or wholly captivated in sordid Vanities and Impieties,
whereby they become cruel and violent in all things, and work wickedness with
Greediness, and draw Iniquity as with Cart-ropes, for they have opened the gate
of original Poisons, the Bitter, Wrathful, Astringent Spirits, which compose
the inwardmost Kingdom of sierceness, wherein Devils dwell, being destitute
both of divine and eternal Light; this evil center many men have so terribly
awakned, as shortly they have by way of simile at racted the evil Spirit, and
Angels for their Companions, who do diligently wait upon, and continually
prompt them to wickedness, and further exciting of the hellish poisonous
properties, whence are generated Filthy Swearings, Lying, obscene words and
Actions, and all kind of abominable Discourses and Actions, with a thousand
horrid thoughts, and vile immaginations, frequent amongst the multitude, so
that if a man's inward Eyes of his Soul were but opened, he might easily see
Legions of those accursed Demons, fluttering in and about such People, egging
them on to all evil Communication and p^actices, it being a certain and
undoubtable truth, that all filthy vain thoughts words and works do arise and
proceed from the Hellish centen, and do all carry the power of their own
principle with them, and so incorporate with their Similes wherever they are
received, and thence pass back again into their own dark original Source, and
totally captivate the soul therein, where they are recorded, and shall stand
forever as Witnesses of Condemnation against them, if men Live and Dye in that
deplorable state, and do not Repent, and turn from them, by Regeneration, and
Newness of Life.

Now from those infernal Legions, which beset us on all sides, both inwardly,
and outwardly, no man is safe any longer then he fears the Lord, and has his
mind fixed on Sobriety and Temperance in Meats, and Drinks, Exercises and
Communications; for nothing (as we have already said, and cannot say too often)
does so much disarm, weaken, prevent and frustrate all evil suggestions and
ingections of the evil Angels, both within and without, as those sublime
virtues with convenient Fasting, and continual servent Prayers. For as our Lord
and Savior Christ says, some sorts of evil Spirits are not cast out, or
chased away, but with Fasting and Prayer: and therefore the Kingly Prophet
says, wherewith shall a young man cleanse and defend himself from evil Angels,
and other Enormities, but only by keeping thy Word, and being obedient to thy
Commandments; always having a regard to that most excellent saying of Christ,
First seek the Kingdom of God, and the Righteousness thereof, and all other
good things shall be added, or given unto you in due season.

For as every man does govern himself, and into what property he suffers his
soul to enter, such an Angel or Spirit he allureth, be it either good or evil,
there being Spirits of all Orders, Complexions and Natures (for which should we
think, the Intellectual world less peopled then the Material?) which always are
ready and officious to exert their power, as we read in the Scriptures of
Truth, The Lord said, who will be a Lying Spirit in the mouths of Ababs
prophets, and presently steps forth one, and said, I will; and far be it, but
we should believe that the benign Spirits are as ready to secure and defend
mankind from evil, when they incline to well-doing and Innocence, as the
malignant Ones are to precipitate them into Error, Guilt and Misery.

If men did but believe those things, and diligently observe and weigh them,
they would certainly be much more careful in moderating their thoughts and
affections, neither would many so much dote upon, or be perpetually vexed with,
for, or about the Spirits of golden mountains of Ethiopia, the Dust of Guinea,
the Rubish of Peru, which do give great advantage to, and powerfully attract
the evil Demons, who by many of the Ancients are thought to have some kind of
rule over, or affinity with those hidden Mines and Treasures in the bowels and
dark Cavetns of the Earth, which are the Idols whom most people now adore, and
over whom the evil spirit Mammon is said to be Lord president. For whatsoever
man does violently taste, and set his mind and affections upon, presently the
evil Spirits that are of that quality, do present themselves, and are busy to
allure the Soul, and captivate it with more passionate desires after it. For
this cause it proves hard, and very difficult for men too be temperate, and to
moderate their affections in any thing wherein they have once run out into, or
contracted an habit of Excess, so many Enemies there are to circomvent and
inveigle them on every side, whose power is great, but it is by reason of the
greatness of man's sins, which give them the Advantages, whereby they lead
multitudes into perdition.

On the other side, the good Angels, and Spirits are as easily attracted by
virtue, as the Evil are by vice; that is so say, they are delighted, and
conciliated by their own fair Resemblances, Purity, Love, Truth, Temperance,
Order, firm Belief, cleanness in Meats and Drinks Innocence and Silence; these
are powerful Loadstones or Magneticks that will attract good Spirits and
Angels, even from the furthest parts of the World.

It is also further to be considered that true Dreams and Nocturnal Converse
with good Angels and Spirits, does afford great delight, and true pleasure to
the mind and soul; the very thoughts of those secret visits, chears and
irradiates the intellectual Faculties even in the day, and causes a desire and
longing for the night; and the more fixed any man is, and the more he lays them
up in a Reserved and Religious Breast, with serious Thoughts and Meditations on
such sublime Mysteries, the nearer he approaches unto their Beeings and
powerfully invites those holy and material Essences, and so by degrees, even
whilst he is in the Body, becomes as it were incorporated with, or endenizon'd
amongst those Celestial Quires of blessed Angels and Spirits of the Just made
perfect, and to have their Names Registered in the Book of Life, as in the
Revelations is promised.

For nothing comes so near those glorious Beeings; or so effectually engages
them as a constant thoughtfulness temperance and sobriety, but more especially
Innocence, and the Child like nature, which does in the highest degree imitate
the nature Angelical, whence our Savior Christ, Mat. 18. 10. admonishes his
Disciples, to take heed not to despise Innocence, and the simple harmless
nature, which he calls one of these little Ones, such as have through the
virtue and power of the divine friendly innocent Principle disarmed the fierce
wrathful properties, and as it were cut off the members of evil, that is their
thoughts, words and works, and have as much as in them lies, imitated and lived
in the innocent nature of Christ's Spirit, and good Angels, for of such he
says, Their Angels do always behold the Face of my Father, which is in Heaven.

But such as live in Uncleanness and Riot, in Chambering and Wantonness, in
Oppression and Cruelty, are subect to the Tyranny and Punishment of evil
Angels, as executioners of the divine Vengeance, which hence are called
destroying Angels: Thus two Angels came to Sodom, and having secured Lot and
his too Daughters, consumed those wicked Cities, whose Inhabitants burning with
unnatural Lusts, were justly destroyed with a shower of Fire and Brinstone, the
Lord by the Angels of his vengeance reigning down as it were Hell out of Heaven
upon them, such was his Abhorance of their Abominations. When David had
provoked the Lord by numbering the People, and thereby showing his Inclinations
to boast of the Arm of Flesh, rather than trust in the Lord his God; It is
said, 1 Chro. 21. 15. God sent an Angel to Jerusalem to destroy it, and he
repented him of the evil, and said to the Angel that destroyed, It is enough,
stay now thy hand; And the Angel of the Lord stood by the threshing Floor of
Ornan the Iebusite, and David lift up his Eyes and saw the Angel of the Lord
stand between the Earth and the Heaven, having a drawn Sword in his Hand,
stretched out over Jerusalem; then David, and the Elders of Israel, who were
clothed in Sackcloath, fell upon their Faces. When Senacherib, King of Assyria
presuming upon the strength and number of his Army, had proudly Blesphemed the
God of Israel, the Lord sent an Angel; which cut off all the mighty men of
valor, and the Leaders and Captains in his Camp, so that he returned with
shame into his own Land, 2 Chronicles. 32. 21. which is also Recorded more
particularly, Isaiah 37. 36. The Angel of the Lord went forth and smote in the
Camp of the Assyrians an hundred and fourscore and five thousand; and when they
arose early in the morning, behold they were all dead Corpse. In like manner,
when Herod had accepted the blasphemous Flatteries of the people, Acts 12. 23.
immediately the Angel of the Lord smote him, because he gave not God the glory,
and he was eaten of Worms, and gave up the Ghost. So the Angel that slew the
firstborn of the Egyptians, is called the Destroyer, Exodus 12. 23. As also the
Angel that smote the rebellious Israelites in the Wilderness. Neither murmur
ye, as some of them murmured, and were destroyed by the Destroyer, 1 Cor. 10.
10. For when men by imitation do come near and sympathize with the principle of
the evil Angels, they become incorporated with, or swallowed up by their
wrathful dark Nature; as the Kingly Prophet David says, Pfal. 78. 49. The Lord
casts upon them the fierceness of his Anger, Indination and Wrath, that is by
the sending out, or granting Commissions unto evil Angels, to vex and plague
them; for man by his Outrages, Gluttony, Drunkenness and Oppressions, both to
Man and Beast, and killing of those of his own kind, has opened the Gate of
Gods fierce warthful anger, which does powerfully attract the evil Angels and
give them oppertunities to commit Evils without Remorse, having a free access
both by Dreams and Visions, and other Spiritual Communications, which do exert,
and inwardly stir up man ever, even in the very center of his Life to Evils,
whence those numberless, and strong lewd Immaginations, wicked Words, and
ungodly Works do proceed, so that a rational man would think that no thing, or
Creature, that is clothed with the humane nature, could be so much depraved
and precipitated into Error and all kind of Ungodliness. Therefore well may the
Angel of the Lord in the Revelations, cry, woe unto mankind, or the Inhabitants
of the Earth, for the Devil is cast out of Heaven, and is come down on the
Earth in great Wrath and Indignation, that is into the wrathful or evil part of
the Adamical Earth, and not into the good part; for this world, and all things
therein, do consist both of Good and Evil, Light and Darkness, Love and Hate;
but into the good, the Devil, that is, evil Angels or Spirits cannot enter, as
being contrary to their Ubi, or Being; the Light being set in an eternal
opposition to Darkness, and Satan, and all his associate Angels being fallen
from the Light, are entered into the dark original wrath, whence the evil part
of this world proceeds; and therefore he and his Legions are only capable of
the poisonous fierce wrathful Ubi, or Station; and consequently where persons
give themselves up unto Oppression, Violence, Envy, Backbiting, Gluttony,
Drunkenness, Swearing, Lying, Lustful Frothy Romancing Discourses, and vain
foolish Jestings, all which do arise, and are generated from the fierce
poisonous wrath, both inward and outward, wherein Beelzebub has his Throne, to
and with the souls and spirits of such men, the evil Angels have free access,
and a ready Intercourse, because they are nearly allied in their original
principle; Ahabs Prophets were before false and lying Prophets, and had made a
Trade of soothing up that wicked King in his Idolatry, with counterfeit Visions
and Flatteries; and therefore it was that an evil Angel was so ready to offer
himself to be a lying Spirit in their mouths. It was the Sin of David that
drew down the beforementioned destroying Angel with his Sword in his hand
against Jerusalem; and when David and his people repented of their misdeeds,
then presently the Lord commanded the Angel to put up the Sword of wrath; for
by such their Repentance; the principle of Indignation was weakened; and on the
contrary, the principle of Light and Love was thereby strengthened and
corroborated, which did discuse the wrathful particles, or cause the destroying
Angel to disappear, and attracted the presence and assistance of the good
Angels, who have their Ubi, or are conversant in the good part of this world,
as the evil Angels are in the dark malign part thereof; and as men enter
either into Good or Evil, so do they contract a familiarity with the one or the
other, and acquire good or bad Guardians, which do powerfuly stir them up
either to virtue or vice.

Hence we read, Genesis 48. 16. Jacob acknowledging Gods divine hand of
providence, says to his Son Joseph, The Angel which has delivered me from all
evil bless the Children; as also the same sacred Scripture, Genesis 32. 24.
declares that the Lord wrastled with Jacob all Night, in a Vision or Dream by
his good Angel, and Jacob's Spirit or Soul was in good earnest, and strove so
with the divine power, or good Angel, that he would not let him depart, until
he had blessed him, which did manifest Jacob's firm Faith, and inward
acquaintance with, and understanding of Gods government by Angels, which of late
Years has hardly any being in the Heads or the Hearts, in the Understandings or
Desires of men.

CHAP. X.
Man cannot Communicate with Spirits in his outward Senses, but in Dreams and
Ecstasies. Strange material Figures, Calls, Blows, etc. before Death. Of middle
Spirits. Against telling of Dreams and how Dreams are always represented in
Corporeal Forms, and in what sense men's works are said to follow them after
Death.

WE have before demonstrated, that during the sleep of the Body, the Soul is
as it were already Separated, and in Eternity, so that both Joy and Sorrow is
essential unto it, and the Soul does really enjoy either pleasure or pain; For
this cause both good and evil Angels and Spirits can most easily and familiarly
communicate with the Souls of men in sleep; for then the Soul is near unto
their Ubi, or Being, and there is a great affinity between them; but when the
Body is awake, and all its sally-ports of the Senses wide open, to let in
outward material Objects, the Soul is clothed with a dark, heavy, earthy,
sensual vesture, which does as it were wholly captivate and chain this
incorporeal Essence; and as those Communications, Revelations, Sights, or
whatever else does happen to the Soul in Dreams and Visions, seems as nothing
to the Body and Senses after waking (which is one main cause so many slight
Dreams) so what is translated through the Senses, or in the outward material
World is nothing to the Soul in Dreams; but the Beggar has as lofty
Representations, as the King, and the poor Captive as free Enjoyments as his
Judge; therefore we should consider the vast differance between the internal
and external principles, and their respective Inhabitants, and that the
external Eye can see only into its own Birth or Original; that is, into the
Things and Light of this outward material World, as receiving its Light from
thence, for nothing can see further than its own principle whence it proceeded.

For this cause no mortal man can see and communicate with Angels and Spirits
by sight, and under the perfect Exercise of their outward Senses; therefore
when the holy Prophets and Ancients received Visions, and the good Angels and
Spirits Communicated their Secrets unto them, it was always in Dreams,
Ecstasies or Raptures; not knowing (as the Apostle says 2 Cor. 12. 2.) whether
they were in the Body, or out of the Body; and therefore the Prophet Daniel,
says, that in the great Vision before mentioned, he had not the strength of a
man, that is, his senses and natural understanding, was during that time of the
Vision, weak, dead, or as it were asleep, and did not see, nor know any more of
the mystery or divine sight, than men do of their common Visions of the Night,
which are as nothing to the Body and Senses; for every Eye sees into its own
Radix, that of the Body into the Principle of this World, as being generated
from the Light thereof, and being it self Corporeal, sees, apprehends and
comprehends all Corporal things; but the Eye of the mind and soul is
Incorporeal, and therefore it can well see, apprehend and comprehend things
Incorporeal and Spiritual, especially when it shakes off, and as it were quits
it self of the Chains and heavy Fetters of its earthly Tabernacle, and the
sensual Facultites of the external palpability, as comes to pass in Visions and
Dreams; for the Soul has an eternal and Celestial original proceeding from the
Intelligible World, and therefore when it is freed from Darkness, it can well
see into, and communicate with the internal and heavenly Spirits and Angels;
But the Senses and Body take their original from gross palpable matter, and
therefore depend upon sublinary nature, consequently subject to destruction and
coruption.

The Body is a dull heavy Trunk, but the Soul is quick as Thought, and nimble
as a Beam of Light; and therefore, when freed from the clog of the Body and
sensual Power, it is capable of entertaining and receiving all things, be they
either material or immaterial.

But here it must be noted, that it is common for Persons in Dreams to be
presented with various Figures, Forms, and Shapes of material things belonging
unto the Animal, Vegetable and Mineral Kingdoms, which do signify, or often
times fore show or denote Prosperity, Adversity, Health, Sickness, the Death of
themselves or Friends; others have vocal Calls, Voices, or Blows before Death
or Sickness; Now all this variety of Nightly Representations or Dreams proceed
from the variety of each man's Genius or Angel, and are true or false, according
to its Nature, and the virtuous or vicious Lives of the Persons.

But certain it is, that many men have certain and assured signs, or
premonitions given them of the Death or Welfare of absent Friends and
Relations, as also of their own; of which were it needful, numerous Instances
might be given; and this as it is very strange and wonderful, so I see not
which way it can come to pass otherwise than by the operation of the internal
and supernatural Intelligers or Genji, which amongst the wise and sober
Ancients was more frequent then of late years, viz. when men fearing the Lord,
believed that he governed the world by Angels, and when men lived in Sobriety,
Temperance, and Cleanness, which does wonderfully prepare men for, and render
them capable of receiving true Dreams or Oracles. For external as well as
internal Purity, and to be free from Violence, and the defilements of Blood,
and of unclean Meats and Drinks is most necessary; for all who would be worthy
of this sublime Knowledge and Gift of true Dreams, must keep a pure undisturbed
and undisquieted Spirit and Imagination, and friendly compose the same; for an
unclouded Spirit is like a clear Glass, or calm limpid spring of water, wherein
you may behold the true Images of things, but if the same be troubled, stirred
or agitated, then you perceive nothing but confused Figures; so the Spirit
being discomposed apprehends nothing as it ought to do, but as long as it
continues serene and tranquil, it lets in the true Lights of distinguishing and
understanding, and presents the real Figures and Notions of things to such as
are of a sound and healthy Body and Mind, not dulled with Intemperance, nor
made sad by Anger, nor provoked to Bitterness and Envy by Covetousness; but
when at peace with God, and all its innocent Creation, you quietly go to Bed,
and fall a sleep, then the Soul being loosed from hurtful thoughts, and freed
from the heavy body, and sensual Spirits, does freely Communicate with divine
Angels and Spirits, and far more certainly, clearly and efficaciously behold
and enjoy wonderful things; and oftimes is then instructed in, and taught many
abstruce Secrets and Mystries; for the good Spirits being diffusive and
communicative, do invite the Soul to their Society by the opportunity of the
Sleep of the Body and Senses, and the nocturnal solitariness, nor will they be
wanting to such when they are awake, if they shall square and conduct their
Lives and Actions by the measures of wisdom, and rules of Piety.

On the Contrary such whose Fantsies and Spirits are dull, and as it were
unpolished, and who languish under distemperatures of mind, and a Body
oppressed with excess of wine, or other superfluity, whence noxious Fumes
arises, that miserably becloud all the Intellectual Hemispere, the access and
intercourse of the benign Spirits or Angels is prevented or frustrated, and
such peoples Dreams are confused, oblivious, and tending to Evil and Vanity;
for the good Intelligences cannot, nor will give true Oracles or significant
Dreams to persons intemperate and unclean, and whose Souls are estranged and
degenerated from their principle, and precipitated into wrath and Violence; But
the Inhabitants of the infernal World have the nearest Affinity to such, and do
by their secret sympathitical Communications suggest and dart into the Soul
many Lying Fantasies and Mischevious Dreams, and teach them sundry vile pranks
and evils.

For there is as great a variety of Spiritual Creatures and Beeings, good and
evil, clean and unclean Spirits, viz. respectively in the two grand Fountains
or Principles of good and evil, as there are material Inhabitants in this
internal or visible principle or Elementary Quaternion of Earth, Air, Water and
Fire, and of as various and different shapes, forms and natures, and
complexions (if we may in an Analogous way apply those words to Spiritual,
which commonly are only predicated of gross Palpable Creatures and things) for
all this wonderful variety of the Animal, Vegetative and Mineral Kingdoms, are
but a Figure and Similitude of what is in the internal Spiritual World, whence
all those proceeded; and the internal Spirit and Power is still the true cause
of all motion, growth and increase, and Life in all Creatures and things
contained in the said three Kingdoms, and no internal Intelligence, Power,
Spirit, Angel, or Genius, whatever can affect us otherwise than as we draw near
them in Spirit, and so by degrees awaken their predominant property or
principle, by which they have power to influence us either in good or evil. But
for the most part, it happens in the Evil, because most men live under the
dominion of the evil principle, and properties of Nature. For a man has both
inward and outward helps in whatsoever he inclines to, more especially if his
propensions and desires be fixed and strong; his inward helps toward virtue
are the good Angels and Spirits, who readily meet, embrace and rejoice at the
drawing near of men to their principle; whence it is said, that there is Joy in
Heaven at the Conversion of a Sinner; and to encourage them in well-doing, they
by almost imperceptible ways afford them assistances, and reveal many
wonderful secrets to them, both by day and nightly Visions; and his outward
Helps are innocent Living, Temperance, and Cleanness in Meats, Drinks,
Exercises and Communications with good sober men; and those latter helps being
practiced to conciliate, and promote the former.

On the contrary, men evilly ^nclined have also two Spurs to wickedness, viz.
inwardly by the suggestions of bad Doemons, whose work it is to prompt men to
vi^iousness; and outwardly by Covetousness, Pride, Drunkneness, Vainglory,
Uncleanness, Intemperance, evil Words, Works and Communications with evil men.

Likewise, as every man is endued Radically with the two grand Fountains or
Principles of good and evil, which every one in the World is more or less
sensible of, by their inward operations, and that continual Strife, and as it
were open wars there is between them in the Center of his Soul, so every man
thence comes to have two Genij or Spirits, that always wait upon, and attend
him, viz. one good, which answers to the good friendly principle of Light and
Love; The other evil, refering to the fierce, wrathful Principle, which two do
continually and fiercely contend for Victory, and oft-times cause great trouble
and perplexity in the Soul; but when the good overcomes, then there is Joy,
Concord and Pleasure, or an entire Satisfaction of Mind.

It is further to be noted, that there are great numbers of Elemental Spirits,
which are of a middle nature; some of which do dart and gleam into some persons
whose understandings are not exalted above their Principles or Elements; These
only busy themselves in foolish unluckey ridiculous prankes, and doing of
pretty mischiefs; whereby they often promote idle jesting, vain laughter,
wanton love stories, and the like; but they generally attend those people that
have poor, low, beggarly genius, whose understandings are very little elevated
above Bruits; for this Infantry of Spirits, or lower graduated Spectrums have
no communication either with men of virtue or prudence, nor yet with those that
are Exalted in the highest degrees of evil; for these Lemures, or Terrestrial
or Watery Spirits are as they chiefly inhabit woods Mountains, or unfrequented
Valleys, Rivers and Lakes, so they come nearer to the nature of some sorts of
Beasts then of man, unless of such men only who have base low beastial
complexions for with such they have a simile of this sort. The Prophet Isaiah
seems to speak, Chap. 13. 21. where he mentions Ziim and Ob and Iim, and the
Satyrs which should dance in the ruins of Babylon, they are unclean sorts of
inferior Spirits, and their conversation does ill become the Noble Race of
Mankind.

But for the good Superior Angels their converse is very advantageous, and
therefore ought* by all lawful means to be courted, and conciliated, and the
discoveries made by them to be highly regarded, and concealed, for its a great
and mischievous error for People to tell abroad their Dream, and the secret
communication of their Souls with Angels and good Genij, and so highly to
prostitute them to every lewd and vain Companion, as though they were of no
worth or value, this is very common amongst most people, but it is a greater
evil then most do imagine; for some who have had good Angels granted to them,
for day and night Companions, that taught and revealed unto them many excellent
things both present and to come, have by their divulging, and foolish talking
of them, lost such their Guardians, and all the conversation of their good
genij, which too late they have been sensible of, but found them as hard to be
regained as Esau's Birthright was, when by evil courses, and sin he had fooled
it away, and then sought it in vain with tears, for there is nothing more
offends the good Angels, then men's light behavior, and vai^ talking of them;
as on the other side, nothing does more please and allure them, then for men to
lock up their secrets in religious and thoughtful Breasts, and to abscond them
from the vulger and profain, as we read in Ezra, Thou shall deliver these books
that contain the secret Law of the Hebrews unto the wise men of thy people,
whose hearts thou know can comprehend them, and keep these secrets;
Therefore it was usual amongst the Philosophical Ancients to hide their great
secrets; and vail holy mysteries in abscure Characters and Hieroglyphics,
because they should not be known to and profaned by the wicked. So we read of
Theodorus, the Tragic Poet, when he would have referred something of the
mysteries of Jewish Scriptures to a certain fable, he was depraved of his
sight. It Is also reported of Theopompus, when he began to translate something of
the divine Law into the Greek tongue, he was smitten with a kind of Frenzy,
or extraordinary trouble of mind, and desired of God to make him sensible
wherefore that calamity was fallen upon him, received answer in a Dream, that
it was, because he had basely polluted Divine things, by setting them forth in
public.

Our Lord Christ himself, whilst he lived in the humane Nature, spoke after
that manner and fashion, that only the more intimate Disciples should
understand the mysteries of the Word of God, but to others he spoke only in
Parables; he also commands, that holy things should not be given to Dogs, nor
Pearls cast before Swine; Therefore, says the Prophet, I have hid thy Word, in
my Heart, that I might not sin against Thee. And Mary, the blessed amongst
women, when the Angel Saluted her, and told her what glorious things should
happen unto her, it is said, that she laid up the sayings in her heart, and
pondered them in her religious mind; which reverence, and serious meditation on
these wonderful things, which the Angel communicated unto her, was well
pleasing to the blessed Creator, whence every good and perfect gift proceeds.
For all celestical virtues are wonderfully strengthened by secrecy, and the
holy powers attracted, who detest public and profane things, and vain bablings.

Now Dreams are no other then certain discourses and incorporeal Sights of the
Soul, being in sleep, loosed from the heavy Fetters of the Body and senses,
whereby it has an near affinity with the matereal beeings, and according to
what property of the sevensold Nature, she is subjected unto, such and such
Phansies, Representations or Dreams, she apprehends which appears as real as if
they were corporeal qualities, and the Soul is thereby either tormented, and
full of perplexity, or on the other side filled with Joy and Delight
apprehended in the Divine Vision; somewhat to this purpose is imitated by John
the Divine in the Revelations, where it is said, Blessed are they that dye in
the Lord, for their Works do follow them. For the Manners Habbits, Temperance,
Sobriety, Innocence of Life, doing unto all as they would be done unto, and the
true illuminated understanding of the Mysteries of God, and his great Divine
Law in nature, are works that may be said to follow a pious Soul after death,
which then calls to mind those things that it did in its life, and still more
intently meditates and thinks on them, and endeavors to do them again, for they
being the Souls chief delight in the time of its continuation with the Body, it
still takes Pleasure in them, but in a more perfect and exalted degree. For
after Death the Soul being deprived, and wholly destitute of all the Faculties
and Functions of huma^e Life, as Nourishing, Growing, Generating and various
Occupations of the Senses, all the delights of the Body must needs cease, and
be terminated; but their works follow them in the Mystery, and become
substantial; for all things then appear in their real Figures, Forms and Shapes
as they do in this World, but in the greatest Perfection and most Sublime.

The truth of this St John in the Revelations does demonstrate, where the Gate
of the Heavenly Paradisical Kingdom of Eternal Happiness being opened and
showed unto him, it appeared in most beautiful curious F^ms, Shapes and Figures
of the things of this external World; but in a far higher degree of perfection,
for the Furniture of this World, viz. the innumerable and vast variety of
Creatures in the Animal, Vegative, and Mineral Kingdoms, are gross, and as it
were half dead in comparison of the Heavenly and Spiritual; for all these lower
things are but faint, dull, imperfect corporal Figures and Forms af the
Spiritual Kingdom whence they had their original. It is therefore to be noted
that no man ever dreamed that he saw any Thing, Figure, or Shape of the Animal,
Vegative and Mineral Kingdoms, which he never saw, thought or heard of before
at least in the parts, if not in the whole; for though many times things are
magnified or diminished and made better or worse, or Heterogeneous things
conjoined in a representation that never were in nature, yet still there is
nothing that has not before been seen, heard or though of.

The like is to be understood of the contrary or dark Kingdom of Wrath or Hell;
such as have by transgression precipitated their souls thereinto, their work do
also follow them, and all Figures, Forms, Shapes, or what ever else is
represented unto them, is Fearful and Hideous, according to what degree they
have with their wills entered into the wrathful fierce unclean Principle. Their
Conditions is like men in terible Dreams, who are afraid of Swords, killing,
falling from high places, drownings, Rocks falling on them, or being torn to
pieces with wild Beasts, and the like strange fierce or malancholy imaginations
and representations, which are all real and most essential, and yet no danger
of death near them, nor any period to their woeful condition. And therefore the
state of the damned is called Eternal death, and a worm that never dies, and
therefore no end of their sorrow and misery. These strange ^hansies, and yet
real apprehensions do follow each Spirit, or Soul, according to that property
which carried the upper dominion in the time of the Body, from which
predominating property do arise, and are generated, most frightful and hideous
representations, which put the captivated Soul into unexpressible fears and
agonies, and make it desious to die, and cannot, but continuing forevermore in
this doleful torture and perplexity, yea the predominating quality gives the
form to the new Body, viz. of a Dog, Cat, Bear, Lion, Fox, Tiger, Bull, Goat,
or other savage Beasts, according to what degree such persons in their life
time entered into any of their respective natures by Cruelty, Lust, Subtilty,
or the like, for this very cause (as was before intimated) all the evil Angels
and Souls that have at any time appeared in Dreams or Visions, have been
clothed with beastial Shapes, Figures, Forms; but good Angels, and blessed
Spirits in human Form, and clothed with the product of clean innocent
vegetation, as fine Linning and the like, for which reason some of the
Philosophical Ancients would not wear any other clothing or garment then what
had an innocent original, as pure Linning, and the like of their Foods;
whereby, immitating the good Angels, they attracted their benevolent Influences.

Thus every persons Joys or Sorrows in the Worlds to come are of that nature,
as where the predominant properties, and inclinations the will entered into, in
the time of its corporeal pilgrimage; for from the two internal or immaterial
Worlds, viz. the Good Heavenly and Paradisical, and the Hellish Wrathful, does
proceed and is generated, this good and evil, or material World, of which
external beeings are but a platform or figure. Which may afford a very sublime
and Philosophical Speculation, and he that would truly know the great adorable
and ever blessed Creator, must with fear and earnestness pray unto him to teach
him the knowledge of himself, and of the things that are; every one of which
does in its respective degree contain the true nature and property of the
whole; for the wonderful all forming Creator is in the midst of his own works,
and does sustain and uphold and continually generate them, and leads the wise
Seeker into the knowledge of the two grand Fountains of Good and Evil, and
whence they proceed, whilst the profane tread them under their feet.

CHAP. XI.
That these Communicaetions from good Angels by Dreams, etc. are not wholely
ceased; the Reasons why the same are now so rare and seldom.

BUT notwithstanding all those numerous instances we have produced from sacred
Scripture, of the frequent Apparitions and Communications of good Spirits and
Angels in Dreams and Visions, to pious and holy men in times past, instructing
and admonishing them, and revealing divine mysteries unto them; the same will
be of little advantage or encouragement to us, if that vulgar opinion be true,
that although they were so usual and frequent in former Ages, yet now they are
wholey ceased, and no such spiritual assistances or converse to be expected;
but as this opinion is not founded on holy Scripture, so there are diverse
reasons which sway with me not to embrace the same; its true, the Text says,
That if an Angel from Heaven shall preach any other Doctrine, that is contrary,
or derogatory unto the Gospel of Jesus Christ, he ought to be rejected and
accursed; for thereby it would plainly appear, that he was an evil Angel, since
God in any of his manifestations is never contrary unto himself; yet this
hinders not but good Spirits may afford us good Offices, and give us notice of
impending Dangers, and defend us from the assaults and incurrances of evil
Doemons, and be the Ministers of God, whereby he may be pleased to make more
clearer revelations of his Secrets to those that fear him; for the blessed
Creator is the same as ever he was, and as near unto mankind as he was in
former Ages, whence the Apostle Paul says, the divine Word, or holy Principle
of Gods eternal Light and Love is near thee, in thy Mouth, and in the Center of
thy Heart; and therefore whatsoever was by divine appointment or permission of
this nature, common to the Prophets and holy men in former Ages, its reasonable
to believe that the same should not only be continued in these later times, but
increased, and far more illustrated since the great work of redemption and
divine manifestation in the flesh, who was welcomed unto the humane nature by
the holy Quires of Angles.

Its under this Gospel dispensation that the holy Prophets have foretold should
be far more glorious irradications and discoveries of divine knowledge; that
all should be taught of God. That their Sons and their Daughters should
Prophecy, their young Men see Visions, and their old Men dream Dreams. The
current of the Scripture bears Testimony to a greater Light to break forth in
the latter days, wherein the knowledge of the Lord shall cover the Earth, as
the Water cover the Sea; and why then should we abridg or reject any of those
ways wherein God has formerly vouchsafed most usually to discover his will in
the mysteries of his Kingdom to the Sons of men.

The good Spirits are inflamed with the same Zeal for spreading the Glory of
their Creator now, as in former times; they have still the same ardent Charity
and Good Will toward men that pursue and seek after Virtue and Piety, as
heretofore; and we have as much need of their aid and assistance, as any of the
Ancients; why then should we think all intercourse cut off between us and those
blessed Spirits? why should we with a stupid neglect lose the benefit of such
powerful Auxiliaries? That evil Angels are daily contriving our temporal and
eternal ruin, that they do by various ways and means cast stumbling blocks
before us in the Paths of Piety, and endeavor to seduce us by multitudes of
temptations, is generally agreed by all professors of the Christian Religion;
and if so, I desire to know why we should not believe the good Angels to be as
diligent to protect or instruct us, as ready to encounrage us in well doing, as
the other are busy to circumvent and debauch us, and prompt us on to sin, and
mischiefs and misery.

Its evident the ever blessed Creator has since the woeful fall and degeneration
of mankind, readily heard the prayers of those that in sincerity have called
upon his Name, and live in obedience to his holy Law, and that he has in
various manners appeared to them in Visions Calls, Voices, Dreams, and the
like; which was continued and increased in an extraordinary manner after the
great Light appeared, viz. Christ Jesus clothed with the humane nature, as
appears by the authority of the Scriptures before mentioned, and if the same be
now discontinued (as some people would have us believe) of which, as there is
no mention in Scripture, so it is against the Principles of God in nature, to
suppose any such Chasm or interruption of communication between superiors and
inferiors, in the state of created beeings; and beside what a miserable and
deplorable state must man then now be in; for amongst the Ancients, if the
Spirits of the Lord did withdraw, and cease from communicating, and manifesting
the secrets of the great Creator, by so me of the forementioned ways, they
looked on themselves in a sad and deplorable condition, as we may see in the
case of Saul and others? Whereas now according to these opinions we are not
only debarred of all those celestial interviens and communications, but also
exposed to all the rage and subtilty of evil Spirits, without any assistance
from the good Angels, which our Forefathers so plentifully enjoyed.

But the Truth is, if we by virtuous lives prepare and fit our selves for the
converse of holy Angels; we have no more reason to despair of their aid, for
the Lord does never withdraw his holy Spirit from man, except man do first by
sin and disobedience separate himself from his Maker; but on the contrary the
divine Principle of love does continually strive with man against the evil, as
our Savior said, I would have gathered you, even as a Hen gathers her
Chickins under her Wings; and in another place; I came to seek and to save that
which was lost. And elsewhere the Scripture says, As many as received the
glorious Light of his Gospel, became the sons of God, or of Light; and the
great Apostle Paul, who was illuminated by divine Vision says, Whatsoever may,
or can, be known of God, is implanted and manifested in man. For God made him
in his own Image, that is, containing a breviate of the nature of all things
divine and humane; which is since his fall enlightened, or again re-invested
with the divine Seed of the woman, and holy Principle of Light, even to the
Center of his Soul, which the wise Man calls, the voice of Wisdom, always
crying in the Gate of the microcosmical City, calling man out of Sin, and the
Babylonical confusion, into the glorious Light and Liberty of the Sons of God,
in which state the inward eye of divine sight is opened, which sees into the
secret mysteries of Gods nature.

But some will say, that these divine sights and visions, like miracles, were
only to illustrate and confirm the Gospel, or glorious manifestation of Christ
in the human nature, and to convince and call the Heathen to repentance, and to
the knowledge and faith of the universal Salvation. But to this I answer;

First, The Objection is not true, for as these secret Communications were
before under the Mosaical Dispensation, so in fact they have been continued
unto, and enjoined by multitudes of holy pious and reserved Souls in all Ages
since, of which varions Examples might be given from Authentic Histories, I
shall only cite one remarkable one out of the Book of Martyrs: In Queen Mary's
days, when the Prosecution was hot against the Protestants, there was but one
Congregation in all the City of London that kept it self entire, and privately
held Assemblies, to which one Mr. Rough belonged, as a D^acon or Officer, to
care for the poor, and to that purpose had in his Custody a^ Roll, wherein all
the names belonging to the Congregation were entered, it happened one night,
that Cuthbert Simpson, Dreamed that Mr. Rough was taken, and the Roll in his
Pocket, and then awaked, and falling asleep again, had the saine Dream
repeated, with which being much affected, he gets up, intending to go to Mr.
Rough, but before he got ready Mr. Rough came unto his Chamber, to whom he told
his Dream, and desired him, that he would some way dispose of that Catalogue,
that it might not be taken with him; Rough reproved him for such a conceit,
telling him Dreams were but silly fancies, and Christians ought not to regard
them; but Sympson, upon whose Spirit it had made a greater impression, adjured
him, in the Name of the Lord, as he would answer the mischief which might befall
the innocent People of God, to mind what he said, and convey away the Book; so
he consented and fecured it; and within two or three days was himself taken,
and had the book been found with him, all the whole Congregation had been
discovered, and ruined, if not lost their lives, which by this providence was
prevented.

Secondly. Is there not as great need and oceasion still for such spiritual
Admonitions and Asiistances, as there was in the Apostles days; nay, more, for
then Behevers were in more ample manner filled with the holy Spirit, and able
to work Miracles then for the conviction of Infidels; whereas now there are
few, or scarce any arrive to those Gifts; And do not the greater part of
mankind still continue in blindness, and unbelief? The compa^ and number of
Professed Christians is inconsiderable in respect of the vast numberless number
of Infidels and Heathens; besides most called Christians have more of the name
then of the nature of that holy Religion.

The adorable Jehovah sent his well beloved and eternal Son our Savior into
the World to appease his wrath, and to break down that irefull Partition Wall
which separated man from the Peace of God and the God of Peace, and to
enlighten the Heathens, and those that sat in darkness and the shadow of death,
and to reconcile man to his maker, against whom he had rebelled, and was become
an Enemy, not only to him, but consequently to all goodness and virtue. Now
since divine Visions and Revelations by Dreams were so frequent before our
Saviors ^carnation, why should we imagine that this most illustrious Light
should put a total stop to all these holy celestial Communications? A^ though
the ever Blessed God that made all things in Heaven and Earth in concord and
sympathy, were not the same, nor so kind to man as in former days, who is
certainly unalterably, and always ready to draw near unto, and hear all those
that fear his Name. But the true original reason or occasion why Visions,
useful Dreams, and the Communications of good Angels are ceased to many nominal
Christians, is their infidelity and disobedience, and not living in the Power
of that pure Spirit of Light, Love and Wisdom that they profess in name: For,
alas! What do names, or formal empty professions and talk signify in this
particular? the Lord accepts of no Worship, but that only which is hearty, viz.
in Spirit and in Truth, as the great Light of the World does testify.

To show that I assert no new or singular opinion in this point, I shall here
add the words of a most Learned and Reverend Author the famous Dr. Usher,
Archbishop of Armaugh, who in his Body of Divinity fol. 150 says thus.

Does man commit Sin in the Night when he Dreameth? [that is, sometimes when he
has evil Dreams, for of those the Author is speaking]

Yes surely [saith this Learned and Holy man] the Soul is never idle, but when
it thinks not of Good, it thinks of Evil. And the Godly may mark, that
after they have had many Dreams of things unlawful, their heart is in a measure
wounded, till they obtain Peace and Pardon from God.

What use are we to make thereof? to pray earnestly that God would sanctify
our corrupt Heart, that it may be a Fountain of Holy, and not Sinful thoughts,
and in the Nigh^ to commit our selves specially to God, that because we having
our Senses and Judgment bound and silent are less able to resist and judge our
sinful thoughts, God would preserve us from them by his Grace. And 2dly that we
avoid all occasions thereof in the Day. Thus far that Judicious Author.

If mankind suffer the fierce, wild, savage, Spirit of Wrath, Violence,
Oppression, Intemperance, and Uncleanness to reign in their Hearts and Souls,
then there is no doubt but all Illuminations, true Dreams and divine Visions
will cease in them; and the Spirit of Error and Cruelty grow Strong and
Powerful.

These are things all sober, serious, well-minded Christians ought to consider,
and not to be lead away, with Tradition, Noises and Clamours; for all such as
shall adhere unto, and regard the Voice of Wisdom, that continually cries in
the Gates of man's Microcosmical City, and hereby have cleansed themselves from
Uncleanness, both of Flesh and Spirit, shall find the Inward and Spiritual Eye
of their Understanding opened; and having by obedience, separated themselves
from the giddy Crowd of the Multitude, and their pernitions Ways, they become
Sub^ects of the celestial Country, and belong to the New-Ierusalem, whose
Gates stand open to them, so that they are Fellow-Citizens with Saint John in
the Revelation; where he says, The Gate of the Heavenly City was opened unto
him on the Lord's Day, that is, the Divine Principle of Gods eternal Light and
amiable Love disclosed its self in the Center of his Heart: Now this was by a
Divine Vision, and the Eye of the mind, that he saw the Heavenly Mysteries,
through the Outward Nature, which is a true figure of the Inward, because from
thence it proceeds; nor can any know this holy Sabbath, or Lords Day, but those
that have retained the Counsel of the Voice of Wisdom, and been true to the
heavenly Power; for unto them alone is granted the Key that opens the Gate of
the Heavenly Jerusalem.

CHAP. XII.
The Causes why Dreams are always Represented us actually present: As also some
means tending to promote intellectual Communications: The Excellency of
Temperance and a Regular Diet, and Sober Virtuous Life, to conciliate and
advance true significant and profitable Dreams, and to make an honest useful
improvement thereof.

THE Soul of man having a divine original, being an Eye or Ray, of the Eternal
power and Heavenly Fire, when looseried from the outward gross senses of the
Elimental nature, as in Dreams, sees into the great Mystery of Eternity, as
into its Mothe^, where there is neither Place nor Time, but near and afar off
is all one and the same.

For the Soul in Dreams when the Body and sensual Powers of the outward
elemental grosness are asleep, or dead (which is all one during the sleep of
the Body) is as it were already in Eternity, and swims in the great Depth, or
Abysses, and sees with an eternal Eye or Sight in the same measure like its
Creator, whence it had its birth, and whose Image it bears.

For this cause the Soul is busied in Dreams and Visions, that are represented
not only really actuated, but present, as if they were already done, or at the
same time accomplished, for all things, whether past, present or to come,
appear present to the Great Eye of the Eternal being, and the same (in
proportion) is to be understood of the Soul in its separate state; that is to
say, dead, asleep, or loosed from the chains and dark clouds of the body and
senses, of outward composition, for the Lord, sees and knows all things; for
unto him, there is neither time nor place, night nor day, but all is
essencially present; for things in Eternity goes not on by degrees, or by
progressions, as they do in time; the like is in its kind to be understood of
the Soul in Dreams when it swims out of the gross sleepy Body, more especially
after Death, in which state all the mystries of that Principle into which the
Soul had entered and immorsed its self in the time of its Cohabitation with the
Body, whether Good or Evil, and also all its works do follow, attend and are
present, naked and bare unto each Soul; hence the Scripture says, Blessed are
those that dye, and are Comprehended in Gods Love, for their works follow them,
that is, are Essensually present with them, as their Figures and
Representations are in Dreams, so the same divine Scripture says of Christ,
that he was a Lamb slain from the Foundation of the World; nevertheless the
same was not accomplished according to time in some thousands of years after.

And as in Eternity all things and time are present, so it thence follows that
it comprehends all times, and is not capable of being measured or divided, much
less comprehended; so the Soul of man being inspirited by the eternal divine
Principle of Love and Light, and thereby capable of having its Conversation in
Heaven, and taking its Flight into Eternity, for every thing is capable to
reascend as high as its first Fountain whence it first descended; in which
state it is capacitated, according to its Gifts to see things either actually
past and Transacted, or as yet to come, and to be Transacted in time, both as
still or already actually present, for so they all stand in Eternity, there
being no Yesterday, nor to Morrow, but it is always the same Yesterday, to Day,
and for Ever, there being in him no Turning, Variation nor Shadow of Change.

Thus Moses saw the Transactions of the Creation, the Fall of man, the Flood,
and all those several Actions done in the World to his own time, as we may find
it Recorded to us in his Five Books. 2 Esdras Chap. 14. 21, to the end; Esdras,
Likewise by the Spirit of the most high, dictated to his Scribs the lost Bible,
for it is said in the 42 verse, They wrote the wonderful Visions of the Night;
as for me (says Esdras) I spoke in the Day, and in the Night I held not my
Tongue v. 43.

The Prophet Isaiah, having a grevious Vision declared to him, was orderd to
set up a watchman, and he to declare what he saw, Chap. 21. and amongst other
things he saw a Chariot, with a couple of Horsemen, and he answered and said,
Babylon is Fallen is Fallen.

Thus the prophet Jeremiah, Chap. 51. 8. declares the Word of the Lord against
Babylon, and says, Babylon is suddenly Fallen; as if her ^estruction were
Actually present, or rather past, and yet, as to time, the City Babylon
Flourished many years after those Visions of Jeremiah.

And Isaiah, after the same manner spoke of Cyrus in the present Tense, Chap,
44. v. 29. Cyrus he is my Shepherd, and shall perform all my pleasure, and
Chap. 45. v. 1. Thus says the Lord to his Anointed, to Cyrus, whose Right hand
I have holden, as if Cyrus had then been in being, when as to time it is
recorded that this Vision was more then an hundred Years before Cyrus was born.

The Angel that appeared unto St John, Rev. 14. 8. says, Babylon is fallen, is
fallen; and another Angel also appeared unto him, and cried, mightily with a
strong Voice, Babylon the Great, is Fallen, is Fallen, Romans 18. 2. yet whether
this mystical Babylon, or that Confusion and Oppression to the meek humble
divine Kingdom of our Lord Jesus Christ, be yet fallen, we are all witnesses;
although the fall thereof was seen and represented as already done in Eternity at
that time of St. John's Vision, which is about sixteen hundred years ago. Thus
much I'thought fit to observe, from that which every man, from his own
experience may find True, that Representations of things in Dreams are always
actually present, not past, or future, whereof the judicious Reader may from
these hints I have given, dedu^e several notable Remarkes.

But here it is probable, some may be apt to inquire, If there be so much in
Dreams as you seem to teach, and that some Dreams, are so useful and
instructive above others: Can you show us a method how we should procure such
signifiant Dreams and retain them, and come to understand their true
significations?

I answer, those Inquirers do it out of pride, vanity or curiosity, desireing
Dreams, and the understanding thereof, that they may vapor therewith, and seem
somebody in the World, or to get money thereby, and the like devilish
intentions; then neither I, nor any man else can possibly contribute any thing
to the satisfaction of their desires, because they act in a contrary Principle,
and these mysteries are Sealed up from them, and all that are of their Spirit;
but to the Meek and the Humble, who drives on no foolish design, but the glory
of God in the first place, their own and Neighbors Happiness, so far only as
it may be subservent to that, I will propose a few considerations, which may
somewhat tend to their Satisfaction.

Since True or Prophetical Dreams are a kind of Revelation of a divine power,
unto the Soul, and that this sublime state of the mind, is much advanced or
depressed, by Temperance or Intemperance, Virtue or Vice, it follows that the
first step to all true wisdom is the fear of the Lord, which teaches all men
Sobriety, Temperance and Cleanness; therefore all such as are desirous to
arrive at that supreme state of the Soul, and to be rendered capable of the
Communications of Good Angels and Spirits, and to receive true and profitable
Dreams, ought to be Chastely and Devoutly disposed, and in an especial manner to
observe Cleanness in Meats and Drinks, and not to over-charge Nature with to
great a quantity; for such surplussage does strangely dull and becloud all the
intellectual powers of nature, so that the Soul, can neither Communicate with
good Angels, or separated Spirits, nor of herself see or penetrate into any
Celestial thing.

But Wisdom which is derived from, and joined to Sobriety, Cleanness, and
Temperance, in that which rightly fitteth and disposes both the Body and Soul,
and Spirit, and advances them to a divine purity; for Abstinence and cleanness
in Meats, Drinks, Employments and Communications, have a wonderful power to
fortify all the Observers thereof against all sorts of Vices and Temptations
of the Devil, who continually goes about seeking whom he may invegle to
Drunkenness, Gluttony, Lying, Coveteousness, Pride, and the like, to all which
enormities, Excesses opens the Doors and Windows, and so it is easy for him to
enter, finding abundance of prepared matter for his Suggestions and
Temptations, to work upon, whereby many Thousands of Poor Souls are destroyed.

The contrary is to be Understood of good Angels and Spirit, who by Temperance,
Chastity and Purity, are drawn and conciliated to our Assistance; therefore let
all that would have their Souls and Intellects adopted for such divine
converse, keep their Bodies and Spirits pure and unincumbered, and not
overwhelmed in the commerce and affairs of this World, and the flesh; to which
purpose nothing does more contribute then a strict observation of the rules of
Temperance, both in quality and quantity, words and works; avoiding all
irregular Passions, Violence and Oppression, both of men and beasts, and to
bound their desires to the necessities of nature; for the things that polute
and encumber men's Souls, and enslave their Bodies, are not needful; our ever
Blessed Creator having in his infinite mercy given us all needful things in
abundance, which are also near us, and easily attainable; but those that are
not needful, nor of use to us, are hard to come at; and men's so eager pursuit
after them, do but show and manifest his depravation and fall from his first
innocent Estate; for the more things man fancies himself to need, the more is
his Turba; that is, the more strongly he awakens the wrathful powers of his
Soul, or first principle; and the less he needs, the more like he becomes to
his Creator, who gives all things, and receives nothing.

It Is certain man's soul is a Mystery, breathed out of the grand Mystery, or
Abyssal Fountain, or Eye outof the All-seeing; a Ray of the eternal Sun, and
therefore when it becomes purified through Cleanness, Sobriety, Temperance, and
the Fear of the Lord, which includes them all; that is, when separated from the
gross fumes and polutions of the Flesh; then is it capable of ascending,
receiving and communicating with good Angels and Spirits, and attaining unto
wonderful things in a moment; even as David was of a Shepherd made a Prophet,
and expert in divine things; or as Soloman, in the dream of one night, was
filled with the knowledge of all things in the Created World; so Isaiah,
Ezekiel, Daniel, and other holy Prophets and Apostles were taught; and the
truth is, the Soul when purified and united by Faith and Charity to its divine
original, can without long tedious studiing, or seeking, without the toil of
Logical demonstration, or perplexity of Syllogisms and Problems see into, and
apprehend, as far as is convenient, all divine and natural mysteries; nor is
there any thing that does more contribute to the good Complexion and
Tranquillity, both of body and mind, then these abstaining virtues, which we
have always celebrated, but can never two much recommend.

But besides, clean innocent Meats and Drinks, such as may extenuate all
superfluous matter, and prevent Crudities, there ought to be observed a due
natural Fasting, for that not a little conduces to the making of the intellect
sound and vigorous, and mostly preserves the Spirit from cloudy thickness and
suffocation, as all the holy Seers and sage Philosophers of old have observed,
who keeping an abstemious and sober Table, did protract there lives in all
sobriety and temperance, whereby they prevented the Generation of all
superfluous matters, that might dull the fantasy; for none can obtain the
high illuminated state, nor understand the divine and holy mysteries of God,
and live in his innocent Law, but only such as do by abstinency prudently
moderate every extravagant motion, of the Mind and Body.

Hence some of the wise Ancients would not admit any into their society, but
such as were abstinent from strong drink, flesh, and common Vices; saying, That
none could know themselves, or their Creator, but such as do fervently and
constantly endeavor to imitate him by a divine conversation, and that the
cleanness and purity of a mind devoted to God, does make such a man's Soul a
perpetual Temple for the divine Majesty.

It is also highly requisite, for such as would be capable of this excellent
Gift of true Dreams, to withdraw from the multitude, and from the variety of
the gross outward Senses, Affections, Imaginations, Opinions, and Passions,
which are the torturing Distempers, and Sicknesses of peoples minds; for the
simple Truth cannot be understood nor witnessed, except a man first live in the
opperation and practice of the divine power and innocent Spirit of Gods Love
and Light principle; these sublime Gifts and nocturnal Communications are to
join unto Abstinency, Sobriety and Solitude; for by Lonesomeness, Retirement
and Silence, the mind is made fine, and as it were loosened from the cords and
perturbations of worldly affairs, and is thereby the better prepared, and the
more at leisure to receive the spiritual Gifts, and free Communications of the
good Angels of God. So Moses the Lawgiver, and grand Prophet abstracted
himself (after he was learned in all the knowledge (or Philosophy) of the
Egyptians) from the voluptuous charms of Pharaoh's Court, and hurry of the
World, and went into the vast Wilderness of Midian, or Ethiopia, when, keeping
of Sheep, (an emblem both of innocence, and of his further conduct of the
people of God) he applied himself to the sole contemplation of divine things,
which pleased the Lord so well, that he suffered him to see him, as it were,
Face to Face, and endued him with a wonderful power of miracles, as the
Scriptures of Truth do testify. Many other wise men and Philosophers have by
Solitude and Abstinency obtained many wonderful gifts, and the true knowledge
of divine and natural things. We ought also avoid the haunt or sorutiny after
all such kind of curious abstruse Arts or Knowledge as is apt any way to
distract or deceive us, or amuse us more then profit us; as credulous Niceness
in judicial Astrology; Criticisms in Grammar; Derivations, and vain:
Genealogies; Squaring the Circle; contriving a perpetual motion, and such kind
of impertinent Curiosities, or other Phylosophical Follies; for the
super-intellectual and essential Unity cannot be known, or understood, except a
man does absolutely withdraw himself from the multitude, and the noise of the
confused World, where little but Violence and Wrath is practiced.

Charity is absolutely necessary to a Christian Life, for it includes our Love
to God (the supreme Good) for his own sake; and to all the rest of the Creation
in obedience to his Commands; but particularly, giving of Alms (which is but
one, and one of the lowest Branches of the sublime (tho most lowly) Virtues)
which, as it does wonderfully abate Pride, Covetousness, and such swelling
Vices, so it does advance the Soul in all kind of Virtue, and causes it to draw
near the supreme Good, who in his boundless mercy gives all things freely, and
receives naught from any but his own; the Truth tells us, Give Alms, and all
things shall be clean unto you; and the wise man says, As Water extinguishes
Fire, so Alms does Sin: and Daniel taught the King of Babylon, that he should
Redeem his Sin by Alms; and the Angel Raphael testifies to Tobias, that Alms
freeth from Death; so our Lord Christ commands us, to pray to the Father,
Forgive us, as we forgive; and by analogy, Give us, as we give to others; but
for our further encouragment to Charity, and Almes-Giving, he adds, not only
that you shall receive an hundred fold, but possess eternal Life; and the
Scriptures declare, that when he comes to judge the Quick and the Dead, he
shall upbraid the wicked above all things, for their neglect of Alms and works
of Mercy.

Furthermore, all that have obtained the knowledge of themselves, and the gifts
of the mind, and the communications of good Spirits and Angels by dreams, or
any other ways, ought above all things to keep silent, and constantly conceal
and lock up such sublime secrets in their religious Breasts; for nothing drives
away, and offend the divine Powers and good Angel Guardians more then to
publish mysteries to the profane multitude; for this cause our Savior Christ,
when he lived on Earth, spoke after such a manner and fashion, that only the
more intimate Disciples should understand the Word of God; but the multitude
should only perceive the parable; he likewise, on the same ground, commanded
that holy things should not be given to Dogs, nor Pearls be cast before Swine;
therefore well says the Prophet, I have hid thy Word in my heart that I might
not sin against thee, and it is said of Mary, the Mother of Christ, that after
the Angel had informed her that she had found favor in the sight of the Lord,
and should bring forth the Savior of the World, she laid all these things up
in her heart, and she did not divulge what was discovered to her by the Angel.

The thrice Great Hermise, or Mercury of Egypt avers, that to publish, to the
knowledge of the Rabble, a Speech, filled with the Mysteries and Majesty of the
Deity, is a sign of a irriligious Spirit; and Plato Commands, that holy
Secrets, and Religious things should not be divulged to the Common People.
Pythagorus enjoined his Followers to a Religious silence, for so many years.
Orpheus also did, with a certain Authority of Religion, exact an Oath of
silence from those whom he innitiated in holy Rites; and in Esdras we read this
precept concerning the Cabalistical Secrets of the Hebrews, Thou shall deliver
these Books to the wise Men of the People, whose hearts thou know can
comprehend them: the Ancient Egyptiaens had certain Characters for their
secrets and mysteries, which might not be easily known to the vulger, and these
are therefore called Hieroglyphics; and Tertullian says, that the promise of
silence is due to Religion, so we Read of a certain Greek Tragedian, that when
he would have Transfered somewhat out of the Jews Laws, to supply one of his
Fables with; was struck Blind. And Theopompus, who beginning to Translate
somewhat out of the divine Law, into the Greek, Tongue, was presently troubled
in mind, and afterward earnestly desiring God to let him know the occasion of
that Judgment, received answer in a Dream, that it was because he had poluted
divine things by Setting them forth in public.

Thus the Indian Brachmans, the Persians Magi; the British Druids, the Greek
Philosophers, Pythagoras, Socrates,- Plato, etc, always were nice and diligent
in keeping secrets to themselves and their qualified Sectatores, and never to
discover Mysteries without a vail. Certain it is that as in Heaven there is an
everlasting Stilness, and sweet Harmony; so all heavenly wisdom is strengthened
by Silence and Concord; but publication and discord, distroys good Effects, and
drives away holy powers from us. Therefore such as would reap Fruit, by what we
have before taught; must hide, and lay up those secrets in their religious
breasts; for the prating of Fools, and incredulity, are the two grand
hindrances, that disturb and obstruct the good effects in every thing, that
tends toward the Illumination of man's Soul; for those sublime virtues require
in a man a wonderful dignification, selfdenial, and that we should leave carnal
Affections, frail Senses, and materal Passions, for men's souls when freed from
the gross Fumes of the body, and evil dispositions; have wonderful power, being
not distempered, but influenced by divine Light, whereby they are rendered
complete in Intrinsecal and Extrinsecal Perfection.

Let us therefore remove all Impediments possible, and wholly apply our selves
to Contemplation, and innocence of Life; that is, doing unto the whole
Creation, as we would be done unto, and turn our Eyes inwards, for there is,
even in our own selves the apprehension of all things, but most men are
prohibited by Self-conceit, prejudices of Education, Custom, vain Conversation,
and the like, from enjoying the benefit of this in-born Light, so as few enjoy
those Heavenly Gifts; for Opinions, Customs and Passions do continually oppose
us, even from our birth; but if those vain Imaginations, immoderate Affections,
violent Desires after what is not needful be once Expelled, the divine
Knowledge and power presently takes place, and obtains the Government over the
Soul.

But for the further accomplishment, furnishing and fitting a man's Soul for the
forementioned subline converse, and also for the abtaining the Knowledge and
Conversation of the Good Genius, before treated of, let these following Rules
be observed.

1st, Let your Meats and Drinks be Clean, and of a simple Nature and Operation.

2d, Have a care the quantity be not too great.

3d, Remember to let your quality be suitable, and agreeable to your Nature and
Constitution.

4th, Let none of your food be attended with the dying Groans of of the
innocent Creatures.

5th, Consider the first state of man, and what Foods were ordained for him,
viz. none but innocent Herbs, Seeds, Fruits and Grains.

6th, Bethink your self and understanding, from what Principle Killing and
Eating of Flesh did first arise, and do proceed.

7th, Consider also the Nature, Shapes and Forms, of these Creatures, that by
Nature incline to eat Flesh.

8th, Note that all the Wild Savages of the Desert, in whom the Principle of
the fierce Wrath does predominant, are formed, by the same Principle which the
fierce Spirits are formed, and look also with Teeth and Claws, like so many
terrible Weapons of War, to Prev upon, and Tear their Fellow Creatures to
pieces, and all their Actions and Inclinations do ^fficiently declare what
property has the dominion in the Center of their Lives.

9th, Consider further, Man the finest and most innocent and noble of all
others, and Governor of the whole Terrestial Orb; view and mark well his Form,
Shape and entire Symmetry, how Curiously, and yet withal how innocently he is
made, and particularly, that his all wise Creator has not furnished him with
any Weapons of Violence; so that he is thereby rendered almost incapable of
tearing Flesh off his Fellow Creatures; and if he were not, by the seeking out
of many Inventions, fallen from his original State, and Furnished by the ^evil
with the Weapons of Mars, he would scarce be able to kill, and feed upon the
inferior Graduates of the Creation, who are his equals in all the outward
Elements; for would it not be hard for a man to kill a Cow, an Hog, or a Sheep,
and Tear it to pieces, and eat it as Dogs and Wolves do, but what the fierce
savage Creatures can do with the Wrathful Weapons of nature, that most men do
by invention, and the helps of the dark fiery Art, whereby almost as many
humane lives have been destroyed, as by the common course of nature, or
diseases.

Therefore, upon the whole matter, such as would have the free undisturbed
converse of Good Angels and Spirits, and the advantage of real Dreams, let them
endeavor, and with equal constancy and earnestness pursue after purity, both
of mind and body, to avoid all excess of foods or drinks, either in quantity or
quality, to eschew things derived from violence, and therefore to be
considerate in eating of Flesh or Fish, or any thing, not procurable but by the
death of some of our fellow Creatures; rather let them content themselves with
the Delicacies of the Vegetables, which are full as nourishing, much more
wholesome, and indisputablely innocent; particularly avoiding all Gluttony and
intoxicating Liquors, as strong Drink, Brandy-wine, and the like; and fumes, as
those of Tobacca, Opium, and the like Poisons; let them make little or light
Suppers; viz. of Bread and Water, Bread and Raisins, or the like; for the fewer
the Body is from supperfluities, and the Head from vapors, and the mind from
perturbations; the brisker are the natural Spirits, and the finer, and
consequently, the Soul has a clearer Light, and is more near the divine Power
by Affinity, and more susceptible of their influences, and communications; but
above all, let them at their going to Bed, divest themselves of all worldly
Cares, as well as of their Clothes, and with an ardent Faith, and entire
Charity, commend themselves to God the Giver of every Good and Perfect Gift,
and the Revealer as well as Auther of all divine Secrets; and then, if it be
convenient for thee, doubt not but thou shall have such Discoveries as thou art
capable of.

AN APPENDIX Showing The Cause of Madness; AND Several Observables relating
thereunto.
. 1. THere being an Affinity or Analogy between Dreams and Madness, so that the
understanding of one will somewhat illustrate the other; for Madness seems to
be a Watching or Waking Dream; I have therefore thought it might not be unfit
to subjoyn here certain Considerations touching Frenzy and Distraction, its
Causes, Nature and Effects; the rather because the same has very barrenly been
handled, as far as I can learn, by those that have undertaken to treat thereof.

I shall not insist upon the several sorts reckoned up by Authors, as Frenzy
which they define to be An Inflammation of the Brain, and its members, with a
continual raving, and sharp constant Fever, caused by choleric Blood, to
which is joined also excrementious Choler: Mania, or Madness, which is a loss
of the wits, with raging and fury, but without a Fever, being a cold and dry
Distemper, which they say, arises from adust, or burnt-black Choler; And
Melancholy, which is a doting, or Delirium, without a Fever (and so different
from a Frenzy) but with fear and sadness (whereby it differs from madness
which is accompanied with boldness and Fury.)

As all those, and others, varying in Symptoms, are but several Species of
Distraction, so though Galen having constituted four Humors in the Body, and
laid it down for a Principle, that from the excess of some, or one of them, all
Diseases do proceed, and consequently, was bound to assign these as causes for
such Distempers; yet more narrow Searchers into the Mysteries of Nature, have
long since discarded that Doctrine, which seems to consist merely in Forms and
Words, rather then Reallities, and do conclude that most Diseases arise, either
from Irregular passions of the mind, or poisonous ferments, occasioned by ill
Diet, or inproper Physic in the Body.

. 2. The truth is, Madness and Frenzy do generally, and for the most part
(for some other few particular causes we shall give an account of by and by)
arise and proceed from various Passions and extreme Inclinations, as Love,
Hate, Grief, Covetousness, Despair, and the like, which do too violently
awaken, or stir up the Central Fires, or four first Forms of the original of
Nature, which thereupon do break, forth, violate and destroy the five inward
Senses of the Soul, whence the outward Senses do arise; So that the Soul loses
its distinguishing property, and then the Imaginative property and Soul's Power
becomes rampant, unbounded, or as it were without a Guide, and consequently
such a Soul is unchain'd, or let at liberty from the dark Confinements of the
grosser Senses and Reason, even as men in Dreams; for whatsoever in this state,
is represented unto the Soul by the uncontrolable and unbounded Imagination, is
essential unto them, whether it be good or evil.

For it is evident that in Madness persons are not deprived of their grosser
Senses of the outward Nature, As Seeing, Hearing, Tasting, Smelling and
Feeling, for those they retain as well as before, but they are bereft of the
inward Senses, or distinguishments; and whenever this happens to any, then
the Soul is unclothed, and all its Fantasies and Imaginations become as it were
substantial unto them, as material things are to those that are in their
prefect Senses, and under the Government, of Reason.

. 3. For when any shall forsake, and slight the counsel of the voice of Wisdom,
and suffer their wills and desires too violently to entertain, and enter into
any of the forementioned passions, then presently the Saturnine and Martial
Poisonous Fires are awakened, whence does arise such an Hurley-burley,
Confusion, Strife and In-equality between the properties in the Sevenfold
Wbeel of Nature, as will in a moments time subvert the government of the inward
Senses and Spirit of Wisdom, and puts Reason under Hatches, and all its
Faculties into a Tempest and Confusion; so that the Soul is left either without
Pilot or Rudder in this outward sensible World. And being thus deprived of its
true Senses, and friendly Guide, or Moderator, viz. The divine implanted Light,
then the first Forms of the Original nature mutiny, and make War one upon the
other, a sullen wrathful property being exasperated, powerfully attracts and
endeavors to compass all with a certain in-drawing Power, and this is called
the first Form, or Saturnine Property, which gives a Body, or Covering to all
Spirits, according to the nature of each Thing or Creature. The second Form is
called Mars, viz. The high lofty out-going, bitter, fierce fiery Property,
which cannot endure to be much holden, or captivated by the attractions and
in-drawing Property of Saturn, whence does arise in the Soul a most terrible
Contest, and annoying Heat; for the Saturnine Property does most powerfully
draw inward, and endeavor to encompass and captivate all; but this the fierce
high lofty property and martial bitter Fire cannot endure, it being contrary to
its Nature; so that in this intestine Civil War or Agonous, State, there is a
terrible dark brimstony or sulpherous fire generated, which does so disturb all
the inward parts, as if Nature were all on Fire, even in the Center. The Heart
aches, the inward Body seems to swell, and becomes too little for the Soul,
which in this Combustion is so terribly afflicted, that it will no longer be
confined to the Body and outward Senses, but either withdraws it self, and
flings up the Reins of Government, and lets Reason, like a wild Horse that
has cast off Bit and Bridle, and thrown his Rider, ramble confusedly
whithersoever the Imagination shall hurry it; or else sometimes breaks off
wholly all Commerce with the Body, and separates its self in Indignation, and
so the Life its self is destroyed; this being the great and immediate cause
both of Distraction, and of Hanging, Drowning, and various other sorts of
Self-Murder, which are too frequently committed in the World.

. 4. The truth is, Pride may justly be said to be the chief Procatarick, or
remote original cause of Madness; for an abusive Self flattering Persuasion,
Credulity, or Esteem of Falsehood, do at first Seduce a person into Presumption,
and a despising of others, or into an Indignation of Self-Love, Anger, Hatred,
or Wrathfulness, toward his Neighbor; from whence proceeds Irreligion,
Unbelief, Superstition, impenitent Arrogance, drunken Disparation, and sottish
Carelessness. For as Faith is the Gate unto Humility, which is the Truth of the
Intelector Understanding, so a credulous esteem or judgment of Falsehood is the
entrance of Presumption and Arrogance, and the first madness of the Soul. But
other Disturbances, as Love, Desire, Sorrow, Fear, Terror, etc. are especially
stirred up by extrinsical occasion, and therefore they do produce their
effects, not only in the Soul, but in the Body: For all passions do in their
beginning take away sleep, weaken the Appetite and Digestive Faculties, and
impress dark Idea's upon the spirits, and at length through a long immoderate,
strong, or sudden inordinacy, those Idaea's do infatuate the Archeus, subvert
the Judgment, and the Soul is, as it were, shaken out of its place.

. 5. Now when the five inward senses of the Soul are weakened or destroyed,
then they can no longer present before the Judge the Thoughts, Imaginations or
Conceptions, but they are all formed into words as fast as they are generated,
there being no control or room for Judgment to censure what are fit, and what
are unfit to be coined into Expressions: For this cause Mad People, and
innocent Children, do speak, forth whatever arises in their Fantasies; but on
the contrary, all those that attain to Maturity of Years, and the knowledge of
good and evil, their inward Senses of the Soul being unviolated, especially
such as adhere to the counsel of the Voice of Wisdom, they let no Conception or
Imagination be formed into words before it be presented by the five Counselors
of the Soul, before the Judge, which keeps its Court, and Seat of Justice, in
the Center of Life; for if this were not more or less observed, would not every
man in the world seem to be Mad, or Distracted? For what wild, incoherent,
absurd, ridiculous notions should we hear from the most serious people, if they
should continually Speak, and form into words the various Imaginations, and
Conceptions that do continually arise from the Magie or Generating Wheel of the
seven Forms of Nature, which never stands still, or cease from working and
generating; the Soul of man, and all the Faculties thereof, being a complete
Image of its Creator, who slumbereth not, nor sleeps, but his generativo, and
wonderful creating power is always active; for never has any man ceased from
Imaginations one quarter an hour in his whole Life, or indeed one moment, no,
not even when the Body and Senses are asleep.

For though man can cease from speaking, and may attain the Gift of Silence, as
any shall give their wills thereunto, yet they cannot cease from thoughts and
Conceptions, either good or evil, according to what property or principle has
obtained the government in the Soul; for if a man could or should cease from
Imagination, then also he must of necessity cease from all Motion and Action,
and become an eternal Stilness, or Nihilation; in which state nothing can be
brought into Manifestation, but it must be done through Motion, Strife and
Contention of the Properties; for all Material and Immaterial were and are
brought into Manifestation first by Imagination, Desire and Motion; For the
Imagination and the Desire have a most wonderful deep and hidden Original; and
if its mighty property were not captivated, darkened, and as it were chained in
the Clouds of gross flesh, and dark Powers of the outward and corporeal Nature,
it would do wonders.

. 6. Therefore it is not perhaps always so very deplorable an estate, as some
suppose, to be deprived of common Sense and Reason (as they call it)
especially, to be a mad Innocent, that is, if the property of Friendliness have
dominion in the Soul; For when men are so divested of their Rational Faculties,
then they appear naked, having no Covering, Vail, or Figg-leaves before them,
to hide themselves in, and therefore they no longer remain under a Mask or
Disguise, but appear even as they are, which is very rare to be known in any
that retain their Senses and Reason; for those two serve to cover and hide the
Conceptions, Thoughts and Imaginations, which continually are generated from
the various Properties and Centers in man, which in innocent Children, as soon
as they have the use of their Tongues, and in mad people, is not done, but all
Conceptions are promiscuously formed into words, as they are generated, there
being no Judge nor Counselors to advise or determine whether they are fit to
be divulged, and Coined into Language, or to be stiffled and suppressed.

. 7. The truth is, as the knowledge of evil is man's fall, so if this sort of
Madness were practiced amongst all men that have the use of Reason, and their
Senses, it would be more like Innocence and Christianity, then most men's
general practices are nowadays; I mean, if every man, laying aside all
subtilty and hypocrisy, would speak his mind freely to his Neighbor, without
Cover or mental Reservations, and leave off speaking of one thing to their
neighbor, or Friends faces, and quite other and contrary things behind their
backs; To complement persons present, with a thousand Flatteries and Lies, and
revile the same persons, as soon as they are absent, with as many Calumnies,
Slanders and unjust Reproaches, which is one of the worst kinds of Madness, and
indeed a Devilish one, because they know they do not as they ought, being at
that very time accused and condemned by the Voice of Wisdom, or divine
Principle; nor is there scarce one thing in Ten that men in the World do act,
but is far greater Madness and Evil, than those things which persons do that
are deprived of their Senses.

For Example: Is it not a greater Extravagance for an Ambitious man to sell his
Liberty, and became a slave to the Lusts and Capricio's of Grandees, to spend
whole years in supple Attendances, Crouching, Cringing Fawning or Dissembling,
only in hopes of being one day made a great man, or having an airey Title added
(like a Rattle) to his name, and seeing people stand Cap in hand to him, whom
he imagines to admire him, though in truth as many of them as are wise, deride
and pity his egregious Folly? For a Lascivious man to waste his Wealth, his
Strength, and expose both Body and Soul for the filthy embraces of a loathsome
Strumpet? And hazard his Life and honor in attempting the Chastity of some
virtuous Woman, and be ready to dye for the Love of her, whom as soon as he has
debaucht, he will scorn and hate? For men to swallow down vast Estates at their
Throats, and Piss away the Labors of their Ancestors against the Wall? To load
their Table with variety of Dishes, and be at any charge for poinant Sawces, to
provoke the Appetite beyond the power, as well as necessities of Nature, that
their Bodies may be filled with Diseases? That they may roar under the Stone,
and the Illiaac Passion, and live Tormented Lives, and dye an Immature Death?
For Parents to cark, and care, and vex, and torment themselves with
unreasonable Toils, and many times hazard their Souls, for unjust Gain, merely,
to heap up Estates for their Children, who all ready wish them dead; or to
leave Riches amongst strangers, who in their frolicks laugh at the memory of
the old Miser, and make themselves and their Companions merry with telling
ridiculous Stories of him, who for their sakes, and for the getting those very
Houses, and those Bowls they carouze in, lies perhaps broyling in the hottest
Caverns of the Everlasting Tophet?

These, and an hundred the like things, which are the main business, and the
daily employment of many, that would be counted the shrewdest and most notable
part of Mankind; Are not, I say, all these far greater, and more mischievous
Phrensies, than for a man to pull of his Garments, and sit naked, and spend
time in weaving of Sraws or Building with Chalk upon the Walls innumerable
Cities, whereof he fancies himself to be Emperor? To speak Truth, the World is
but a great Bedlam, where those that are more mad, lock up those that are loss;
the first presumptuously, and knowingly, committing Evils both against God
their Neighbors and themselves; but the last, not knowing what they do, are as
it were next door to innocence, especially when the Evil Properties were not
awakened, nor predominant in the Complexion in the time of their Senses: Tell
me I pray? Are not all these Intemperances, Violence, Oppression, Murder and
savage Evils, and Superfluities deservedly to be accounted the worst Effects of
Madness? As also, Lying, Swearing, vain Imaginations, and living in and under
the power of evil Spirits, more to be dreaded than the condition of those that
want the use of Senses and Reason; and therefore are esteemed Mad?

. 8. As for the Species of Madness they are as various as men are in their
Complexions; for according to what Principle and property, whether good or
evil, does govern the Life, in the time of their retaining their Reason and
Senses, such a property does more clearly manifest it self when the Reason and
Senses are broken to pieces; for this cause, some who have seemed very
Religious, and soberly inclined, as long as they retained their Senses and
outward Reason, as soon as they become deprived thereof, the bitter envious
fierce wrathful proud Spirit appears in its own form, and has its operation
without let or hindrance, which was before by the cunning Reason and sensual
subtilty kept in, that it could not manifest it self; for some men have
obtained so much outward government over this bitter Spirit, that they can at
one and the same time cry Hosanna, and Crucify; say, God bless you, and in
their hearts wish your destruction: But when such people, who hide their
Woolvish and Bearish Natures, in the external sheeps clothing of a dissembled
Innocence, happen to be Mad or deprived of outward Sense and natural Reason,
then they discover the Savage Nature that ruled before in the Center of their
Souls. But others, who in the time of their sound Senses, were accounted harsh
and moross, or severe, their Tongues not so smoothly plained, or Tipped with
Complements, but yet their words and works more agreeable to their insides;
that is, they speak as they think, and do not play the Hypocrites, by retaining
subtle Reservations, or saying one thing, and at the same time resolving on
another; such, I say, though many of them did not seem to be so fair and good
men as the former, yet they are really more innocent, and have far better
Principles within, than the others, who made use of their Natural Faculties, to
hide and cover the subtle bitter Spirit; and therefore when these latter plain
sort of people happen to be distracted, they appear more calm and friendly than
the former, because the good property had a greater dominion in the Soul.

. 9. Every person when disturbed in his Senses and Reason, then the
distinguishing Faculties of Nature does variously appear in properties and
Qualities, differing according to which of the seven Forms Nature did carry the
upper dominion in the Complexion. Therefore Mad People vary as much in their
inclinations and passions of Love and Hate as they did when in their Senses.

For Example; If the first, or Saturnine Property did preside in the Soul, and
be not corrected, moderated, allayed, and made friendly by Wisdoms Voice,
whilst they remained in their Senses, then such will manifest themselves when
Mad; in sullen, dogged, mischievous Melancholy dispositions and Inclinations,
with blasphemous words, apt to hurt, and be injurious, with Sour evil
Complexion and Looks.

But if the Jovial Properties had the uppermost Governments in the time of
their Reason, then such, when out of their wits, are for the most part affable
and friendly, using no cruel words, nor so apt to do hurt, or be churlish, or
dogged.

But if the Martial Property be superior in the Complexion, such when deprived
of Sense and Reason, become furious, blasphemous, apt to all mischief and
violence, great Swearers, and very unruly, fierce, turbulent, and raging.

But if the Solar Property do bare Rule, such have great and high thoughts, and
lofty Imaginations, fancying themselves to be Kings and Princes, and that all
are in subjection to them; and between while, they are very unruly fierce and
boisterous, when they think they are not respected or humoured according to
that Quality they have assumed to themselves.

So where the Venereal Property swayes in the Complexion such are between
whiles friendly, apt to laugh, and be merry, often discoursing of Love affairs,
and will sing and dance, but sometimes are little out-ragious, though not like
the former; for these people seldom do any hurt, nor are they subject to
Cursing Swearing, or such like evil Speaking.

Where the Property of Mercury does bear sway in the constitution, there is a
strange mixture of Imaginations, they are apt to think themselves very cunning,
extraordinary free and frolicksom, with their Tongues running out of one thing
into another, prone always to talk too much, and very furious bold and raging,
but calm at certain Intervals.

Lastly, where the Lunar property predominates, such people are extremely
unconstant, fierce, and raving, never at any certainty, but roaming out of one
thing into another: And not only this last sort, but all other Mad people are
better or worse, according to the Motions, Influences, Configurations and
Aspects of the Coelestials, and their benevolent or malevolent Rays, toward
the Ruling Constellation of each man's Complexion, because all people that are
deprived of the use of their Reason, Sense and distinguishing Faculties, are
more immediately subjected to the outwardmost Government and Influences of the
Stars and Elements. And you may perceive a sensible alteration in their
Humors, Dispositions and Inclinations, as the Coelestials alter; which as they
have Influence upon, and do vary and change all things, so more especially do
they opperate upon those that have lost the guidance of the Will, which is the
Primum Mobile of man's Life: Therefore it is observed, that distracted people
are more subject to be altered by the Influences Celestial, especially by the
progress and Configurations, that the Moon has with the other Erraticks and
Constellations, she being the Mansionhouse or Magazine, which receives all the
Influences of the greater and higher Bodies, or Stars: And therefore persons
bereaved of their Wits, are in our English Laws called Lunaticks, from the
great power she has upon such people.

. 10. By Custom, Sense and Reason, most men do hide their inward Inclinations,
Dispositions Complexions, and what property carries the upper dominion in their
Hearts and Souls, so that the same may by several means be discovered and laid
open, is manifest in Drunkenness, which is a kind of short Frenzy, or
Temporary Madness, which make people appears in various Moods and Dispositions;
for those that seemed of a Malancholy Complexion, seem Sanguine; and the
Sanguine, Malancholy; for it renders men to be that outwardly which they are
inwardly; for this cause, some that are counted, and seem to most men to be
Severe and Austere; when drink has opened the Sanguine Gate of Nature, are
found to be very familiar, friendly and kind in their words and works: But on
others, it has a quite contrary operation, viz. such who carried themselves
very affable and friendly, when overcome with Liquor, grow Cruel, Quarrelsom,
Devilish and Uncivil, which does clearly intimate, that the Saturnine and
Martial Principles did predominate in the Soul; for drink makes people appear
in various Forms, because during the operation thereof, they are really
deprived of the Exercise of their Right Reason and Senses of true
distinguishments of things, whereby they are uncovered, and as it were left
naked (as Noah was, after he had drank too liberally of the fruit of his new
planted Vines). And so the inside appears as it is, in its own Form and Nature,
which does most truly discover the Complexion and natural Inclinations; and
what property does govern essentially in a man; for then all glosses and
cunning are removed; whereas whilst a man is himself (as they use to call it)
Shame, Reason and good Breeding put a Restraint upon those vicious
Inclinations, lurking within and suffer them not to appear; but when they are
deprived of their Senses and Reason, then they have no power to use those
subtle Arts of Hypocrisy, but what form soever has the predominancy does
display and manifest it self in its own Colors. And therefore as soon* as they
recover their Reason, and come to their Senses, they are ashamed of what they
did, and by Reason, and Breding, endeavor to hide these Defects and Ill
Qualities, which rule over them. And thus not a few through Wit and Subtilty
appear as if they were Saints, but in truth they remain but little better than
Devils; so great is the power of man's Wit and contrived Understanding that he
can appear with two faces to deceive others first, and himself at last: It is
therefore a very difficult matter for any to judge of men's Complexions, or real
Inclinations, except God have endued him with somewhat of the universal
understanding of the nature of things, and of the signatures of nature; for the
form or figure of each thing, does to the enlightened Eye discover the inward
Properties thereof.

But this is more evidently discovered in Phrensy or Madness, the same being a
real turning of the inside of all the natural Properties and Faculties of the
Soul outward; so that whatever mad people do externally in words or actions,
the very same other Folk do inwardly in thoughts and Imaginations; and the
difference is only this; The one speaks and forms every thought into words:
having not the Bridle of sense nor Reason to restrain him; the other often
times cuts off such and such thoughts and Imaginations in the Budd, or at least
shuts the grand Gate, the Mouth, and keeps those shameful unruly Stragglers in,
not sufferring the Organs and Properties of Nature to form them into Articular
Expressions.

. 11. It is also further to be noted that all, or most Mad People, are far
stronger, and more able to endure Hardship, Hunger, Cold, and the like
inconveniences, although many of them are naturally of weak tender natures, and
during the continuances of their Senses, and Reasoning Vigor, did indulge and
enure themselves to tenderness; yet when once they become Mad, they are so
strong and powerful, that some of them must have two, three or four men to hold
and rule them; and as to their enduring of Cold, it is wonderful, for even
nice, tender Gentlewomen, who Screen themselves all the Winter by lusty Fires,
in warm Beds, and close Chambers, and the like; with choice Foods, and cordial
Drink, are no sooner deprived of their Reason and Senses, but they leap over
all these things, and endure hardship, to admiration, without prejudice to
their health, even beyond the sturdiest constitution; the reason whereof is,
because when people, by any of the forementioned Accidents, and Passions, fall
into Distraction, the whole Systime of Nature being put into a tumultuous
unequal Motion, the same does in a moment of time rouse up or awaken the deep
or great Original Fierce, Poisonous Fire; or the four first Forms of Nature.
Now when these turbulent Fires of Saturn and Mars have obtained the dominion,
and sole Government in the Soul, they with a rapid motion destroy the
Government of the Divine Light, and also of the humane Nature, which are and
ought to be the Moderator, and Allayers of the aforesaid original poisonous
Fire, and the true Distinguishers between what is good, and the contrary, and
thus the Spirit being always as upon a ferment, and uncontrolable motion, it
warms, strengthens, and oftentimes does as it were put a new life into the very
Element of the Body, whence a strong vigerous strength and agility of body, and
a Defense of Cold, Hunger, and the like inconveniences does proceed

This is further demonstrated by all sorts of people in Passion, of either Love
or Hate, or when surprised, or in Sudden Frights, are they not Generally under
such Circumstances of far greater Spirit, stronger and more active Bodies, and
rendered more able to Lift, Run, Carry, Fight, or any other thing Good or Evil,
then at other times, and have abundantly more courage, and they can attempt
and perform many wonderful things without the least suspicion of Danger, which
at other times they tremble to think of, and would not for the greatest rewards
be preswaded to undertake.

Nay, when the Soul-Fires are kindled in the poisonous Root, a man can whithout
Dread and Fear lay violent hands on himself, so wonderfully great is its ^ower,
for this is a madness of the highest degree, since no man, (as the Apostle
said) hates his own Flesh, but loves and cherishes it, which ought well to be
considered by all Jurors concerned in such cases.

So likewise when men are overcome with Drink, the spirituous Properties of the
strong Liquor, received in too great a quantity, do by Simily incorporate with
the Spirits of Nature, in the Elements of the Body, so that it inkindles the
Original fierce Fires, and puts the whole Frame of Nature into a tumultuous
state of Inequality, and during its operation, Reason it captivated; and men in
this condition may truly be said to be in the worst kind of Madness, as clearly
is manifested by their idle lewd Discourses, and mischievious Actions.

Likewise Malancholy people, when grievously oppressed with its taciturne
Properties, are in a degree deprived of their natural Senses and Reason, and
the Soul becomes as it were Spiritual, so that it Imagines, Sees, Hears, and
Apprehends wonderful things, which, though to others appear as mere fancies,
yet to them are real, and essential.

. 12. As for the Original Seed, or Spring of Phrensies or Madness in the Body,
it must be noted, besides what has been already said, that there is in the
Pipe of the Artery of the Stomach, a vital Faculty of the Soul, for the
inbeaming of Rays of Light into the Heart, so long as it is in a good state,
but when through Passions and Disorders it behaveth it self rashly, or amiss,
then presently Heart-burning, Fainting, Giddiness of the Head, Appoplexes,
Epilexsies, Drousie-Evils, Watchings, Madnesses, Head-akes, Convultions, etc.
by the means we have herein before described are sturred up. And since the
stomach is the Seat of the Concupiscible Faculty, and from whose fumes both
sleep and watchings are occationed; and since that Alienation of mind, chiefly
proceeds from irreguler desire, it may rationally be concluded, that the Prime
local Spring, or Seed of Madness is in or near the stomach, or its neighboring
parts, the Midriff and the Spleen; though afterward it displays its
male-influences upon the Brain; for a man forms his Images in the Midriff; as
well those of the Concupiscible, or Desiring, as those of the Irascible, or
Wrathful Faculty, so that Madness is therefore not undeservedly called,
Hipocondriacal; for the prime Efficacy of disturbances consists in the
Spleen, and therefore perhaps Antiquity has counted Saturn the principle of
the Starry power, and highest of the wandering Stars, to wit, that which should
cast his influence downwards on the rest, but that the rest should in no wise
reflect upwards, because they are believed to conspire for the Commodities of
sublunary things, but not on the contrary upwards; and therefore, though they
called the same Saturn, the Original of Life, and beginning of Conceptions, or
Generations, yet they also named him, The Devourer of his own young Children,
as thereby intimating, that as the Images or Ideas framed by the desirable
Faculty do make Seed fruitful, so also the Inns of Digestion in us, when they
are exorbitant, consume the new and tender Blood, and bring many Diseases upon
us.

. 13. But besides the beforementioned most usual Causes of Maedness, from the
Passions, we deny not but sometimes other things received in from without, may
occasion alienation of Mind.

Thus the Biting of a Mad-Dog conveys a Venom impregnated with its own raging
Idea, which is soon communicated to the Spirit of man, and produces in him that
wild foolish conceit, called, by Physicians Hydrophobia, or a fear of Water,
in which the Person affected by an error of his imaginations seems to see the
Image of a Dog; and in time, if no Remedy be found; grows raving Mad, and dies,
so also those that are Bit with the Tarantula, a venomous Beast, or Insect,
seen sometimes in Italy, and other foreign Parts) are particularly disposed to
a certain kind of skipping or Dancing Frenzy, which at last proves Mortal: So
some by ignorance of Apothecaries, who have taken Henbane-Seed instead of Dill,
have immediately become Mad, Stupid and Foolish, so that they could not utter
an intelligible word, for all which there are distinct Reasons in Nature, but
too tedious here to be related, and somewhat unnecessary, because these Cases
very rarely occur amongst us.

. 14. As to the Cure of Madness in general, the Schools, commonly prescribe
Blood-letting, and Sleep procuring Medicines, but with how much success daily
experience witnesses, they mistake the Cause, and therefore blindly combat
with the Effect; and for the latter, let such as intend to cure Distractions by
sleepyf^ing things, take notice that stupifactive Medicines do scarce procure
sleep unto mad persons by a four-sold Dose; and when all is done, they increase
the Madness; for Madness is nothing but an Erring Sleepifying Power, because
every Madman dreameth waking; and therefore Stupefactive Dreams are thereby
added unto doting Dreams in waking, and so the mind more disturbed then before.
Therefore undoubtedly, the sealing Character in a Madman, presupposes a
restoring of the hurt reason, and a correction of the Poison by its Antidote,
but not another stupefactive Poison to be added unto it.

And as Supifying Medicines are of little value, but rather prejudicial, so,
much more mischievous is too much Company, and prating, and especially, the
Teazing of such distempered People with unnecessary Questions; on which score,
as I must acknowledge that Gallant Structure of New Bethlam to be one of the
Prime Ornaments of the City of London, and a Noble Monument of Charity, so I
would with all Humility beg the Honorable and worthy Governors thereof, that
they would be pleaed to use some Effectual means, for restraining their
inferior Officers, from admitting such Swarms of People, of all Ages and
Degrees, for only a little paltry Profit to come in there, and with their
noise, and vain questions to disturb the poor Souls; as especially such, as do
Resort thither on Holy Days, and such spare time, when for several hours
(almost all day long) they can never be at any quiet, for those inportunate
Visitants, whence manifold great inconveniences do arise. For,

First, It Is a very Undecent, Inhumane thing to make, as it were, a Show of
those Unhappy Objects of Charity committed to their Care, (by exposing them,
and making too perhapes of either Sexs) to the Idle Curiosity of every vain
Boy, petulant Wench, or Drunken Companion, going along from one Apartment to
the other, and Crying out; This Woman is in for Love; That Man for Jealousy;
He has Over-studied himself, and the Like.

Secondly, This staring Rabble seldom fail of asking more then an hundred
impertinent Questions. -- As, what are you here for? How Long have you been
here, etc. which most times enrages the Distracted person, tho calm and quiet
before, and then the poor Creature falls a Raving, and too, probably, a Cursing
and Swearing, and so the holy, and tremendous name of God is dishonored,
whilst the wicked people, who think it a rare Diversion, instead of Trembling,
as indeed they ought, being themselves really Guilty, as the Occasion of all
these Blasphemies, fall a Laughing and Hooting, and so the poor distracted
Creatures become twice more fierce and violent then ever.

Thirdly, As long as such Disturbances are suffered, there is little Hope that
any Cure or Medicine should do them good to reduce them to their Senses or
right Minds, as we call it, and so the very Principle end of the House is
defeated. Certainly the most hopeful means toward their Recovery would be to
keep them with a Clean Spare Diet, and as quiet as may be, and to let none come
at them but their particular Friends, Grave sober People and such as they have
a kindness for, and those to, not always, but only at proper times, whereby
discoursing with them in their Lused Intervals Gravely, Soberly, and
Discreetly, and humouring them in little things, shall do much more, I am
Confident, toward their Cure, then most of the Medicines that are commonly
Administered; But to come home to the Cure we must Consider that a mad Idea,
imprinted on the principles of Life, cannot be taken away, but together with
the Subject that has closed it; therefore a Remedy is to be found out, which
may Slay, take away, or obliterate that Image of madness, or the Blot so
characterized; just, as it is said, a Blemish imprinted by the longing Mother,
does by the moving of the hand of a dead Carcass (that was killed by a
lingering Consumption) on it, until the cold thereof shall pierce the Blemished
part, vanish away for the future of its own accord.

After the same manner the Idea of madness ought to be put to flight, whether
it be done by the death of the said Idea, or by ingenerating an Idea of equal
prevailency, or one that over-powereth the foolish Idea; for from hence it
comes to pass, that a remedy for Madness has hitherto been dispaired of,
because the nature and properties of the Distemper has not been searched for
beyond the exoesses of first Qualities. Nor can it be but the scope of cureing
must be difficult, because not only the Idea of a corrupted imagination, and a
sealymark and blemish is introduced into the innermost point of the
understanding, but also, because the restoring of the inbred Spirit is hardly
to be effected, since the sweet Government of the divine Principle is cast of,
and the Creature is now no longer able to turn his Will thereunto, or to
hearken unto the Voice of Wisdom for help; but Infinite Goodness is never
wanting to those that truly seek him in Humility, that with Bowels of Charity
toward their Neighbor; to such God, the Giver of every good and perfect Gift,
will in his own due time reveal and communicate a proper Remedy; for Medicines
have with a success been administered wherein a Symbol, or Mark of Resemblance
does inhabit; that is the firmental imaginations of a sounder judgment. For
truly as there are Poisons of the Mind, causing the allienations thereof, for
sometimes, or for the whole space of Life; to wit, such as do introduce a
proper Fantasy into us, as a Mad Dog, the Tarantula, etc. So also there are
in simples their own Fruits, of the knowledge of Good and Evil, in their first
face indeed porsonous, under which notwithstanding the more rich Treasures, and
renewings of the mind are kept.

The Ancients Celebrated even to a proverb, the virtues of black H^llebore in
such cases; For although manifold Vomitive Medicines are not wanting, yet a
peculier virtue is attributed to Hellibore, for a Mad brain; not that the
poisonous and hurtful qualities does reach unto the Head, but because it
unloads the Midriff and the Spleen, the original Seats of this distemper, and
so by consequence relieves the Brain, which was affected by a secondary Passion.

. 15. For such as have been Bitten with a Mad Dog, the Dutch (as I have heard)
do prevent the Mischief, by applying to the place a raw Herring salted, for
three days space, every day renewed; but if that had been neglected, and the
party begins to dote, and fear the water, (which is one of the first symtoms of
that kind of Distraction) then they get him on shipboard, strip him, and tie
him to the end of the Sail-yard, and lifting him first on high, plung him down
headlong into the Sea, and let him remain a little while under water, and so a
second, and third time and then take him down, place him on a smooth place with
his back upwards, and his head declining, or as it were hanging over something,
and so will cast up all the water received into his stomach, and thence forward
be perfectly cured.

And Vanhelmont witnesses, that such plunging over head and ears is a Cure, not
only in that case, but in other inveterate Mania's or Madnesses, and in fresh
water as well in the Sea; He says, he has often tried it, and was never
deceived in the event, but when through fear of drowning them, he drew the Mad
persons too soon from under the water.

For prevention of these distracted Calamities, since generally, and most
commonly they proceed from excess of Passion, and irregular Desire; Therefore
let all Persons Study by Temperance, and Moderating their Affections, to eschew
those baneful Evils, and by hearkening to the Voice of Wisdom, they shall
assuredly avoid them; and many other Distempers and Mischiefs: Therefore, O
Man! consider what is before mentioned, keep thy Self to thy Self* turn thy Eye
of thy Understanding inward; observe thy own Center, and learn to understand
with David, That thou art Fearfully and Wonderfully made, and so by the Conduct
and Guidance of the Divine Light and Love thou shall come to know the
wonderful Power of God in thy own Soul, which will open unto thee both the
Mysteries of Nature, and the Treasures of Eternity.

FINIS
ADVERTISEMENT. Published by the Author of the Treatise of Dreams and Visions,
etc. Four very useful Books, viz.
I. THe Country-Man's Companion, or a New Method of ordering Horses and Sheep.
1st. How to preserve Horses from Surfeits, and other Diseases whereunto they
are subject; and also to render them much more useful and serviceable than is
usual, and yet with less trouble and charge to their Owners. 2dly. How to
preserve Sheep sound, healthy and free from the Diseases whereunto they are
subject; and particularly concerning the Rot in Sheep, how it is contracted,
the times when, and the only sure and certain means to prevent it, and secure
Sheep sound in the most fatal times of a general Rot.

II THe Good Housewife made a Doctor, or Healths choice and sure Friend. Being
a plain way of Natures own prescribing, to Prevent and Cure most Diseases
incident to Men, Women and Children, by Diet and Kitchin-Physick only. Wherein
is laid down the most proper and natural ways of preparing many excellent sorts
of Food, both for healthy and sick People. Also, the nature, use and excellency
of foreign Fruits, Spices, Sugers, etc. Together with the Nature of most sorts
of Wine, and other Drinks commonly drunk, each being spoken to in distinct
chapters by themselves. With many other useful Observations, too large here to
Recite.

III The Way to make all People Rich, or Wisdoms Call to Temperance and
Frugality, In a Diologue between Sophronio and Guloso, One a Lover of Sobriety.
The other addicted to Gluttony and Excess.

IIII FRiendly Advice to the Gentlemen-Planters of the East and West Indies, in
three parts. I. A brief Treatise of the most principal Fruits and Herbs that
grow in the East and West Indies; giving an Account of their respective
Virtues, both for Food and Physic, and what Planet and Sign they are under.
Together with some Directions for the Preservation of Health and Life in those
hot Climates. II. The Complaints of the Negro-Slaves against the hard Usages
and barbarous Cruelties inflicted upon them. III. A Discourse in way of
Dialogue, between an Ethiopean or Negro-Siave, and a Christian that was his
Master in America.

ADialogue between an East-Indian Brackmanny, or Heathen-Philosopher, and a
French-Gentleman concerning the Present Affairs of Europe.

All Printed and Sold by Andrew Soul at the Crooked-Billet in Holloway-Lane,
in Shoreditch, London.



