A LETTER Of Advice from a Friend, sent to Sir Thomas Armestrong IN NEWGATE,
After the Rule for his EXECUTION, Touching his Present CONDITION.
SIR,
AMongst the Eastern Emperors on the Day of their Inauguration into that
Dignity, 'twas a Custom to present them with several pieces of Marble, to make
Choice of which piece they best liked for their Tombs. The Egyptians in their
Festivals, had always a Deaths-Head served up with their last Course. And the
Macedonian Philip, maintained an Officer to re-mind him of his Mortality, with
a Memento te Mortalem esse.

If thus therefore in the highest Prosperities of Fortune, in the midst of
Health and Jovial hours, these Admonitions of Death were looked on as necessary
amongst the Ancients, not knowing how soon their Glories might be levelled with
the Dust, I hope ye will not take it Ill in me, at this time, under those
Circumstances the Justice and Providence of the Almighty has overtaken you,
that I thus appear as a Monitor to warn you of that approaching Fate which so
nearly attends you.

Death, as it is the separation of Soul and Body, those two Ancient and
Endeared Friends, is rarely welcome to the best of Men; Nature is ready to
Hesitate at her Summons, and Tremble at her Approach; even then, when she
brings with her the Robes of Honor, and puts on the most pleasing Aspect that
a Virtuous Life and a quiet Conscience can deserve of her; much less when she
appears as an Enemy with the Terrors of Guilt, and marks of Horror in her Face,
to Cite the Criminal to the great Tribunal of Heaven and Earth, to Answer the
Almighty for the crying Exorbitances of an Ill-spent and Debauched Life: it is
not therefore to be trifled with, or prepared for with a Cursory easy
Complement, a bare (Lord have Mercy on me;) a Dying Sigh, or departing Groan;
but 'ere you launch into the Ocean of Eternity whither the same conveys you,
that you ought to consider what Bottom you trust to: and Pardon me Sir, In
regard hereof, I presume hereby to remember you of some part of your Duty,
which in this great affair is Incumbent upon you. The Crimes you stand Guilty
of are not ordinary, or slight Peccadiloes, the weaknesses of Nature, a hasty
unadvised Breath of Passion, a Courtly Desire, or Lascivious Inclination; but
such, and so great, is that Guilt you lie under, as nothing less than the
forfeit of your Blood can expiate on Earth: and the Mercy of the All-Merciful
God forgive in Heaven. The Particulars I need not enumerate: your own
Conscience, I hope, 'ere this reflects them to your Memory, with the Scarlet
and crying Aggravations hereof, and you behold them with another Eye then
formerly you did. The Perspective is inverted, and Murder is no longer Galantry
and height of Youth and Spirit, Deceit and Injustice the Quaintness of Wit, and
Parts, Treason and Conspiracy against the Life and Person of the best of KINGS
and Brothers, the preservation of Monarchy the Overthrow of the best of
Governments and Religions, the mantainance of our Rights, Privileges, and
Liberties.

These Sir, have been the Crimes, and these in you almost Crimes Unpardonable.
When the Imperial Roman was Stabbed in the Senate, the most unkind Stroke was
from his beloved Brutus: (Et tu mi Brute?) In like manner, amidst the number of
those who are your Fellow-Villains and Conspirators that prepared the Dagger
for the Royal Heart of your Sovereign, (tho God be praised your Designs were
Frustrated) scarce a Brutus there to whom with more Reproach his Sacred Majesty
might have said, And is it you? do you Conspire against me, whom my Mercy has
so often spared? Is the Life thou owe to my Royal Bounty, Employed against
me? Did I preserve thy Breath to shorten my own? And save thee from the
Gallows, to foster an Enemy for my Self? Have my favors cloyed thee? Have my
repeated Indulgences deserved this at thy Hand? Horrible Ingratitude! And Might
not this have been said against you? It might, you must Acknowledge it, for the
whole World is now no stranger thereunto; and consider with your self, that if
God should so deal with you by your own Measures as you intended with your
Sovereign, the utmost that Almightyness it self could Inflict upon you, would
be your downfall: But Heaven be thanked, tho you have forfeited all hopes of
Mercy in this World, a true and unfeigned Repentance of, and a Contrition for
the Crimes, with a full and open Confession to God and Man how far you have
therein been concerned, may preserve you from a bitter despair of God's Mercy:
Nor can you without it possibly imagine ever to obtain it. Religion and
Conscience Exact this Duty from you: your King and Country whom you have so
highly Offended, whom you Threatened and endeavored to Ruin and Desolate, can
no^ otherwise be satisfied, than in a Discovery of the rest of those that are
still in Enmity against them. Let not the Faces of our Foes be hid, lest they
perp^^^a^e their Malice upon us. The Friend ship you owe them, is no obligation
to their Concealment; for you are now to shake-Hands with them for ever, and in
another World you will never be taxed with Ingratitude for Deserting them: they
have left that God whom you hope to approach; are Enemies to him that you now
would give (were they in your disposal) a Thousand Worlds to be Friends with;
and unless you disown them he will never own you.

Consider this, and let not Justice be stopped: Providence has brought thee
under the Stroke thereof, and I hope you are not Insensible of the immediate
Hand of God therein: and well it is that he has hitherto spared you, he might
as well have Correpted your Life in the midst of your Ryots and Extravagancies,
he might have levelled a Plague at your Heart, or a Bolt at your Head when you
defied him, and hurried you long since into the Pit of eternal Perdition,
whence no Appeal had lain to the Throne of his free Grace: but he has given
you a Day, tho it be a short one, to make your Peace with him. Lose no time,
for the Evening of your Life draws on apace; Night is upon you, a long, long,
Eternal Night, wherein you must never more behold the material Beams that shine
now upon you, and as you improve this little, little Time, Happiness or Misery
attends you: Everlasting Bliss or never-ending Pain in an unknown Climate, to
which you are now going: for which Change the Lord prepare you, and Sanctify
these Afflictions unto you for your Benefit; which is the Prayer of him that
abhors your Crimes, but loves your Soul,

Your once Affectionate Friend N. T.

LONDON, Printed by Geo. Croom, at the Sign of the Blue Ball over against
Baynard's Castle in Thames Street. 1684.


