A DEFENSE OF THE CONFUTER OF BELLARMIN's Second Note of the Church, ANTIQUITY,
AGAINST THE CAVILS of the ADVISER.

IMPRIMATUR, May 31. 1687.

HEN. MAVRICE.

LONDON: Printed for Ric. Chiswell, at the Rose and Crown in St. Paul's
Churchyard, MDCLXXXVII.

A Defense of the Confuter of Bellarmin's Second Note of the Church, Antiquity,
etc.
I Apprehend by this Author's Genius, that it is much easier for some Men to
write Farce than Controversy: And tho I cannot say whether or no any man ever
undertook the Confutation of Bellarmin over a Pot, as our Author elegantly
begins his Advice; yet he seems to me, by his ludicrous Behavior, to have
engaged in his Defense in that sort of humor. He may think it Vanity, if he
pleases, in the Reverend and Learned Author of the Piece he attaques, to assail
the Roman Champion himself; yet even I, who never entered the Field of
Controversy before, shall presume to engage with such a Smatterer in the Noble
Science, as his Second.

And yet, immediately after this fit of Rhetoric, he does not pretend, that
the Pot-qualifications are the case of him who has undertaken to answer
Bellarmin' s Marks of the Church. No, Why then does he commence his Advice with
such a Suggestion? Did he think fit to publish to the World, that he had a mind
to be impertinent? An humor, especially in Conjunction with Buffoonry in
serious Affairs, I would advise him against for the future, if the powerful
Influence of an ill habit has not totally overruled his Liberty in the matter.

And thus, after the witty Introduction to his little good Will; little enough,
I dare say; we come now to receive the Advice of this grave controversial
Counselor, in the Case depending.

First, Then he pretends, (for I Will relate his Advice in shorthand, as much as
I can, till I find something worth the transcribing) that Bellarmin never meant
what his Adversary undertakes to prove, that the Plea of bare Antiquity is
proper to the Church: No! but this Gentleman must own that he did, when I have
told him only, that by bare Antiquity, his Adversary understands Antiquity
abstracted from the Consideration of Truth, those Ancient Truths delivered in
the Scriptures. Now, I presume, he will not say, that Bellarmin any where
expressly in his Book of Notes, muchless in this Chapter, makes the consent of
Doctrines with the written Word, which is not bare, but true Antiquity, a Note
of the Church; tho indeed, such is the force of Truth, he can hardly keep off
of that Argument. In his ninth Chapter, he makes agreement in Doctrine with the
Ancient Church, a sixth Note of the Church: Ancient, he farther explains by
Apostolic; telling us likewise out of Tertullian, that a Church is so called,
as for other Reasons, so for her conspiring with the Apostles in their
Doctrines; and yet, after all, most pitifully slides off to quite another
thing, as will appear to any one who shall examine that Chapter.

But it may be almost worth a man's while to read the Adviser's Comment upon
Bellarmin's Text, tho I hate transcribing. He says, indeed, says my Author,
that whoever at this time will find out the Catholic Church, professed in the
Creed, amongst so many pretenders, must not apply himself to any upstart
Congregation, which was never visible in the World, but of late years; but to
such a Church which has been of as long standing, as ever since Christ and the
Apostles days, and consequently such a Church to which Antiquity of necessity
at this time belongs. This Bellarmin asserts.

Where I observe, First, that, by this last Expression, he Represents his own
flourishing Gloss, as Bellarmin's Words, which they are not; a thing that looks
a little toward a design of putting a trick upon his Readers. 2ly, That we are
here shrewdly directed to find out the Catholic Church by finding out a
particular, to which we must stick without farther enquiry. 3ly, That this Man
passes a genere ad genus, from Antiquity to Visibility, which the better Logic
of his Master Bellarmin would not probably have suffered him to have done. And
lastly, after all, that he unluckily says the same thing in substance, with
what he disproves in his Adversary; for what does all his Gloss amount to, but
to this; That he who would find out the true Church, must overlook all such as
boast not of Antiquity at all adventures, without any regard had to the true
Antiquity of their Doctrines, or any thing else they pretend to; and pitch upon
that, without any more ado, which has been of as long standing, (of as long
standing barely, without any farther respect) as ever since Christ and the
Apostles days? And what is such a standing as this, but bare Antiquity? Unless
he can prove a necessary entail of Truth upon a long Succession, which all the
World can never do. And therefore, hoping he may be a little more happy in
following, than in giving Advice, I present him with his own, and the second he
gives; That when he would confute his Adversary, he say not the same thing that
he does; and withal, desire him to attend, for the future, more diligently to
the Sense, than to the Expression of a Period.

But wherein does the Confuter of Bellarmin thus unluckily jump with him? Why,
in explicating and proving the same Antiquity to be a Note of the Church, which
Bellarmin affirms to be such. To which I answer, first, that if Bellarmin by
Antiquity meant such as his Confuter explains, p. 45. as is pretended, then he
understood by that word, an agreement in Doctrine with Christ and his Apostles,
for so it is plain his Adversary meant; but we have shown before, that that
could not be Bellarmin's Intention. 2ly, That if the Cardinals Discourse upon
this Note does really tend to prove, not Antiquity, (but as the Confuter
compendiously distinguishes, Priority) to belong to the Church, as it seems to
do; then it is demonstrable to me, that he presently grew weary of his Note,
which he could not manage without blending and confounding it with another more
proper and pertinent to his business, tho besides his design.

The third Inconsistency which he thinks he has found in the Confuter of
Bellarmin, is this, That having proved Antiquity not to be a proper Note of the
Church, because it did not always belong to it, as a proper Characteristick of
a thing ought to do, there being a time when the Church was new, p. 42. He
should, nothwistanding, in the 45 p. assert that the holy Scriptures are the
true Antiquity, there being a time when they were new likewise; and here he
thinks he has undoubtedly caught him. But alas, his Pen was more nimble than
his thoughts were deep. If indeed Bellarmin's Adversary in this point had
advanced this Proposition, That Antiquity is a proper Note, or inseparable
Property of the Scriptures, or written Word, and had after this undertaken to
prove, that Antiquity could not be such a Note of the Church, because the
Church was once new; the Argument would with equal force have recoiled upon
that same Assertion of his in relation to the Scriptures. Or if Bell. had
affirmed only that the Church is truly Ancient, and his Adversary had denied
it upon the Score of its former newness; he could not neither, if his own
Objection were good, have rightly affirmed that the Ss. are the true Antiquity:
But who can discover the least repugnancy betwixt these two Assertions, that
Antiquity is a Note of the Church, and consequently, as the Confuter well
argues, proper to it, and inseparable from it, which yet cannot be true, if the
Church was once new; and this, that the Scriptures are the true Antiquity; i.
e. that the Doctrines delivered in the Scripures or written Word, are the
oldest and truest Doctrines in the Christian Church. Thus I have often
observed, that a few plain Words will unriddle great Mysteries in appearance;
and that some Men are unhappily apt to run away with a bare jingle of Words,
instead of harmony in Sense.

In the fourth Remark we meet with no less a charge than that of a
contradiction; and that is a bad business indeed in so narrow a compass of
Pages; but where has this starter of difficulties espied it, for it is not
easily discernable? Why, the Confuter of Bellarmin has asserted absolutely, p.
42. That Antiquity is not a proper note of the Church, whereas p. 45. He has
found out an Antiquity that is proper to the Church. In good time! Bellarmin
uses the word equivocally, either for that which is ancient, or for that which
is first; the former his Confuter says, p. 42. is not a Note proper to the
Church; but that the latter, which Bellarmin did not originally mean by his
Note of Antiquity, tho he was forced to run into it, belongs to the Church. And
is this now ad idem? and if not, where is the contradiction? If, discoursing
with this Gentleman, I should own my self a Member of the Catholic Church, and
finding afterward that, according to their usual and presumptuous blunder, by
the Catholic Church he meant the Roman Catholic Church, I should deny my self
to be a Member of it, should I be guilty of a Contradiction? for shame what
trifling is this? I thought some sort of People had better understood the
dubious import of Words used equivocally.

His fifth Remark wants nothing but Truth to make it a very good one; and is
this, That the Confuter of Bellarmin has produced a Citation out of St.
Cyprian, which is so far from favoring his own Cause, that it really supports
his Adversaries, and is the very ground of what they maintain, and he opposes.
And in earnest then, amongst such great variety, he was very unhappy in his
choice. But how does the Adviser make this appear? why, by two or three pert
Interogations, and that is all. To which if I opposed only as many more, I might
reasonably seem to have given him a just Answer. For the place is so extremely
pertinent to the Argument the Confuter was upon, that, for my own part, I can
scarce persuade my self the Adviser was in earnest when he made his Remark, if
he knew what he was about. The Confuter was showing, that bare Antiquity, as
before explained, could not be a proper Criterion to judge of the true Church
by, for that, amongst other Reasons, wicked Doctrines running down to
Posterity, even from the Infancy of the Gospel, made use at length of the Plea
of Antiquity to give them countenance and support; which pretense, says he, was
notwithstanding refuted by the Fathers in several remarkable Words. Amongst
others of which he alleges that passage in St. Cyprian's Epistle to Pompeius.
Custom without truth is but Antiquity of error -- and there is a short way of
Religious and simple minds to find out what is truth; for if we return to the
beginning and original of Divine Tradition, Humane Error ceases -- Thither let
us return to our Lords Original, the Evangelical Beginning, the Apostolical
Tradition, etc. Is not now our Lord's Original, the Evangelical Beginning
(terms synonimous with Apostolical Tradition) that ancient Truth the Confuter
desires to appeal to? Or, is this, as the Adviser farther boasts, That setting
up the very Tradition which Catholics appeal to? Yes, says he. But why so? for
no other reason doubtless but because he luckily espied the Word Tradition in
that sentence, and perhaps found it under that head in his Commonplace Book.
Now seriously, if this Gentleman pleases, I Will produce him half an hundred
Instances out of the Ancient Fathers, Irenaeus, Tertullian, Cyprian, etc. where
Tradition is used by them for the Scriptures, or written Word of God. If he had
but consulted that other Epistle to Caecilius, Cited by the Confuter in his
Margent, he would have found it taken there five or six times in that very
sense; and that it is really so in the place now before us, is so demonstrably
evident from the Epistle whence it is cited, that none who had ever consulted
the Original, could with the least modesty, or judgment, have alleged it in
Defense of Tradition, as stated in the Church of Rome. For the Holy Martyr
refuting here what Pope Stephen had replied to him in a Letter concerning the
Baptism of Heretics, repeats several Passages of it. Of which this is one, Si
quis ergo a quacunque Haeresi venerit ad nos, nihil innovetur nisi quod
Traditum est, ut manus illi imponatur in poenitentiam. To which St. Cyprian
immediately replies, Whence is this Tradition? does it descend from the
Authority of our Lord and the Gospel, or from the Injunctions and Epistles of
the Apostles? For God testifies, That those things are to be done which are
written. If therefore it be commanded either in the Gospel, or in the Epistles
of the Apostles, or in the Acts, that they who come from any Heresy over to
the Church, be not Baptized, but only have imposition of hands for repentance;
let this Divine and Holy Tradition be observed. But if, etc. And now what
thinks our Adviser of St. Cyprian's Apostolical Tradition, which pleased him so
wonderfully at first sight, and I dare say he never looked farther? Are the
Gospels, the Epistles, and the Acts, the only Tradition which Catholics appeal
to? Let him remember his Trent-Creed, and then tell me.

We come now, in the next place, to his Remarks and Advice in relation to the
Confuter's second Proposition, That the present Church of Rome vainly pretends
to true Antiquity, i. e. ancient Truth. And here we find him all on a sudden
taken with a very strong fit of the Gentleman; he is upon his Punctilio's, and
teaching his Adversary better manners than to charge the Church of Rome with
Lies; and yet this Master of Controversial Ceremonies is off of his breeding
within two Pages after, where we have him ranking the Divines and Disputants of
the Church of England with honest Cobblers and Tinkers, as if they were really
at a Club together over the Pot he speaks of in his Introduction, for the
Confutation of Bellarmin; and, to instance no farther in this fulsome kind,
what else is his whole scribble but one continued breach of Good Manners and
common Civiliey, unless he thinks it the part of the Gentleman to Boffoon a
whole Church, and all her Clergy? I shall not farther recriminate, though I
justly might, from several of their late Papers, were it worth the while. I
shall only therefore tell him, that Bellarmin in that very Chapter we are now
upon, gives his Adversaries the Lie twice very roundly; and why should he be
angry with a man for copying after such an Original? And that I could wish some
People were not so deeply concerned in the Character of those who, in the
Apostle's homely Phrase, shall in the latter times speak Lies in Hypocrisy [1 Timothy 4. 2.] and by lying Wonders [2 Thessalonians. 2. 9.] impose upon the People, as to
deserve such plain English. But the Lie deserves a Stab, they say, and
therefore we may now expect a keen Pen, when pointed with such generous
Resentments.

In the second place therefore he pretends, that the Confuter, in kicking down
the Church of Rome, has overthrown his own at the same blow. For he having
asserted, p. 49. [not, as the Adviser words it, That the addition of Articles
to the ancient Creed, takes of all claim to the ancient Truth, as if a Church
that coins new and false Articles of Faith, does thereby forfeit her Title to
those true and ancient ones she before retained, though not impugn'd by these
new ones, as the Adviser would suggest, but] that the present Church of Rome,
having superadded several Articles of her own, contrary to several of those
Christian Truths upon which she was originally founded, becomes another Church
from what she was then, and cannot plead Antiquity for her present
Constitution; the Adviser subsumes, that neither then can the Church of England
be the ancient Church, who besides the Nicene and Athanasian Creeds, has
another of a later date, of nine and thirty Articles, besides another
Plot-Creed called the Test. Sure this Man wrote only to make People merry. Or,
is he really not able to distinguish betwixt Articles of the Christian Faith,
of necessity to be believed in order to Salvation, and such he cannot but know
the Church of Rome accounts all the Articles of the new Trent Creed, and those
of Communion and external agreement, which, tho ancient Truths, (and if we
cannot give better proofs of their true Antiquity than they can do of their
necessary Articles, we will be content to lose them) are yet of an inferior
Nature. And as to our Plot Creed in particular, I Will set another Plot-Creed
with a Witness against it; and that is, the deposing Power, by Law established,
by a Law that is a Creed in the strictest Sense to them, the Definition of a
General Council; and had it not been for this, and other Plot-Creeds of
absolving Subjects from their Allegiance, and the like, I am apt to believe
they had never been troubled with ours.

In the next Paragraph the Adviser leads us such a Dance, there is no keeping
Pace with him. He frisks and frolicks it so in his Field of Crontroversy, that
he puts me in mind of the Diversion of another sort of Animal, lately come into
a good Pasture, and in a warm Sun. I was in despair for some time of finding
out his meaning in his long Ramble of two Pages, but beating about, for it laid
in a very narrow compass, I found it at last in a Corner of the Field of
Controversy; and it is in short, this, That the Confuter's Argumentation, which
see p. 50. etc. does not prove that when a Change or Alteration in Religion
begins publicly to be abetted, maintained and propagated, etc. -- That then
such an Alteration in Religion could spread it self over the whole Christian
World, and yet the Authors, Promoters, Abetters, and Embracers of it, not be
known, and taken notice of. This being a popular, tho very weak refuge insisted
upon by greater men than the Adviser, I shall give it a more distinct, tho
short, Answer.

First, then I say, That the Confuter, p. 52. has given him one particular
Instance of an acknowledged Change, of which they themselves cannot yet assign
the Author by whom, nor the time when, it was introduced; and that he has
farther, p. 53, etc. as much as his designed Brevity would admit, evinced the
Rise and Progress of two notorious changes in Religion, established in the
Church of Rome, and the Opposition they met with, and could at h pleasure have
farther enlarged upon this Subject.

Now either of these Ratiocinations are a sufficient Confutation of
Bellarmin's, adopted by the Adviser; And how little he has replied to his
Instances, we shall see by and by.

2dly, He is mightily out in his Computation, unless the old blunder of the
Roman being the Catholic Church, run still in his Head; if he thinks all those
Doctrines of theirs, which we charge with the want of true Antiquity, were ever
universally received over the whole Christian World, as he flourishes to
exaggerate the Matter; What thinks he of one of the Confuter's instances, the
Papal Authority, to go no further? But I hope his better Knowledge in this point
will supersede me the labor of enlarging upon so copious an Argument.

3dly, I must tell the Adviser, that the Doctrines we complain of, being
generally such as are calcuted for the Meridian of Rome, the greater
Veneration, Wealth, and Grandeur of the Pope and his Clergy; it is no wonder at
all that we hear not of so much Bustle and Noise about them in the Western
World, as we might otherwise have expected. And if he asks me, as he is good at
such silly questions, Where the Church of England was all this time, and why
She did not Preach, and make Laws against such Corruptions and their Abetters;
I presume to ask his Wisdom again, Where She was under the late Reign of
Cromwell, and why She did not Preach and make Laws against him and his Abetters.

Why truly She was, in both Cases, under the invincible Tyranny of an Usurper;
and therefore, methinks, the general Answer of the Householder to his Servants,
asking him whence came the tares, that an Enemy had Sown them, might satisfy
in this Anti-tipe of the Parable likewise; especially, since we find neither
Master nor Servants any farther sollicitous in particular Enquiries about them,
even when they grew up, and were consequently seen and discerned; for ill weeds
to be sure grow fast enough. And I shall only in this place, desire the
Gentlemen, who are so ready to boast of the present Continuance of the
discriminating Doctrines of the Church of Rome, notwithstanding the Opposition
they have met with, to make this farther Remark with me upon the Parable of the
Tares, That they were suffered to grow up with the Wheat until the Harvest, and
let them recollect what became of them then.

4thly, Were there no other method for Errors to spread in the Church, than by
what the Adviser seems to Dream of, by appearing in open Contradiction and
Defiance to the true Church, condemning its Doctrine, and opposing the Articles
of her Faith, as Erroneous and Heretical, as he tragically expresses it; then
his inference might probably hold good, unless we will suppose such Errors to
have appeared in a very dark and supine Age indeed, and even in a more
cautious, it is possible Records might be lost; but alas, since they usally grow
up and advance after a quite different manner, pedetentim, by little and
little, as Fisher Bishop of Rochester owns the Doctrine of Purgatory did; or,
it may be under the Color of greater Piety and Devotion, or the like, as the
Doctrines of Image and Saint-worship, and thereby draw in the Pastors of the
Church themselves for their Maintainers and Abetters; his Argumentation falls
to the Ground.

5thly, He ought to distinguish betwixt such Errors, as immediately confront
the prime Foundations of the Christian Faith, and that Apostasy the Spirit has
foretold should be brought in by such as speak lies in Hypocrisy, [1 Timothy 4. 1,
2.] of the first sort were the early Heresies, concerning the Person of our
Savior, His Divinity and Humanity, The Resurrection of the Body, and the like;
such as these indeed did not, nor cannot well be supposed to appear in the
Church without a mark upon the time of their rise, their Authors and open
Embracers. The other is a mystery of Iniquity, and may be advanced by specious
and almost imperceptible methods, as is hinted above, without any great stir or
din about them.

6thly, To the single Instance of the Confuter concerning an acknowledged
change, the rise whereof they themselves cannot account for, the half
Communion, I shall add two more, the Doctrines of Purgatory and Indulgences,
both owned by Fisher Bishop of Rochester, and Cardinal Cajetan, to be of
uncertain Original; thereby acknowledging them not to be of the number of those
Ancient Truths we contend for, and yet are not able to tell who first brought
them in. To his two Instances of Alteration in Religion, the Papal Authority,
and the worship of Images, which we can account for according to the Adviser's
Directions, I add one more; The great Burning Article of Transubstantiation;
whose Rise, Progress and Opposers, they have lately been told of, [ See Disc.
against Transubst.] remitting the Adviser to Polydore Virgil for farther
Instruction in this matter, if he desires it. After all which, I must farther
presume briefly to remind him of the several new Definitions of the Trent
Council, and of others, which from Doctrines formerly taught, sprang up
presently, in that prolifick Soil of Religion, into Articles of Faith; and sure
it is a considerable Alteration in Religion, to make the belief of Points
necessary to Salvation, which were not so before. And yet I hope we are able to
name the who, the where, and the when, of those Alterations. But

Lastly, I must tell the Adviser, that, tho out of complaisance to him and his
Betters, I have so far enlarged upon this Argument; yet, as stated by himself,
with reference to the public Appearance of Corruptions; it is answered in one
word, by the same curt Ratiocination as it was before, when considered with
Relation to their first rise only. For, tho we could give no account of the
open Maintainers, Embracers and Abetters, nor of the Opposers of any Doctrine
or Practice prevailing in the present Church of Rome; yet, if we are able to
demonstrate that such Doctrine or Practice manifestly differs from what was at
first established in the Church by Christ and his Apostles; or going yet
farther, can show out of unquestionable Records, that no such thing, as for
instance, the present Papal Authority, was ever owned in the Church for such a
time, 600 years for example; does it not inevitably follow, That a change
however has been made, both from the true Antiquity, the Scriptures, and the
subordinate Antiquity of so many Centuries of the Church, tho we could not name
the place where, the time when, and the Persons by whom, such Corruptions were
publicly maintained and abetted? I can scarce, for my own part, believe that
men are in earnest, when they oppose such a wretched piece of Sophistry to the
unanswerable argument of matter of Fact, and the plainest experience in the
World.

We come now to his Remark upon the Confuter's instance of Communion in one
kind, and his advice to him here is, to prove in his next, That a diversity of
practice is an alteration in Religion; and especially of such a practice, which
Christ left indifferent in respect of the Laity, and without any positive
command of their receiving it in both kinds. But since he has not thought fit
to prove this at all, which was his proper province in this place, unless by
two or three frivolous Citations, of which afterward; I shall still take the
contrary for granted, being well assured, first, That he can show no positive
command to the Clergy to receive it in both kinds, which does not equally
include the Laiety; and, secondly, That they, being equally interested with the
Clergy in the benefits that accrue to mankind from the effusion of our
Savior's Blood, and the Sacrament of the Eucharist being instituted in
Commemoration of this effusion of his Blood, as well as of the breaking of his
Body; the drinking of the Cup, as well as the eating of the Bread, becomes as
necessary a part of this Sacrament, in relation to the Laiety, as it is to the
Clergy; they who equally partake of the benefits of both, being equally
concerned in the Commemoration of both. And a thousand years constant practice
accordingly, is a good exposition of our Savior's Design in the institution;
and can then the refusing the Cup to the Laiety be called a diversity of
Practice only of administering it to them? Or, is the abolishing of a practice
(of such Divine Authority, and of so long a continuance in the Universal
Church) in relation to such Myriads of People, only a differing modus of
exercising it? A familiar Instance will illustrate the matter, though it seems
sufficiently to discover it self by its own natural absurdity. Suppose then
some friend of the Advisers should, by his last Will and Testament, leave so
much Beer, and so much Bread, to be distributed every Week, for instance, to
the Poor of the Parish where he had lived; and the Adviser, his Executor,
should, for a long time, take care to have both the Beer and the Bread
faithfully distributed according to the Testator's Will; but yet, at last, for
some private reason of his own, should deprive them of their portion of Beer,
and confine them to Bread only; does he imagine he could sham off the Wotld,
and the Poor People concerned, with this piece of Sophistry, That what he did
was only a diversity of Practice in fulfilling the Will of the Deceased, and no
alteration of the Will it self? Who sees not, at first sight, the illusion of
such an evasion? But now because the Adviser counsels the Confuter to prove in
his next, That a diversity of Practice, as he pleasantly calls the denial of
the Cup, is an alteration in Religion; I Will endeavor to do it for him, in as
few words as I can, now that I am upon the spot, and save him the labor. For,
if the Sacrament of the Eucharist be a part of the Christian Religion, and I
hope 'twill be granted to be a very considerable one, and the Cup an essential
part of that Sacrament; then they who deprive the Laiety of the Cup, the
diversity of Practice here spoke of, make thereby an alteration in Religion;
but, etc. And I Will make good this Argumentation to him when he pleases. The
custom of administering the Cup with Water only instead of Wine, was not, I
hope, so great a diversity of Practice, as not administering the Cup at all to
the Laiety, who were at that time partakers of the Cup, such as it was; and yet
it were worth his while to read what stress St. Cyprian, in his 63 Ep. to
Caecilius, lays upon the practice of our Lord in his Institution of this
Sacrament. And, in a word, so far is this defrauding the Laiety of the Cup,
from being no alteration in Religion, that, besides what has been said, it
opens wide the Door to the greatest alterations imaginable. For, if the Church,
nay, what is worse, the Church of Rome in particular, can, by her own
transcendent Prerogative, alter and act contrary to this positive Law and
Institution of Christ, she may, by the same reason, dispense with, or formally
abrogate any of the other at her pleasure. As for his Quotations out of Luther
and Melancthon, I have not been able to find, upon a pretty diligent search, as
much as the very Tract and Epistles from whence he cites them, and therefore am
apt to imagine, that taking them up at second hand, he, or his Author, made a
mistake in them. However it be, it matters not much; for his second Citation
out of Luther appears, at first sight, so foreign to his purpose, that by it
we may guess at the rest. But above all, recommend me to the Skull which could
Cite that place of Spalatensis, l. 5. c. 6. for the refusal of the Cup; or
conclude, that because private Persons, upon extraordinary occasions, as want
of Wine, antipathy to it, or the like, mentioned by this very Author, may
lawfully receive in one kind, the Church may make an universal standing Law
against the Laiety's receiving in both. Give me leave but just to continue the
words of Spalatensis, where the Adviser leaves of, and you will be sufficiently
able to pronounce of either the judgment or ingenuity of this Author, without
any farther descant upon him. After having told us then in the general, in what
cases the Sacrament may be lawfully received under the species of Bread alone,
he proceeds, Though in such a case, says he, the Sacrament is not truly and
properly whole. Wine may either be wanting, or the Person abstemious; or, it
may be more convenient to recieve at home, than in the Church, upon a lawful
cause, in which case a man may carry the Bread along with him, tho not so
conveniently the Wine, as old examples teach us (a practice perhaps not
altogether warrantable in the Church) But the Church neither could, nor can, by
an universal Law deprive the Laiety of the Cup, whether they will or no, upon
no necessity at all; for what Christ granted to all men, is in vain denied by
the Church; and where the whole Sacrament may and ought to be exhibited, it
cannot be mutilated and halfed without the greatest injustice; and this is
expressly prohibited under an Anathema by Gelasius in a Canon of the Church.

In the next Paragraph, the Adviser is all upon the ramble again, and you
scarce know where to have him; I Will pick up the sense though he has dropped here
and there, and digest it for him as well as I can. First, Then he is angry with
the Confuter for dateing the rise of the Papal Authority he speaks of, so far
back as Pope Victor; and his reason is, because the Church of Rome is generally
believed to have been in those days pure and incorrupt. Here wants nothing but
a good consequence. The Faith of the Church of Rome was then sound and
Orthodox, and therefore one of her Bishops could not be of a warm, passionate,
or assuming temper, as Africans generally are, of which Country he was; and, by
an unwarrantable action, undesignedly perhaps, lay the first Foundation of a
future encroachment and usurpation. This is the whole Logic of the Business.
But, the practices the Confuter censures, were owned by the Christians of those
days. I wonder then he did not show the vanity of what the Confuter alleges
concerning the reprimand that Celestine met with from the African Bishops upon
his intrusion into their Affairs; or, to go farther back, did the Adviser never
hear of the bustle that Victor's excommunicating the Asiatic Bishops made in
the Church? Or was no Body ever so kind as to tell him how ill that action was
resented by Bishops of the Latin Church it self; as may appear from a fragment
of a Letter of Irenaeus, Bishop of Lions, to Victor upon this occasion? [see
Eusebius. Hist. l. 5. c. 24.] But, Secondly, Pope Victor's practice could be no
other than an Apostolical truth, because he lived in the Second Century. I
thought we should have him upon the Argument of bare Antiquity, for all his
former indignation at the Confuter for telling him 'twas Bellarmin's second
Note of the Church; and here again is nothing but the poor business of a little
Logic, and conclusiveness wanting. For the argument proves too much, and so
proves nothing at all to his purpose, being that which a fortiori will justify
the Treachery of Judas, and all the Heretical Doctrines that were broached
before Victor's time. But I need not farther expose its absurdity, the Confuter
having done it so excellently well in his first particular. His third
appearance of reason, is, that the Popes the Confuter mentions as beginners of
the present Innovation of the Papal Authority, living before or in the time of
the four first General Councils, if what is pretended were true, those Councils
would have taken notice of it. Now because he confines his observation to those
Councils only, so shall I do my answer, which need be no other than this, That
the Innovation was then perfectly in its Infancy; the Tares as yet, according
to his own distinction, in the dark and under ground, not grown up, and
overtopping the Corn, as they did afterward, and therefore difficultly
perceptible, at least in their future fatal tendency and event; and as such
might, consequently, easily escape the severe and solemn Animadversion of a
general Council. But can the Adviser imagine, that if the Bishops of Rome had,
in those days, presumed to have broke down all the ancient mounds and
boundaries of Jurisdiction, the (...) of the Council of Nice, and had, in a
word, but offered at such an audacious attempt as an universal Monarchy over
the whole Church of Christ, that they would not have been taken notice of by
those Councils, as they were by others afterward, and by the African Bishops
during that time? Yes, he may assure himself we should have had a brand of
Infamy set upon them, that would have lasted to all Posterity, if any but the
Church of Rome had the keeping of the Records. But there is something behind
still in this Paragraph, which looks, as if he were fond of it; and therefore
we must do it the civility of a remark; and that is, that the ancient Fathers
urge the continued succession of these very Bishops of Rome, as an Argument of
the True Orthodox Faith and Religion professed in that Church. Ergo, What? What
you please. I have told this Gentleman before, that the Orthodoxy of the Faith
of the Church of Rome in those days is no way concerned in the present debate;
for the Church over which the Bishops we speak of, presided, might be sound in
the Faith; for the Pope's universal Jurisdiction was then no Article of it; and
yet they, through passion, inadvertency, or perhaps natural ambition, lay the
first Foundation of that monstrous Fabric of Papal power, that after-Ages built
upon it. I shall not here enter upon a Discourse concerning the proof of the
Truth of Doctrines by succession of Bishops, because the Adviser uses it only
as a Medium to prove, though poor man he has made but bad use of it, that no
Bishop of Rome could by any means sow those Seeds, which might be afterward
improved into dangerous innovations; yet, I must tell him that, after all,
those Fathers ultimately resolve the truth of all Doctrines into their harmony
and agreement with the Apostolic writings. The ridiculous Buffoonry that fills
up the rest of the Paragraph, sufficiently exposes its Author, of it self; only
whereas he tells us, we have no other way to look fair, than by blackning the
Church of Rome; I must tell him in return, That, in my Mind, they are equally
impertinent who would wash an Ethiopian white, and who would paint him blacker
than he is.

In the next Paragraph about Image Worship, he palliates very finely, as if
Paint and Varnish were still as requisite to a Discourse upon that indefensible
Subject, as to the Subject it self. The Confuter hinting briefly to him by what
advances Image Worship crept up to that height, wherein it is now taught and
practiced in the Church of Rome, begins as he ought, from the very first Steps,
or unhappy Occasions only, of that religious Worship that was afterward given
them; viz. the Historical use of them 300 years after Christ, improved into the
Rhetorical, as he well expresses it, in 300 years more after that. Now upon
this fastens the Adviser, without ever taking notice of the Religious Adoration
that is paid them, that great Alteration of Religion the Confuter complains of,
and of which the former uses of them were only unhappily Introductory; but
slurs it over in the general terms of other Reasons; others with a witness, for
which the Confuter condemns the Church of Rome of Innovation in Religion. Is
this Ingenuity? Is this Arguing? But alas, it is as good as the Cause will bear.
How then is the Church of England laid upon her back by the Alteration in
Religion, which the Confuter in this place charges upon the Church of Rome?
Does the Church of England worship Images? If not, She can never be in the same
Condemnation, for not worshipping, with that Church, which does worship them.
But here perhaps lies the Mystery; Mr. Mountague, in the 21. Chap. of his
Appeal to Caesar, approves of the giving them [ Civil] Respect and Reverence,
as was done by Pope Gregory in Rememoration, and more effectual Representment
of the Prototype; all which amounts to no more, even in his own Exposition in
that Chap. than to a bare Historical use of them; And what of all this? Does it
hence follow that the whole Church of England is equally laid on her Back with
the Church of Rome, that religiously worships them? Is there no difference
betwixt Mr. Mountague's private Opinion, and the Doctrine of the Church of
England? No difference betwixt a mere Historical, and that Religious use that
is made of them in the Church of Rome? Well, but Mr. Mountague confesses that
the Historical and Rhetorical uses of them, are allowed by the Church of
England. And suppose so for once; what becomes of the poor Consequence still,
for that is what I am concerned for? The Church of England allows an use of
Images harmless in it self, and therefore She is equally culpable with a Church
that allows, nay commands, an use of them, sinful in it self. Consquences so
big with Absurdity, that a man needs but name them, to expose them. But after
all, the Church of England has no such Doctrine that I know of, nor does Mr.
Mountague say so. He says indeed, Chap. 20. that we do not account the Papists
Idolatrous for these Historical and Rhetorical uses of them; and in the same
Chap. that it is not the Doctrine of the Church of England to have departed
from the Church of Rome about this point, if She had gone no farther in
Practice nor Precept than what St. Gregory recommended; and that he, for his
part, could have actually gone thus far along with them: But he affirms no such
thing of the Church of England, as the Adviser would make him. But, since he
has been pleased to make use of Mr. Mountague's Name, as a sort of an Abetter
of their Doctrino in this Point: I think I cannot do Him, nor the Reader,
greater Justice, than here to give a Specimen of his Sense of this Doctrine and
Practice of the Church of Rome. Thus, then, says he in the 19. Chap. one of
those cited by our Author. I do not, I cannot, I will not deny that Idolatry is
grossly committed in the Church of Rome. The ruder sort at least are not
excusable, who go to it with downright Idolatry, without any relative
Adoration, worshipping that which they behold with their Eyes. This Idolatry is
Ancient in their Schools, as he there shows; not amongst the Vulgar only.

The little Flourishes which follow, are not worth a remark; for who says, That
such an use of Images, as he there speaks of, leaves the Church of Rome without
all title to Antiquity, or, that it Vnchurches her? This I am sure is a
Rhetorical use of words, instead of a Logical one, which obliges a Disputant to
keep to his terms; a strictness, alas, that will never agree with thin Sense,
and a bad Cause. The Confutation of his Comparison betwixt the Introduction of
the worship of Images, and Lawn-sleeves, etc. I leave to the Laughter or
Indignation of every Reader, as he is in Humor, when he meets with it; for he
who would vouchsafe such stuff any other Reply, might justly be thought guilty
of as great trifling in refuting, as he in advancing it.

His Remarks upon the Confuter's Conclusion, are a pure Declamation, and I have
no great appetite to encounter a Schoolboys Exercise. He tells us, He cannot
possibly make sense of what the Confuter says in reference to the Church of
England, That her Religion, by Law established, is the true Primitive
Christianity; for so run his Words; and what then? Is the Confuter bound to
find him in understanding? He might have enough to do at that rate. I thought
he had explained himself in the next Page, and that very pertinently too, by
telling him, That our Religion is as old as Christ and his Apostles, with whom
whosoever agrees, they are truly ancient Churches, tho of no longer standing
than yesterday: As they that disagree with them, are new, tho they can run up
their Pedigree to the very Apostles; and this he farther confirms by
Tertullian's Authority. Now if the Adviser had had a mind, or ability, to have
spoke pertinently to the matter in hand, he should have endeavored to have
shown, either, that Conformity with Primitive and Apostolic Doctrine does not
make a Church truly Ancient and Apostolic; or, that the Doctrines of the Church
of Engl. have no such Conformity; for if they have, 'twill be found that Christ
and his Apostles have a greater hand in the Constitution of this Church, than
in that of Rome, notwithstanding his trifling harangue to the contrary. The
World knows very well, he tells us, when this Church was first established by
Law; and so does the World know too, when Christianity was first seated in the
Throne, and protected by the secular arm, and yet I believe the Christians of
those days thought no worse of their Religion for that; nor, I believe, would
the Adviser think worse of his, if the Laws were on its side. But where this
Church was before 'twas established by Law, that is not so easy to tell. Why,
truly in my mind, 'twas much in the same state with the Jewish Church under the
Dominion of Pharaoh in Egypt; the one being born down and enslaved by a
Temporal Tyranny; the other by both a Temporal and Spiritual Usurpation; till
God was pleased, as to rescue the one, so the other too, out of the House of
Bondage. After this, he whissles and plays about the separation and novelty of
this Church. To which I shall only return; That if he pleases to be but so kind
to himself and to us, as to lay aside the Buffoon and Declamator for a while,
and condescend, for once, to speak to the purpose, upon that, or any other
subject; he needs not fear a suitable reply from some or other. In the last
place, he is for finding out the Confuter some work, in Relation to the proof
of our adequate belief of the Creed, and in the same sense, in which it was
taught by the Apostles, and professed by the Primitive Church. No man, who
knows the Reverend and Learned. Confuter, can doubt of his Abilities for a much
harder Task than what the Adviser would set him; but I presume he knows how to
dispose of his time much better than to lay it out in refuting the Suggestions
of every incompetent Adversary; and since he has thought fit to fling out this
Surmise about the belief of the Church of England; in my Apprehension 'twould
much more become him to make it out in the first place, and then, perhaps he
may hear of the Confuter, if he chances to write any thing worth his
Confutation.

He tells us, in one place, of the forwardness of the beardless Divines of the
Church of England. I must confess I know not whether the Down is still upon his
own Chin, or no; but if not, I must needs tell him, that for ought I find in
his friendly half Sheet of Paper, the Beard contibutes no more to the making of
the Divine, than it does to the making of the Philosopher; and therefore, I
shall conclude with one piece of Advice to him, and that which may do him more
true Service than all he has given the Confuter can ever do him, and that is,
That, if it be really his hard fate not to be able to write more to the
purpose, than what he has hitherto done, he would give over writing in this
kind, and for the future follow the bent of his Genius, which seems to lead him
rather to the Comical Humor of the Stage, than into the Field of Controversy.

FINIS.

