I Appoint Thomas Newcomb, and Henry Hills, to Print this Information,
According to the Order of the HOUSE of COMMONS; And that no other Person
presume to Print the same. November. 10th. 1680.

Wi WILLIAMS, Speaker.

THE INFORMATION OF Edward Turbervill Of SKERR in the County of GLAMORGAN,
Gent. Delivered at the BAR of the HOUSE of COMMONS, Tuesday the Ninth day of
November, In the Year of our Lord. 1680. Perused and Signed to be Printed,
according to the Order of the House of Commons, By me WILLIAM WILLIAMS, Speaker.

royal blazon or coat of arms C R
HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE DIEV ET MON DROIT

LONDON, Printed by the Assigns of John Bill, Thomas Newcomb, and Henry Hills;
Printers to the Kings most Excellent Majesty. 1680.

THE INFORMATION OF Edw. Turbervill Of SKERR in the County OF GLAMORGAN, Gent.
WHo says, That being a younger Brother, about the year 1673. he became
Gentleman Usher to the Lady Mary Molineux, Daughter to the Earl of Powis; and
by that means lived in the House of the said Earl about three years: and by
serving and assisting at Mass there, grew intimate with William Morgan
Confessor to the said Earl and his Family: who was a Jesuit, and Rector over
all the Jesuits in North- Wales, Shropshire, and Staffordshire. And he during
the three years time often heard the said Morgan tell the said Earl and his
Lady, That the Kingdom was in a high Fever, and that nothing but Bloodletting
could restore it to Health, and then the Catholic Religion would flourish.
Whereunto the said Earl many times replied, It was not yet time, but he doubted
not but such means should be used in due time, or words to that effect. And he
heard the Lady Powis tell the said Morgan and others publicly and privately,
That when Religion should be Restored in England* (which she doubted not but
would be in a very short time) she would persuade her Husband to give Three
hundred pound per annum for a Foundation to maintain a Nunnery. And this
Informant was persuaded by the Lady Powis and the said Morgan, to become a
Friar; the said Lady encouraging this Informant thereunto, by saying, That if
he would follow his Studies, and make himself capable, she questioned not but
he might shortly be made a Bishop, by her Interest in England: because upon
Restoration of the Catholic Religion, there would want people fit to make
Bishops, and to do the business of the Church. And thereupon she gave this
Informant Ten pound to carry him to Doway; where this Informant entered the
Monastery, and continued about three weeks, and with much difficulty made his
Escape thence, and returned for England. For which the said Earl and his Lady,
and all the rest that encouraged him to go to the Monastery, became his utter
Enemies; threatening to take away his life, and to get his Brother to disinherit
him. Which last is compassed against him; and Father Cudworth who was then
Guardian of the Friars at Doway, some days before his Escape thence, told this
Informant, That if he should not persevere with them, he should lose his Life
and Friends: And farther added, That this King should not last long: and that
his Successor should be wholly for their purpose. And Father Cross, Provincial
of the Friars, told this Informant, That had he been at Doway when this
Informant made his Escape thence, he should never have come to England. And
this Informant finding himself friendless, and in danger in England, went to
Paris, where one of his Brothers is a Benedictine Monk, who persuaded this
Informant to return for England. And in order thereunto, about the latter end
of November 1675, he was introduced into the Acquaintance of the Lord Stafford,
that he might go for England with his Lordship. And three Weeks he attended his
Lordship, and had great access and freedom with his Lordship, who gave him
great assurances of his favor and interest to restore him to his Relations
esteem again: and said, He had a piece of Service to propose to this Informant,
that would not only retrieve his Reputation with his own Relations, but also
oblige both them and their Party, to make him happy as long as he lived. And
this Informant being desirous to embrace so happy an Opportunity, was very
inquisitive after the means. But the said Lord Stafford being somewhat
difficult to repose so great a Trust as he was to Communicate to him, exacted
all the Obligations and promises of Secrecy, which this Informant gave his
Lordship in the most solemn manner he could invent. Then his Lordship labored
to make this Informant sensible of all the Advantages that would accrue to this
Informant, and the Catholic Cause. And then told this Informant in direct
terms, That he might make himself and the Nation happy, by taking away the Life
of the King of England, who was a Heretic, and consequently a Rebel against
God Almighty. Of which this Informant desired his Lordship to give him time to
consider: and told his Lordship, That he would give him his Answer at Diepe,
where his Lordship intended to ship for England, and to take this Informant
with him. But this Informant going before to Diepe, the Lord Stafford went with
Count Grammont by Calais, and sent this Informant Orders to go for England, and
to attend his Lordship at London. But this Informant did not attend his
Lordship at London, but went into the French Service; and so avoided the Lord
Staffords further importunities in that Affair. And this Informant further
says, That one Remige a French Woman, and vehement Papist, who married this
Informants Brother, lived with the Lady Powis all the time this Informant
resided there, and some years since; and was the great Confident of the said
Lady. And the said Remige was for the most part taken with her Ladyship into
Morgans chamber, when the Consults were held there; where he has often seen
Father Gavan, Father Towers, Father Evans, Father Tylliard, Roberts, White,
Owens, Parry, and the Earl of Castlemain, and other Priests and Jesuits meet,
and shut themselves up in the said Morgans chamber, sometimes for an hour,
sometimes for two hours, more or less; and at the breaking up of the said
Consults, have broke out into an Ecstasy of joy, saying, They hoped ere long
the Catholic Religion would be established in England: and that they did not
doubt to bring about their Design, notwithstanding they had met with one great
Disappointment, which was, the Peace struck up with Holland: saying, That if
the Army at Black Heath had been sent into Holland to assist the French King,
when he was with his Army near Amsterdam, Holland had certainly been Conquered;
and then the French King would have been able to assist us with an Army; to
Establish Religion in England. Which expressions, with many others, importing
their confidence to set up the Romish Religion, they frequently communicated to
this Informant. And the said Morgan went several times into Ireland, to London,
and several other parts of England, as this Informant has just Cause to
believe, to give and take Measures for carrying on the Design. And the said
Remige and her Husband, having first Clandestinely sold their Estate, are fled
into France, about May or June last, for fear of Discovery: This Imformant by
many Circumstances being assured, that the said Mistress Remige was privy to
all or most of the Transactions of the Plot. And he says, That about May last
was two years, he was present at Mass with the Lord Powis in Vere street, when
the Earl of Castlemain did say Mass in his Priestly Habit, after the Rites and
Ceremonies of the Church of Rome.

Edward Turbervill. Before Thomas Stringer, William Pulteney, Edmond Warcupp.

Sworn the Ninth day of November 1680.
FINIS.

