Imprimatur,

Febr. 23. 1676. H. London.

ANIMADVERSIONS Upon a Late PAMPHLET Entitled THE Naked Truth;

Or, THE TRUE STATE OF THE PRIMITIVE CHURCH.

The Second Edition.

LONDON, Printed by T. R. and are to be sold by Benj. Took at the Ship in St.
Paul's Churchyard, 1676.

ANIMADVERSIONS ON THE TITLE, THE DEDICATION, AND Epistle to the READER.
OF all the Rarities which of late have been the discourse of the Town (where
men spend much of their time, as the men of Athens did, either in hearing or
telling some New thing) nothing has been more talked of, than a cerrain Pamphlet
called The NAKED TRUTH. Now having got a sight of it, and scanned it
throughout, I am abundantly satisfied, not only from his Style, which is
sometimes Enthusiastic, but from his Matter and Principles (if he stick to
any) that the Author is a Borderer upon Fanaticism and does not know it. But by
Naked Truth he seems to mean Christianity without either Welt or Guard (as they
say) and not set off with Ceremony. For his Title Page stands thus: The Naked
Truth, or the True State of the Primitive Church. This Title Page of his, he
explains very sufficiently, p. 17. In the Primitive times (says he) in the
greatest Storms, when the whole World of Jews and Gentiles were Enemies to the
Church, and not one of your Ceremonies in the Church to preserve it; The simple
Naked Truth without any Surplice to cover it, without any Ecclesiastical Policy
to maintain it overcame all: and so would do now, did we trust to that, and the
Defender of it. If he means its great Defender in Heaven, we put our whole
Trust in him: or if he means his Vicegerent upon Earth, the Defender of the
Faith, we repose an entire Confidence (as we ought) in the gracious
Declarations and Expressions His Majesty is pleased to repeat upon all
Occasions, of his perpetual good Affection and Compassion for the Church of
England. Or if by Trusting to the simple Naked Truth, this Author means, the
Truth of our own Cause, we dare trust to that, and to many Defenders of that
too. But if trusting to the Naked Truth, be to this Pamphlet and this Project;
we dare not trust to it. Why, this is stripping the Church bare to the very
skin, nay, Skin and all must go, an Article of a Creed if need be, for he
spends his first long Chapter in Reforming there too, and reducing the Faith
to, I know not what, Naked Truth. Methinks he should have called his Pamphlet
The TRUTH FLEY'D, for NAKED TRUTH is too short, and not spoken through his
Subject. But Skin for skin, and all that a man has will he give for his life:
for This he contends on his Principle of Self-preservation, This he concludes
the only possible expedient to keep out Popery, This is his healing Salve, This
is the product of his Fasts, the Answer to his Prayers, the effect of his
seeking God (as he takes care to acquaint us) This has been the Travel of his
mind, since he had these thoughts, which he has been humbly conceiving these
two years, time enough for an Elephant to bring forth in.

This is the thing which he Dedicates to the Right Honorable, the Lords and
Commons assembled in Parliament. Pity it was not presented to the Lords during
the last Session, then I believe, it would have been delivered over by their
Lordships, to be confuted by the same experienced hand, that took to task a
more Primitive piece of Naked Truth, viz. the Solemn League and Covenant in the
Palace-yard at Westminster, where it expired into ashes. As for those Noble
Patriots in the House of Commons, it is probable they would have voted him their
Thanks too after the same manner, for laying a Libel at their doors, making a
breach upon their glorious Act of Uniformity, and violating their Act (their
most necessary Act) against Printing without a License: though he makes a neat
Excuse whilst he is doing it, that he does it against his Conscience, for which
he very poentiently begs pardon of God and Them, and so sins on: for, all this
while he goes on with his Printing and Publishing it without a License.

How he will justify his claim to the Title of An Humble Moderator, I cannot
imagine; unless Assuming, Imposing, and turning all upside down, be the signs
of Humility; and immoderate Zeal for one Party to be the qualification of a
Reconciler, or Moderator.

In his Address to the Reader he gives an Account, why he is so scrupulously
careful to conceal his Name: because he cannot bear reproach. So all that is
like to fall upon the poor Fatherless and Motherless Pamphlet; though he would
have done a piece of Justice, to have named himself, and so to have cleared
others, for it has been confidently laid to the charge of more than one
Reverend person who (I have great reason to believe, and am several ways
assured) had no manner of hand in it, yet he does himself and me a particular
favor, in making it impossible for me to reflect upon his Person (which I know
no more than the Man in the Moon) only as he makes himself the Patron of so
vile a Cause. For whosoever vents his own Amusements, to the Churches great and
real prejudice (and that is this case) he must not think to escape for the
Godliness of his Style, nor for a man of good Intentions, as sure he is, or
else he would never give the Devil so much more than his due, as to make so
strange a Protestation as he does here, that he would never condemn any good
Action though done by the Devil (as if he supposed, the Devil might do some
such for ought he knows) but Hell it self, they say (though we never heard
before of any good Actions there, yet it) is full of Such as were once full of
good Intentions.

Animadversions upon his first Chapter concerning Articles of Faith.
I Confess when first I saw this Jewel of a Pamphlet, and had run over two or
three pages of this Chapter, I suspected its Author for some Youngster that had
been dabling among the Socinian Writers, and was ambitious of showing us his
Half-Talent in the way. I was quickly delivered from this jealousy by his
Orthodox contradictory expressions in other places: But I find he is one of the
Men of the Second Rate (as I take leave to style them) that hardly ever see to
the Second Consequence. Therefore once for all I protest, that I do not charge
Him with many of his own most obvious Consequences as his opinions: for it is
plain he does not discern them. But the Church may justly complain of him, for
thrusting out such crude, indigested matter, without communicating these
conceptions of his, to some that would have showed him the weak and blindsides
of them. Now since the mischief is done, to undo the Charm again it becomes a
duty to Expose him; and most of all for this Chapter, where he has most exposed
himself: a Chapter of most pernicious consequence, and admirably serving the
turn of the rankest Sectaries. Who not being able to keep up their
Congregations any longer, or to keep their Disciples from ours by trivially
declaiming against our Ceremonies; They ferment them now by instilling into
them new fears and jealousies of our Doctrines: Warning them away from our
Churches, as if there was some strange Fury working, or some Innovations
contriving in the Church of England: and as if we were allowed to preach and
maintain even in our City-Pulpits, new Articles of Faith, Socinian or Pelagian,
in opposition to the Catholic and truly Primitive. How unsufferably J. O. for
one has reflected, not only upon some particular Persons, but upon the whole
Church of England and its Governers upon this account, any one may read, that
does but run over his Survey of a discourse concerning Ecclesiastical Polity.
No wonder then, if now they are transported with joy, when an Author appears as
one dropped down from heaven to plead their Cause, vouching himself a Son of the
Church of England, teaching as one having Authority like a Father, venturing at
first dash upon the tenderest Point in the World, concerning Articles of Faith,
implying and supposing all along, that some are extremely to blame for
improving the Faith, not by confirming, but enlarging it, asking, whether the
state of Salvation be alter'd' and, what need any other Articles? In what
Church does he ask these Questions? and how monstrous impertinent are they
here, if we do nothing like it?

Well! to begin with him, and follow him step by step through his many turnings
and windings, and sometimes nothing but a rope of Sand to guide me; He makes a
discovery to us in the first place, that That which we commonly call the
Apostles Creed, is the sum of Christian Faith. And again, that the Primitive
Church received this as the sum total of Faith necessary to salvation. Why not
now? I answer, it is so now, and all true Sons of our Church hold it so now:
Then why this Question? Why that which follows? Is the state of Salvation
altered? No doubt the terms of Belief, on which Salvation is ordinarily
attainable, are never changeable, but, like God himself who established them,
fixed and immovable. But still he follows his blow, though he fights with the
Air: If it be complete (says he) what need any other Articles? There may have
been needful heretofore, not only other Articles, but other Creeds, for the
farther explication of those Articles in the Apostles Creed: and yet in those
new Creeds, not one new Article. The Apostles Creed is the sum of Christian
Faith. True; yet I hope he will not think the Nicene, the Constantinopolitan,
and the Athanasian Creeds were superfluous and unnecessary: And in his Chapter
about preaching he seems concerned for this last the Athanasian; and yet his
censure is so bold upon Constantine the Emperor, and some godly Bishops (he
conceives more zealous than discreet, and so do some godly Bishops conceive of
this Author) and his pique at the new word Homoousios carries such an ugly
reflection upon that Creed, that I scarce dare understand him. But we shall
have more of this hereafter.

He would have men improve in Faith, but rather Intensive, than Extensive, to
Confirm it rather than Enlarge it. And yet it is certain that all formal and
mortal Heretics, that are not Atheists, are justly condemned for want of due
extension in their Faith.

He prays us to remember the Treasurer to Candace Queen of Aethiopia, whom
Philip instructed in the Faith: His time of Catechizing was very short, and
soon proceeded to Baptism. This is soon pronounced (as he uses to do) but not
proved. It does not appear how long, or how short was the time of his
Catechizing: or how many Leagues they traveled together before they proceeded
to Baptism. It Is true there needs no great length of time to propose and
demonstrate Christianity (as St. Peter and the Apostles did it in few words,
and) especially out of the Prophesies of the Old Testament, which the Eunuch
was then reading. But then a great deal must and may be learnt in a little
time: as the prime Articles of Faith are so strongly and rationally knit
together, that it is indeed impossible to teach or learn any one of them,
without teaching or learning them all. Whereas then our Author proceeds thus.
But Philip first required a confession of his Faith, and the Eunuch made it,
and I beseech you observe it: I believe that Jesus Christ is the Son of God:
and straightway he was baptized. How? no more than this? no more. What! nothing
of the Holy Ghost till he heard of him in the Baptismal form? What does he mean
then by that which immediately follows? This little grain of Faith being sound,
believed with all his heart, purchased the kingdom of Heaven. Had he believed
the whole Gospel with half his heart, it had been of less value in the sight of
God. It Is not the quantity, but the quality of our Faith, God requires. I
answer, the true and full notion of Saving Faith is embracing from the whole
heart the whole Fundamental truth of the Gospel. Why does he talk then of the
whole Heart, and yet supposes but half or a part of this Fundamental truth?
Does he dream that St. Philip the Evangelist Christened the Eunuch after
Christ's Ascension into Heaven, only as St. John the Baptist brought men to his
Baptism, before Christ appeared in his Ministry upon earth? and made him such a
Disciple, as those whom St. Paul found in Ephesus, that had not so much as
heard whether there were any Holy Ghost? to whom thereupon St. Paul proved
Christianity from their Master the Baptist's Testimony: and to make them
perfect Christians, which they were not before, but only a sort of Disciples,
Baptized them in the Name of the Lord Jesus, Acts 19.

Yet this Author will not let go his hold, and will needs be thus objecting
against himself. But, sure the Eunuch was more fully instructed. It may be you
are sure of it: but I could never yet meet with any assurance of it, nor any
great probability of it. Yes, I am sure of it, if he means by more fully
instructed, taught other Fundamental Articles beside this one, that Jesus
Christ is the Son of God. And I will give him one demonstration of what I say
(which is more than a Probability) out of the story it self; and he might have
met with this demonstration in it himself, if he could have seen but an inch
before him; for we find in the story that the Eunuch himself made the motion to
the Evangelist, and reminded him of baptizing him. Therefore it is evident they
had discourst before even of this particular, though we are told no more in
express words, but that St. Philip preached to him Jesus, the Faith of Jesus.
Yet he had brancht out this Faith into all its Fundamental Articles, and had
declared to him even the necessity of Baptism; which he understood not at all,
if he did not apprehend it aright, and as it was presently to be celebrated; in
the name of the Father, and the Son, and the Holy Ghost. Why, this very short
Baptismal form is a perfect Creed by itself, if it be thoroughly penetrated and
explained in its full latitude: for it seems the Name of the Son was by a
divine Criticism chosen and interposed between the other two Persons, whose
Godhead was confessed and acknowledged by the Jewish Church, rather than that of
the Word, to denote the Second of the 3 Persons of the most equal and
inseparable Trinity, as God of God from the Eternal Father; and also to connote
the Coeternal Son, made man in the fullness of time, and therefore born of a
Woman, the Virgin Mary. Why, here is a great part of the faith already. And then
the Baptismal action it self, the Immersion and Emersion out of the Water, did,
in its full and plain importance (as no doubt the Eunuch was made to understand
it, before he was brought to it) acquaint him and instruct him abundantly in
those other great points of Faith, the Dying, Burying, and Rising again of
Christ for our Justification from our sins; as also with the whole Practical
duty of a Christian man: that being the Inward part, or Thing signified in the
Sacrament of Baptism: viz. a Death unto Sin, the great comprehensive duty of
Mortification, and a New birth unto Righteousness: where he must needs be told
the mystery of the First and Second Covenant, that being by nature born in sin,
Original sin, and a Son of wrath, he had hereby Forgiveness of sins, was
adopted and made a Child of Grace, and Heir and Coheir with Christ in the
Communion of Saints, to live with him after the Resurrection in life
everlasting. Now this Author may see what use and need there was of the
Constantinopolitan Creed, that put in, One baptism for the Remission of sins:
Since the true understanding of that Sacrament is so instructive of all other
Fundamentals. For, all this our Apostle St. Paul supposed, as the common
Notions all Christians should have of their Baptism, Know ye not that as many
of us as were baptized unto Jesus Christ, were baptized into his death?
Therefore we are buried with him by Baptism into death, that like as Christ was
raised up from the dead by the glory of the Father: even so we should walk in
newness of life. For if we have been planted together in the likeness of his
Death; we shall be also in the likeness of his Resurrection, To. 6. 3, 4, 5,
etc,

To as little purpose then is his next Application of that passage in St. John,
Every spirit that confesses that Jesus Christ is come in the flesh, is of God.
1 John 4. 2. Why, the Mahumetans confess, in some sense, that Jesus Christ is
come in the flesh, as a great Prophet sent from God. Will a Mahumetan, or a
Socinian confession of this suffice? For the Socinians will admit the Apostles
Creed as the sum of Faith; the words I mean, but not the Catholic sense of it:
And they will say, through Jesus Christ our Lord at the end of their own
Prayers, in their own distorted sense of it. But if confessing Jesus Christ be,
as St. John means it, confessing the God and the Man (otherwise it is not
indeed confessing the same Jesus Christ, whom Christians ought to confess) this
takes in whole Christianity, that is, all its few primary Fundamentals are
coucht in this: All these no question, were virtually contained in St. Peter's
short confession of faith, Thou art Christ the Son of the living God; for which
confession he was blessed, and upon which faith Christ declared he would build
his Church as upon a Rock. And all these no doubt St. Paul preach to the
Corinthians, when yet he determined to know nothing amongst them, but Jesus
Christ and him crucified. 1 Cor 2. 2.

But whereas, in the next place, he charges some with introducing new and many
Articles of Faith; I hope he does not mean all our 39 Articles: most of which,
as (a late Right Reverend and learned Praelate) Bishop Lany, Lord Bishop of Ely
styles them in one of his 5 Sermon* p 48. are Articles of Peace, and consent in
certain Controversies, not Articles of Faith or Communion. Not as if the
Subscribers to these Articles engaged themselves to no more than not to
contradict them, or never to preach against them; No, the Church is so just to
her self, as to exact for the security of her own Peace, that all whom she
trusts with teaching others, or whom she recommends to the world with
University Degrees, shall subscribe to these Articles as their own Opinions,
and what they believe as convinced in their own Judgments that they are true;
Yet this I take to be one of her greatest Ecclesiastical Policies, that she
admits the many thousands and hundred thousands, without any Subscription to
these Articles, ad Communionem Laicam, that is, not to Half-Communion (as some
would ignorantly construe it, because they have Sacrilegiously taken away the
Cup from the Laity) but to that which the Primitive Church called the Communion
of Laics: that is, such a Communion as was given without such Conditions as
were anciently required of Ecclesiastics. But my best excuse for him is, that,
though he be scuffling in the dark, yet he strikes at the Papists especially,
and would narrow their Faith, rather than ours. It Is true they have introduced
many a new Article of Faith which is bad enough; and, which is worse, many a
one that has not a syllable of truth in it. He puts the Papists, Lutherans, and
Calvinists all together. One cries, this is a Demonstration, Another (says he)
cries, no such matter, etc. He may make as bold with any of these as he
pleases, for we are none of these; and I am not bound to make war in their
vindication.

In the 4th. page concerning the Procession of the Holy Ghost, he does
implicitly condemn the Catholic Church both in the East and West, for being so
presumptuous in her Definitions. It Is modestly done of him. But he means, we
have no comprehensive knowledge of the matter declared. His meaning is good and
true; But his Inference is stark naught, if he means, therefore we understand
not at all that this or that is declared. And I am sure, I do him no wrong in
fixing this meaning upon his words, for these are his very words, If then our
Reason understands not what is declared, how can we by Reason make any
deduction by way of Argument from that which we understand not? Is it even so?
Then let us put the case with reverence, That Almighty God, who assuming, I
suppose, the shape of an Angel treated with Abraham face to face, as a man does
with his friend, should for once have spoken in the same manner to Arrius or
Socinus, and made this one declaration to either of them, that the Catholic
Church's doctrine of the Trinity was true, and his false; Then I demand, would
not this have been demonstration enough of the Faith which we call Catholic,
either to Socinus or Arrius? And yet all those contradictory Arguments, which
either of them had once fancied Insoluble, supposing them not answered in
particular, would remain against it, and stand as they did before any such
declaration; and yet all this without giving him any comprehensive knowledge.

But as to the ground upon which he raises all this dust, in p. 4. about the
Procession of the Holy Ghost, I can easily answer for the Church of England;
let the Church of Rome answer for her self, if she can, for her trampling upon
the poor Greek Church as she lies in the dust, and branding her with Haeresie
for her doctrine of the Procession, as cruelly as her Turkish Masters burn
their Half-moons on the bodies of those whom they enslave. But our Church is
not so uncharitable, as to define it a Haeresie for any to maintain, that the
Holy Ghost proceeds from the Father by the Son, though we maintain also with
good reason, as a great truth, that the Holy Ghost proceeds from the Father and
the Son. But this makes no breach of Communion between us and the Greeks, the
difference arising only from the Inadaequation of Languages, which
notwithstanding, we agree in the main of this Article. So that I may answer all
this needless discourse, as Demosthenes once answered the Orator Aeschines,
who kept much ado about a word which the other had not used so properly; But
the Fortunes of Greece, said he, do not depend upon it.

But if in Divine matters we once give way to human deductions, a cunning
Sophister may soon lead a weak disputant into many Errors. So I doubt some such
one has misled this Author, who, whatever he be, I dare say is not condemned by
St. Paul for one of the disputers of this World, but rather is one of those
whom the same Apostle forbids us to admit to any doubtful disputations. But is
this Author serious against human deductions from Scripture, as he calls them,
especially since he confesses, p. 7, that Haeresies never appear at first in
their own natural shape, but disguised with specious pretenses drawn from some
obscure places of Scripture, capable of various interpretations; And thus
having gotten footing by degrees, they lay aside their disguises and march
barefaced? Now after this observation, would one think it possible for one that
is but master of coherent thoughts for three minutes, within the compass of
three pages to tell us gravely, Wherefore we have no other safe way to speak of
divine matters but in Scripture language, ipsissimus verbis, with the very same
words. Admirable! What way then is there to oppose those new arising Haeresies,
that draw their specious pretenses from those obscure Scriptures, and do not in
express words contradict any plain Texts, if there be no safe way to speak
against them, or to speak at all in Divine matters, but in express words of
Scripture? Nay our Author, as it happens, is aware of this horrid consequence,
and admits it: blaming for his imprudence that most prudent and most pious
Constantine (as he calls him) the first and best of Christian Emperors, that
he did not pursue his own Intentions, to suppress all Disputes and all new
Questions of God the Son, both Homoousian and and Homoiousian, and command all
to acquiesce in the very Scripture expressions without any addition, and then
he is confident the Arrian Haeresie had soon expired. Why, this was the very
design of those Arrians themselves, that which they drove at in the Court, that
which they urged in all their little Councils and Cabals; that silence might be
enjoined both Parties, and the Nicene profession of Faith not imposed upon
them: as if it had not been ground enough for the Church safely to declare and
define one divine Essence in the Trinity, when St. John had set it down, There
be three that bear witness in heaven, the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost,
and these three are One, (...). What signifies ^^^ but Unum, that is, Una Res,
or Una Essentia, One Essence? and what is (...) more than this? Only the Church
had a necessity of using that word directly to meet and encounter the opposite
(...), which the Heretics took up, to speak their new Faith in a new Term, and
beside and against the Scripture.

But this Principle will mislead him farther yet: for upon his measures and
rules of Faith, what will become of our Prime and most necessary Principles of
Faith (as he very truly calls them p. 4.) the Trinity three Persons and one
God? Why do we find this Author p. 29. solemnly affirming this in the presence
of God, that he has known some pass for very good Preachers that could not give
a good account of the Athanasian Creed. I suppose this Author passes for a very
good Preacher himself, and firmly believes this Creed, and professes his Faith
by it openly in the Church: yet what good account can he give of this Creed, if
we have no other safe way to speak of divine matters, but in Scripture
language, and may not safely use deductions or inferences from Scripture? How
many Terms are there in the Athanasian, which to seek for in the Apostles Creed
or in the whole Bible, were to as much purpose, as it was for the old affected
Ciceronian in Erasmus, to labor and toil his brains to turn that Creed into
Ciceronian Latin? Yet these are the Terms in which the Catholic Church has
thought she spoke safely in these Divine matters; But it seems she has spoken
all this while at the peril of her understanding. In the mean while the old
dormant Heresies may safely revive again, as the Monothelites that affirmed
that there was but one Will in Christ, and the Nestorians that asserted there
were two Persons in Christ, etc. Now, their Ghosts may rise and walk and invade
the Church again, under this Authors shadow: for though by immediate
consequences they destroy the Faith, and rob us of our Savior; yet these
consequences are only Rational Deductions, an human (or Heathen) way of
Argumenting, as he words it. But there is no safe way to speak of these Divine
matters but in Scripture language, Ipsissimis verbis; with the very same words:
Then these and twenty other sorts of Heretics are safe enough, unless they lay
aside their Disguises and turn such errant Mooncalves, as to state their
Heretical conclusions point blank contradictory to some expres propositions in
the Bible. But any thing to avoid the plague of School Divinity (as he very
feelingly calls it) though I dare say, he was never infected with it: But alas!
poor St. Augustine had a touch of it, and so had Athanasius before him. And, if
we believe this Author, Many of the primitive Doctors and Fathers being
converted from heathenism, and having by long and great industry acquired much
knowledge in natural Philosophy, Antiquity, History, and subtle Logic or
Sophistry, were very unwilling to abandon quite these their long studied and
dearly beloved Sciences (falsely so called) and therefore translated them into
Christianity, applying their Schoolterms, Distinctions, Syllogisms, etc. to
Divine matters, intending perchance through indiscreet Zeal to illustrate and
imbellish Christian knowledge with such Artificial forms and figures, but rather
defaced and spoiled it. Kindly and learnedly spoken of Learning in general, and
Reverently spoken of the Primitive Doctors and Fathers! Why, he could hardly
have declared himself with greater animosity and severity against Greg. de
Valentia, or Suarez, or some other of the late Popish Schoolmen. As for the
Fathers, that they were no defacers or spoilers of Christianity, it is defense
enough for them, if I allege in their behalf the Testimony of One that was
none of their greatest Champions, even Mr. Dalle himself: who in that very
book, which he was so many years collecting and writing on purpose to expose
them for all their little failings: yet he confesses and contends, that they
were guilty of no Errors amounting to Haeresies in their Controversies of
Faith. And by this Author's good leave, the Fathers were not the men that
corrupted our Christianity through Philosophy; but if any have done so, it is
rather that sort of men (the Popish Schoolmen,) who (pardon the expression)
Aristoteliz'd the Fathers. As for the elder Schoolmen their design was noble,
to draw the whole Scheme of Divinity into such order and method, that a Divine
might sit and see, as it were, his whole world of Matter before him; and to arm
him at all points where he might possibly be attaqu'd, they set themselves to
go into the bowels of all Controversies, herein they have often exceeded in
beating matters too thin; and I say not, all their Armor was of Proof, but
that which is firm and good, as a great deal of it is, ought not to be thrown
away because it is too heavy for some men's shoulders. That unlucky Pantaenus
set up Disputing (if you will take our Author's word for it) in a School of
Alexandria, though others verily believe that one St. Paul before him, disputed
daily for the space of two years in the School of one Tyrannus. And some differ
from this Author's Opinion, that the damnable Haeresie of the Arrians sprang
from the School of Pantaenus, they rather think, and our Ecclesiastical
Historians say, that Arrius's spleen had never wrought so furiously against the
Church, but only for a disappointment he received in his aspiring expectations
of some great Bishopric.

But we must needs look back to the second and third pages, to see how he
justifies all this, by alleging and proving, with a great deal ado, from
Reason and Scripture, that No man should be forced to Believe, for No man can
be forced to Believe. As for example (says he) If you hold a clear printed
book, with a clear candle, to a man of clear eyes, and able to read; he will
certainly read: But if the print be not clear, or the candle, or his sight not
clear, or he not learned to read; Can your force make him read? and just so it
is with our Understanding, which is the eye of our Soul, and a Demonstration
being as a Candle to give light; If then your Demonstration or Deduction, or
his Understanding be not clear, or he not Learned; You may with a Club dash out
his brains, but never clear them. It were easy to confound his Similitude, by
showing the disproportion between the parts of it. For he brings the sense of
Seeing, which is linkt and tied to the dull dimensions of a Body, and the
studied acquired faculty of Reading, which is the other term on the one side; I
say he brings these into comparison with our Understanding, which be calls the
Eye of our Soul; and a Demonstration, which he makes the candle to give it
light: But if it be, as he supposes here, a demonstration indeed about things
absolutely necessary for us to know, it must of necessity so irresistibly dart
its beams into the mind of any, that is not born without any brains to let them
in, as there shall need no force to clear them. But it is more to my purpose to
retort his Similitude thus: Suppose you held a clear printed book, with a clear
candle, to a man of clear eyes; and suppose the man shuts his eyes, and suppose
all men that look upon him attentively, see that he shuts his eyes (as that is a
thing may be seen) [or, which is all one, that he stops his ears (as some that
will not so much as enter our Church-doors) refusing to hear the voice of the
Charmer, charm he never so wisely] and suppose this book thus held to him be
the Word of God it self: Then, since the same Word tells us, that some may be
damned for shutting their eyes upon it; Certainly the Magistrate may, and ought
to force him not to wink so hard, but to open his eyes: (and sure all this may
be done without dashing out his brains with a Club) and then indeed it will
follow that he will certainly read, but not otherwise. The Jews in Rome are
constrained once a week to hear a Christian Sermon: The Pope indeed cannot make
the Jews Believe, but he can make them hear, unless they close up their Ears
with wool, or purposely send their Wits a wool-gathering (as the Country phrase
is) which would be a fault in their Wills, to be punished if it could be
proved: Whereas this Author would ascribe all to men's want of common
Understanding, or want of Discerning ability in the matters now in question,
which are the great matters of Faith. But God is wanting to no man in
Necessaries: and the Reason which helps every man to see these Truths, at least
when they are showed and pointed out to him, is a vulgar, a popular thing. But
sure this Author imagines there are a world of Idiots, that he may not be
forced to admit any man's hypocrisy and wilfulness to be gross and palpable.
Thus he concludes, Our force may make him blinder, but never see clearer, may
make him an hypocrite, no true Convert. No! by this Author's favor, he that
shuts his eyes, yet pretends to see clearly, is an hypocrite already: and we
that would oblige him to open his eyes, whether he will or no, do not go the
way to make him an Hypocrite, but a true Convert from his sinful Hypocrisy.

But he still eagerly pursues his ill-chosen Principle in mistaken charity: If
a man do not see a thing clearly contained there (i. e. in Scripture) you
cannot force either his Sight or his Faith. p. 4. He had said before, p. 3; He
then that believes the Scripture, cannot but believe what you clearly
demonstrate from Scripture, if he has clear brains: if he have not, your force
may puzzle and puddle his brains more, by the passion of Anger and Hatred, etc.
And again in the same page, Can you drive Faith, like a Nail into his head or
heart with a hammer? Nay, it is not in a man's own power to make himself Believe
any thing farther than his Reason shows him; much less Divine things. Put this
together (and there is a great deal more of it) and see whether it does not lead
us into the very dregs of Mr. Hobbs's Divinity; i. e. Fatality. For if it be
not in any man's power to discern Fundamental truths (of which we are treating
in this Chapter) when they are laid before his eyes; Then I am sure it is none
of his fault: of which the result is this, that whereas our Savior has
pronounced, that He that believes shall be saved, and he that believes not
(that is, he that disbelieves after a sufficient proposal) shall be damned;
This Author will have it, that He who does not believe, even after such
Evidence, cannot believe, and therefore cannot be saved, and so cannot avoid
being damned. Only, this Author is better natured indeed than Mr. Hobbs, who
allows the Civil Magistrate to correct, and even to cut off those that are thus
necessitated to do evil (as men kill Vermin or noxious Creatures:) Whereas this
Author (as much in the other extreme) dares go no farther than that a Christian
Magistrate should punish or banish those that trouble the Church of Christ with
Doctrines apparently contrary to the clear Text, and such as are destructive to
Christianity. But who will judge what is clear? or what is thus destructive?
the Party accused, or the Civil Magistrate? For, as for the Ecclesiastic, he
makes the Church all along in this discourse a party: and we shall see anon
that he will not allow her, even in a General Council, for a competent Judge, to
be relied upon by both Parties, no not in points of Faith. But if he dares go
no farther than this, I dare not go so far: I am very far from thinking, as he
does, that it was any part of S. Paul's meaning in this place, I wish they were
even cut off that trouble you to wish there were a fitting Power, that is a
Christian Magistrate to punish or banish them: and his Reason is nothing, why
St. Paul should not mean here, a cutting off from the Church by way of
Excommunication: for that (says he) was in his power to do. Why then should he
wish it? It might be in his Power, i. e. he wanted not authority, but yet he
might justly apprehend it a perilous thing, formally to cut off and
excommunicate so numerous and powerful a Faction, for fear of some great
apostasy from Christianity; from which these men, by his favor, had not cut
off themselves though they ran into Schisms or Haeresies. Therefore he might
well consider it as a thing rather to be wished than executed: and if this were
no wish of St. Paul's making, that the Troublers of the Church might be punished
or banished, then I cannot find in my heart to go along with this Author in
making it my wish, that they should either be banished or more severely punished
for the present, than by forcing them into our Churches (whence they have
indeed banished themselves) that they may hear our defenses of an honest Cause.
And if it wring their Consciences to come thither to Prayers, I cannot choose
but make another wish, that they might first be satisfied either in our public
or private Conferences with their Leaders. The notable effect of such
Conferences, he that does not believe let him but read what my Lord Bishop of
Winchester, (then of Worcester,) printed, of what passed, in that short one, at
Worcester-house, or the Savoy, where as soon as ever it came to writing in
Syllogism, which this Author so despises here and every where, the adverse
Party was driven immediately to that wild Assertion, that whatsoever may be the
occasion of sin to any, must be taken away. But this Author, without making any
such provision for their Souls, as has any thing in it of constraint is for
leaving them to their fate. As for those (says he) who keep their erroneous
opinions to themselves, who neither publish nor practice any thing to the
disturbance of the Church or State (as if to set up Altar against Altar, were
no disturbance) but only refuse to conform to the Churches established Doctrine
or Discipline (pardon me if I say) I cannot find any warrant, or so much as
hint from the Gospel to excuse any force to compel them. No! let all such live
like Pagans, and go to no Churches at all, if they have a mind to it.

But he knows full well there is a common Objection about the Magistrates using
any compulsion, taken from S. Augustine. Some Heretics Donatists came to him
in his later days, and gave thanks that the Civil Power was made use of, to
restrain them: Confessing, that was the means which brought them to consider
more calmly their own former extravagant Opinions, and so brought them home to
the true Church. To this he answers, First, the Donatists are well known to
have been a Sect, not only erroneous in judgment but very turbulent in
behavior, always in seditious practices. and in that case (he tells us) he
showed before how the Civil Magistrate may proceed to Punishment. But, he says,
our case is not in repressing seditious practices, but enforcing a confession
of Faith, quite of another nature. Though I could easily and justly retort him
a sharper answer, I say only this; the very Act against them calls them
Seditious Conventicles: and openly to break so many known Laws of the land,
after so many reinforcements, is not this to be turbulent? And was it not ever
understood so in all Religions? even in heathen Rome? The most learned P.
Aerodius tells us, when a sort of Innovators kept their Conventicles in
opposition to the way received among them of worshipping their Gods, the Senate
made an Act there should be no such Meetings, as tending to the disturbance of
the State, and the public Peace. Et si quis tale Sacrum solemn and
necessarium duceret, and if any one judged such a Sacrifice to be necessary,
and a Solemnity not to be omitted without a Crime, he was to repair to the
Praetor, and the Praetor was to consult the Senate, when there were at least a
hundred Senators present (so that the Rump of Parliament would not do neither);
And if the Senate gave him leave, it must be with this condition, That when he
performed his offices of Religion his own way, ita id sacrum faceret, dum ne
plures quam quinque sacrificio interessent, there should not be above five
persons allowed to be present at the Meeting. The self same number, besides the
Dissenter's own Family, is so far forth endured by an Act of this present
Parliament, that there must be more then five to make it a Conventicle: But
what are 5 to 500? as commonly they meet: And are not such Meetings formidable?
and whatever is formidable to the Church and the State, is not that also
Turbulent? And if they were thus solicitous to preserve and establish, as a
sacred inviolable thing the Idolatrous worship of their false Gods, what care
of ours can be great enough to secure the Godly worship of the only True God,
when it is shaken by such Divisions? But to return to St. Austin; how did the
Civil Magistrate proceed to punish the Donatists for their sedition? even by
laying his Commands upon them, at that good Father's Request, That they should
come to Church. A severe punishment and very likely indeed to be inflicted upon
them, as Traitors to the Imperial Crown! But secondly, says he, to answer more
particularly this story, I suppose, says he, there is no man such a stranger to
the world, as to be ignorant that there are Hypocrites in it; and such for
ought we know) these seeming converted Donatists might be, who for love of this
World more than for love of the Truth, forso^k their heretical Profession,
though not their Opinion, etc. Incomparable! for ought he knows, they were
Hypocrites! So for ought we know, This Author is all this while a Jesuit, and
writes this Pamphlet only to embroyl us Protestants. But he goes on; unless it
can be evidenc't, that these Donatists hearts were changed, as well as their
Profession (a thing impossible to prove) all this proves nothing. Very good! So
unless it can be evidenc't that he writes all this Pamphlet from his Heart
(which is impossible to be proved) it all signifies just nothing. But thirdly,
says he, put the case their hearts were really changed as to matter of belief,
it is evident their hearts were very worldly still, grovelling on the earth, not
one step nearer Heaven. A horrible charitable saying! we may forgive him any
thing after this: as his supposing, in this next sentence, that the pruning of
the Tree by the Magistrate's Sword is doing evil. As for his putting the Case,
Malchus had been converted by St. Peter 's cutting off his ear, and saying,
this would not have excused St. Peter 's act, which our Savior so sharply
reproved, and threatened by perishing with the sword: In the first place (I
humbly conceive) St. Peter was no Civil Magistrate: unless he that will not
allow him to draw o^e Sword here as a private Person, will admit the fine
Monkish conceit of Ecce duo Gladii! behold here are two Swords, the Spiritual
and the Temporal for St. Peter and his Successors. And secondly, for his
cutting of Malchus's ear, I suppose there is some difference, between the
Magistrat's giving one an ear to hear with, or compelling one to hearken and
listen to reason; and cutting off ones ear, or setting one in the Pillory.

But all this, he says, in reference to compelling men to believe or conform,
still reserving to the Magistrate power according to Scripture to punish evil
doers, not evil believers, not who think, but do publish or do practice
something to subvert the Fundamentals of Religion, or disturb the Peace of the
State, or injure their Neighbor. God, the only searcher of hearts, reserves to
himself the punishment of evil thoughts, of evil belief, which man can never
have a right cognizance of. And does he take all this pains only to put a
fallacy upon us? and only to prove the truth of an old Adage, that Thought is
free? And that no body can be punished in this world for his Thoughts only? or
that it is all one for a thing not to be, and not to appear to be? But for all
this, evil believers, if they profess their evil belief, plainly appear evil
doers, and are to be treated accordingly: Though I speak nothing more against
them or their greatest Speakers, than that they may be brought to our Churches,
and give us a fair hearing.

Animadversions upon his Appendix to the former Subject.
HIS Appendix to the former Subject begins with censuring the modesty of our
first Reformers, for their deference to the Ancient Fathers and Councils. We
thank him for this reproach. Hereby (says he) they were reduced to great
straits in their Disputations. He shall find himself reduced into much greater
before we have done with him, for thus aspersing and deserting, both the
Ancients, and the Modern Fathers (as I may style them) of this Church, and the
Reformation. His reason for thus rejecting Antiquity is, because some Popish
Errors were crept very early into the Church. The Superstition of the Cross and
Chrism were in use in the second Century. They were in use: but none were then
allowed in any superstitious abuse of them. As for the Millenary Error, and the
Necessity of Infants receiving the Blessed Sacrament, (Errors indeed, but no
Heresies, and common Errors, but by no means to be charged on the Church
Universal of those Ages, which is but a Vulgar Error,) since the Papists, he
confesses, reject them both, I hope these do not prove the Fathers Papists, nor
yet Heretics, that the Reformers should balk them on these Surmises.

However this Reformer urges them where he thinks they serve his turn. St.
Cyprian tells us, that every Praepositus, which we call Bishop, is to be guided
by his own Reason and Conscience; and is responsible to God only for his
Doctrine. St. Cyprian only says in the place which he means (though he is not
pleased to quote it) that a Bishop was Praepositus, and responsible to no
other: that is, to no other Bishop, and particularly not responsible to the
Bishop of Rome. But St. Cyprian never says that a Bishop is not responsible to
the Church, or a Council of Bishops, which without any usurpation have always
taken to themselves the authority of calling even Patriarchs to an account for
their Doctrine: as that General Council held at Constantinople by the Emperor
Constantinus Pogonatus, judged, and condemned five Patriarchs at once, and
Honorius the Pope of Rome for one of them.

But St. Augustine believed it a direct Heresy to hold there were any
Antipodes. It Is true, he held there were none, and rallied those that held
there was any such thing: This was for want of understanding the System of the
World, which in those Ages few understood before the late Discoveries. But St.
Augustine is so little guilty of believing it either a Direct or an Indirect
Heresy, that he scarce makes Religion at all concerned in it. And if he touch
it only as a point of Philosophy, then his Reputation of Wit is as safe as that
of Herodotus and Lucretius, and many of the greatest Wits, that made as fine
Burlesques as he, upon this opinion of Antipodes. But if so great a Divine as
St. Augustine, and so great a Scholar as Lactantius were liable, to such
mistakes for want of skill in the Mathematiques; Then why does this Author
inveigh against that part of Learning for a Divine, in his preaching Chapter,
p. 27. and 28?

He cannot but wonder that men of any brains or modesty should so grossly abuse
this saying of our Savior, He that will not hear the Church, let him be unto
thee as a Heathen and a Publican, spoken of private differences between man and
man, to be referred to the Determination of the Church, that is the
Congregation of the Faithful which they usually and by order should assemble
in; and refer this to the Church in General, in matters of Faith, not in the
least pointed at there. He will have much ado to make us believe that a man is
not bound to tell his Brother of Heresy, a matter of so great Consequence, and
to tell it to the Church, if his Brother will not hear him; and yet prove that
he is bound to do this, in matter of private difference, or petty quarrel
between them. Wherefore (to borrow his own Conclusion of this matter) I pass
this over as very Impertinent.

And so is that which follows, I do not believe, nor am I bound by Scripture to
believe such Expositions as the Popish Church makes of this place, That the
Gates of Hell shall not prevail against the Church. Who bids him believe the
Popish Expositions? But if that place be not spoken of the Roman Church,
therefore does it signify nothing to prove the Visibility or Indefectibility
of the Catholic Church? But it is plain he advances the notion of a Church
Invisible, a Church that shall be driven into the Wilderness (where her Ninety
nine Ceremonies are to be left to attend her) scarce visible in the World:
whereas the Learned understand that place of the Church's Persecutions the
first three hundred years, which made it the more illustriously visible: and
our nineteenth Article calls it the visible Church of Christ.

Now he proceeds to the business of General Councils, whether they may Err in
some points of Faith? The Church of England acknowledges they may Err, and have
Erred in things pertaining to God. No doubt of it. But this Author immediately
flies higher, with a why not in some points of Faith. All the Evangelical
Doctors grant (says he) that the later General Councils have Erred: if so, why
not the former? what promise had the former from Christ more than the later?
True, there is no more promise to a Council of the fourth Age, or to that of
Nice, than to one that should be held in the seventeenth, if it were as General
and as free. He asks concerning this promise, The Gates of Hell shall not
prevail against the Church, what is this to a general Council (which is) not the
thousandth part of the Clergy, nor the thousand thousandth part of the Church?
We shall find him mistaken in this Account at long running. Lastly, he shows
his charitable Divination, in foretelling how much more mischief General
Councils would have done, if more of them had been convened. But say you (says
he) No General Council determined those errors? Why? because none was called
about them: had any been called, who can doubt but they would have avowed that
in the Council, which they all taught in their Churches? This he says: but his
Yea's and Nay's are no Oracles with us: For why should they be, when a General
Council is not so with him? Then presently he humbly craves pardon for his bold
presumption: viz. of these hard sayings against General Councils. And I as
humbly beg leave to speak for them in behalf of the Church of England, and the
Law of the Land: both which I Am sure I have on my side, and both give much
deference to General Councils. The twentieth Article of our Church has these
words, The Church has Authority in matters of Faith; And the Statute of the
Land runs thus, (Eliz. 1. c. 1.) That none, however commissioned, shall in any
wise have authority or power to order or determine, or adjudge any Matter or
Cause to be Heresy, but only such as heretofore have been determined, ordered
or adjudged to be Heresy, by the authority of the Canonical Scriptures, or by
the first four General Councils, or any of them, or by any other General
Council, wherein the same was declared Heresy, by the express and plain words
of the said Canonical Scriptures, or such as hereafter shall be ordered,
judged, or determined to be Heresy by the Court of Parliament of this Realm
with the Clergy in their Convocation. But for all this we do not confess or
acknowledge all or many of those for General Councils, which they at Trent, or
which Bellarmine is pleased to account for such, a parcel of eighteen of them;
But those very few we count for General, which the Church Universal, before the
unhappy breach between East and West, received for General.

But now to unravel the skein which is much entangled and ruffled in his
confused way, the diminutions he puts upon general Councils may be reduced to
these three Heads.

1. That General Councils may err in points of Faith, because they have no
promise to the contrary. 2. Because they want Numbers, even of the Clergy,
being not the thousandth part of them: and therefore (to put this Argument as
far as ever it will go) are not truly General. 3. Because of the prejudices
they that should sit in Council would bring along with them; and then who can
doubt but they would avow that in the Council, which they all taught in their
Churches?
1. In answer to his first Exception, I premise these limitations. If by erring
in some points of Faith, he means some points belonging to the Piety of Faith
(as Divines use to speak;) or to the Perfection of Faith, or remotely belonging
even to the essence or necessity of Faith, and wounding it by far-fetcht
Consequences; I will not deny but even great Councils may possibly be
circumvented for a time: yet I may safely venture (with our Learned and Pious
Dr. Hammond in his Paraenesis) to reckon it among the pio credibilia, or a
thing piously credible (as we say) that God will not permit a Council truly
General and Free to err in Fundamentals; which thus far only I presume to
explain, that God will never permit them to deny and declare against any
Fundamental Truth, and much less to affirm and declare any Fundamental Error
to be a Truth, and least of all to declare it a Fundamental Truth. And if this
Author asks which of God's Promises give us encouragement to hope and believe
this, I refer him to the Prophet Isaiah, chapter 30. v. 20. And though the Lord
give you the bread of Adversity, and the water of Affliction; yet shall not thy
Teachers be removed into a Corner any more; but thine eye shall see thy
Teachers. That this Chap. is Evangelical will not, I suppose, be denied; and so
is that Isai. 54. 17. and every tongue that shall rise against thee in judgment
shall thou condemn. If this be denied to be spoken of the Christian Church, I
prove it undeniably from our Savior's application of the Context. And all thy
Children shall be taught of God. It was then a Prerogative of the Christian
Church that her Teachers should be driven into a corner no more; that is, be
always Visible, even when the Lord gave them the bread of affliction, that is,
even in times of Persecution, as the lawful Catholic Bishops were never more
Visible than when the intruding Arrians, that were far enough from being Lawful
Bishops, persecuted them away from their Bishoprics, and drove their Persons
indeed into Corners; yet they held intelligence, and kept exact correspondence
with one another still, and with all their Flock's that persever'd in the
Faith, and disowned the uncanonical Arrian Bishops. This they did by their
Literae Formatae; by this method the Church preserved in her Communion her own
Members amidst their Dispersions, and before any General Councils, except at
Jerusalem held by the Apostles themselves, though the greatest Heresies arose
early; by this means they proclaimed their Faith loudest of all, then when they
were silenced and excluded by the Arrians from their own Pulpits; as the
Sufferings which happened to St. Paul fell out rather to the furtherance of the
Gospel. So that his bonds in Christ were manifest in all the palace, and in all
other places, and many of the Brethren in the Lord waxing confident by his
bonds, were much more bold to speak the word without fear; Phil. 1. 12, 13, 14.
And if the Church has a power of Condemning in judgment every tongue that rises
up against her; I think this amounts to a promise, a glorious promise (and
there are many such) that all or near all the Bishops in the Christian world,
shall never apparently fall from an Outward Profession at least of the
Catholic Faith in Fundamentals, and profess the quite contrary Heresies
instead of them. And he that will not allow thus much at least to the Church,
must run into wild aerie suppositions of sheep without any shepherds, People
without any Priests, a Church without any Orders, and as invisible as the
Leviathan makes it in his parallel between the Church of Rome and the Kingdom
of Fayries. Thus sar methinks this Author should go along with me, for all his
asking What Is this to a General Council? for the promise was made to the whole
Body of the Church; since even he acknowledges that the Gates of Hell would
prevail against Her, if the Devil could so wound the whole Body of the Church
as to destroy the Vitals, the Fundamentals. And if this be not a mortal wound
to the Body, to lose all its Pastors and Teachers by their falling into formal
and mortal Heresy; then nothing at all can wound it deadly, but a total
Dissolution of all and every one of its members: and at this rate, this Author
may fancy, as a certain great Enthusiast did before him, that Himself alone
might be the Catholic Church, and that it might wholly subsist in his Single
Person. But he would fain avoid this inconvenience, though a General Council
should fall into such Fundamental Error, and persist in it, because Secondly
(says he) It Is not the thousandth part of the Clergy, nor the thousand
thousandth part of the Church, which in the Scripture is always put for the
whole Body of the Faithful, though of late it be translated into quite another
notion, and taken for the Clergy only. I answer, if the Church be always put
for the whole Body, yet the Clergy sure are the voice or the mouth of that
Body, and God has promised Isa. 59, 20. And the Redeemer shall come to Zion (to
put it out of doubt that all this Chapter is Gospel;) and unto them that turn
from transgression in Jacob, says the Lord: As for me this is my Covenant with
them, says the Lord, my Spirit which is upon thee, and my words which I have
put in thy mouth, shall not depart out of thy mouth, nor out of the mouth of
thy seed, nor out of the mouth of thy seeds seed, says the Lord from
henceforth and for ever; Farther I add out of the Author's own confession, in
his Chap. concerning Bishops and Priests, The Church was always governed by
Bishops, that is by one, whatsoever you please to call him, set over the rest
of the Clergy, with Authority to ordain to exhort, to rebuke, to judge and
censure as he found cause: no other form of Government is mentioned by any
Author for fifteen hundred years, from the Apostles downwards. I make account
then, that a General Council of Bishops is, as Tertullian styles it,
Representatio totius nominis Christiani, a Representative of all that are
called Christians, Inferior Clergy as well as Laity; And what then if they are
not the thousandth part of the Clergy, nor the thousand thousandth part of the
Laity? nay, to strengthen his Argument, what if there is not actually met in
Council the twentieth part of the Bishops that are in the Christian World?
Suppose that all are invited with assurance of safe conduct to a place of
security, and time enough allowed for their convening, all which can never be
effected without the consent of Kings and Princes, and without that it never
must be attempted: nevertheless, because very many cannot possibly take such a
voyage, and must needs be absent, it was never pretended to have the force of a
General Council, till it was manifestly accepted by those absent Bishops of the
Church Universal wheresoever dispersed, or at least by the visibly Major part
of them, so that it might appear to any one at first glympse (as they say) and
without any scrupulous enquiry, which way their much greater number had
declared themselves. If there be still a few Dissenters it is inconsiderable, as
what were seventeen Arrian Bishops (for there were no more Arrians that were
lawful Bishops) in the Council of Nice, where there were three hundred and
eighteen Catholic Pastors, equal almost to the number of Servants bred up in
the House of Abraham?

I know not then what they mean that would evacuate and annihilate almost the
whole authority of general Councils, by sending us to Ortelius's Mapps or
Geographical Tables, bidding us take a survey of all the great Cathedrals or
Metropolitical Churches, and then demand of us whether there were ever any
Councils so Ecumenical from which above half the Bishops of these Sees were
not absent? True; but if they were present upon their own Charges, and did but
what would be certainly required and exacted of them there, or wherever they
were; they must needs accept, subscribe, recite, publish, and preach, and cause
to be preached over all their Dioceses, the Decrees concerning the Faith, such
as the Nicene Creed or the Constantinopolitan: Nay, the Bishops did many times
summon Provincial and National Councils to sit a little before and at the same
time with the General, on purpose to ratify and spread their Decrees. And if
any Council was pretended to be General and Free when it was not so, as was the
second of Nice, which being overaw'd by an Imperious woman Irene, decreed
Image Worship, Immediately two or three other great Western Councils, as that
of Francfort in Germany, and that at Paris, and the British Bishops, declared
themselves openly against it. And Charles the Great himself wrote against it.
Whilst this exact Correspondence was among all the Bishops of the Catholic
Church, and in every Diocese between the Bishop and his Clergy, and all his
Flock, then as one of the Fathers glories, If any man asked the way to the
Catholic Church no Heretic had the face to show him the way to his
particular Church, as if that were the Cotholique. And thus although the Body
of the Clergy be a thousand times greater (as this Author observes) then any
Council, and for this very reason for their unmanageable numbers, cannot be
convened in one place, nor their Suffrages gathered, yet it is observable that
the Universality or whole Fraternity of Christians that were in the Apostles
Fellowship or Communion, had honorable mention made of them and of their
concurrence in the Letter of Decision from that first Apostolical Council in
the Acts of the Apostles. And so the Legates of Princes and several Learned
Priests and Deacons have been Assessors to General Councils, but no Voters
there (for that were endless) and consentiendo subscripsere (that is)
subscribed their assent and consent; therefore our Author is not to think it a
Monopoly of ours, though the word Church be sometimes used and taken for the
Clergy only: for as I showed before, there can be no sheep without Shepherds,
so it is an equal absurdity to imagine, that the Shepherds should be preserved
without their sheep.

But if he will grant any thing at all by way of deference to the Church's
Judgment, he must not talk to us of the whole Body, nor of his thousands and
thousand thousands, for fear of falling into the new oral-Tradition way, that
rare invention of learning what is the Faith, by sifting and finding out (if we
can) what was held at all times, and in all places, by all the Midwives, and
the Dry-Nurses, and the Common People.

I come now to his last pretense against the Church's Authority in General
Councils, The Prejudices they that should sit in Council would bring along with
them: and then who can doubt but they would avow that in the Council, which
they all taught in their Churches?

This again is a piece of my Author's unthought of Popery, for the Papists are
not able to endure Councils free and truly General, which never failed to
swinge their Popes and their Popery too; that is, the Quintescence of it the
Popes Supremacy: as no doubt they would condemn many other of their Doctrines
and Practices, but that as there have been no such Councils of later Ages, so
indeed there was no such Church of Rome in former Ages when there were such
Councils: and the Council of Trent has made their Church so quite another
thing, that we may well retort them their own Question, Where was your Church
before Luther? Now ask them for any Decree of a General Council for praying to
Saints, or worshipping Images, or the like, if we reject the Council of Trent
(as we would do the Assembly of Divines at Westminster) they reply, the visibly
major part of the Church, both East and West, have introduced it: and (as our
Author expresses himself in another Instance) They all have taught it in their
Churches, therefore if they met in Council, who can doubt but they would avow
it? I desire to remind these overhasty Opiniators of that well known and
remarkable story concerning Paphnutius, at the Sacred Ecumenical Council of
Nice: when the Question was debated earnestly there, Whether married Priests
should be separated from their wives? or no? and when the Major part of Bishops
inclined to the wrong side, even to forbid them cohabiting any longer, the
great Paphnutius stood up and set them right; proving the ancient Tradition or
Custom of the Church to the contrary: And with one Speech he turned the whole
Council: for it is one thing to strike at random, as commonly Polemical Authors
do, or to oppose those passages in their Adversaries books, which are ready to
fall of themselves, and to pass by those which urge and press them harder; and
quite another thing to keep one another to a point, till it comes to an issue
upon the whole affair: But this can hardly be when two Controvertists are as
far distant from each other in place, as they are in opinion. But if sober,
good and learned men were convened and met, prepared with study, not for a vain
wrangle or victory, but for a mature deliberation to give such an account of
their Belief, that all might end in some fixed determination, after full
conviction; If Praesidents and Moderators were designed, with one to do the
office of a Prolocutor or Speaker, to see that all might be done orderly, and
proceed in strict and punctual form of Argument (a Method which this Author so
often declares against, that he will not be this Prolocutor.) If the
Ratiocinators on both sides might have days given them, to recall any thing
that slipped inconsiderately from them, that there might be no lying at the catch
(as they say;) If such a Conference as this were protracted from time to time,
till all were ripened for an issue; If there were ready at hand all books that
would be of use, Fathers especially, and Former Councils, and above all the
Holy Bible placed upon its Throne (as it was the custom to place it in Ancient
Councils;) If I durst hope to see but such ^ Council as this, then I would hope
to see the Church restored to all her Ancient splendour and Serene glory. For I
will but appeal to this Author (if we may compare those great things with our
lesser affairs) if he has ever done any exercise at Divinity-Disputations in an
University, what a vast difference there is between sitting in ones study and
writing such Pamphlets, as his and mine; and defending in the School a material
Question in Theology, where one stands a Respondent enclosed within the compass
of his Pew; as Popilius the Roman Ambassador to King Antiochus, made a circle
with his wand about that Prince, and bid him give him a determinate answer
before he went out of it. Which puts me in mind of a certain Pope's reply (and
it was a very shrewd one) when he was importuned to call the Council of Trent,
he put them off a great while with this Answer, that he would not fight with a
Cat in a Cupbord; meaning, he was loath to contend with all the Praelacy shut up
together, for then he knew they would fly in his face; and so they did in the
faces of his Successors, notwithstanding all their Artifices: whereas he could
deal well enough with them severally and at a distance; And it is no wonder at
all, if the Bishops of the Duffusive Church are fain to suffer and groan under
many of the Papal Abuses, which they might easily remedy and reform, if they
were protected (as they ought to be) by all Christian Kings and Princes, in
meeting and acting freely. But incomparably beyond any short and cursory
Debates (such as our Disputations in Universities must needs be) are the
advantages of a free General Council (but Trent was neither Free nor General)
to bring things in debate to a conclusion. I speak now only of those advantages
that are in the nature of the thing it self: what shall I say then of the
Supernatural Assistances, from the Blessing of Heaven upon such a Meeting? For
though it be promised, Wheresoever two or three are gathered together in my
Name, there am I in the midst of them, yet sure St. Paul strengthens the
Argument, 2 Cor. 4. 15. that the abundant Grace might through the thanksgiving
of many, redound to the glory of God. For by parity of Reason, if the
Thanksgivings, then the Judgments, and the Censures, and the Decrees of many,
if not all the Governers of the Church, either met in one place, or afterward
consenting to the same thing, must also redound to the glory of God. Whom
therefore he dishonours by Prophesying thus aforehand, that if any General
Councils had been called, they would have miscarried. And so I have done with
his two first Chapters concerning Articles of Faith; upon which I have been the
longer out of a just Indignation, to see a man in his Enthusiastic fit
threshing of Fathers, and Councils, and Faith, and all into splinters. For what
is behind, though he will ever and anon enforce me to make a severe reflection,
yet it will hardly be capable all along of a serious refutation.

Animadversions on his Chapter concerning Ceremonies.
I Have seen the Picture of an old Lawyer with this inscription upon it, that
for a time he was the only Sergeant at Law in England; and then he appeared at
the Common Pleas for Plaintiff and for Defendant, and said what he could say on
either side with great indifference to both. So one would think this officious
Advocate thought himself the only Divine in England, and that in this case of
Ceremonies he had a privilege of speaking pro and con. But he quickly shows
himself so earnest a Pleader for one party (for so he magnifies himself to the
Non-conformists in his Charitable Admonition, p. 64.) that he makes himself a
party against the other. He begins this Chapter with condemning the
Non-conformists for breaking an evident Commandment without as clear evidence
from Scripture, (which he expressly affirms they have none, either against
Church Service, p. 22. or against the Ceremonies, p. 64.) to satisfy
themselves in a doubtful matter, which (says he) without doubt is damnable.
But he ends this Chapter with a long Speech he puts in our Savior's mouth,
pronouncing, as at the day of Judgment, the very Sentence of Damnation against
the Governers of the Church, and Exacters of Obedience to its Laws: Had I mercy
on you, and should not you have had mercy on your Fellow Servants? with the
same measure you meted, it shall be measured to you again. I tremble to go
father. So do I tremble at this bold Harangue. But where are his Reasons? Why,
if Rational and Pathetical be all one, we shall have demonstrations enough. But
touch any of his flowers of Rhetoric, and it is hardly worth the while to stand
still, and see them fall in pieces of themselves. Reduce his Declamation into
form of Argumentation, and then he will make another Declaration (as we shall
find one anon in his Chapter about Preaching) against Syllogisms and Enthymems,
and that Logic which discovers fallacies in Ratiocination, as clearly as
Arithmetic does cheats in our other accounts.

First then he flourishes in the Air against the Surplice. What wise and loving
Father would put a Winding sheet on his head to fright his weak and simple
Child? A Similitude is not bound to run upon four legs (as they say) but this
of the Windingsheet is so lame it has never a good one; for do we wear our
Surplices (as the Turks do their Turbant) on our heads? I have heard indeed of
one that wore his Surplice upon his heel: He was a kind of
Halfquarter-conformist, and when he came into the Reading-pew where he must put
on his whites, he used to hold up one of his legs behind him (like a Goose) and
resting it upon his Matt, he would hang the Surplice upon his foot, that he
might be able to swear, he both wore the Surplice, and bowed the knee at the
Name of Jesus. This man indeed did not take a course to fright the People with
the Surplice. But now to speak really (as this Author uses to speak) is a
Minister in a Surplice a sight so terrible, that any one should be really
troubled in mind at it? we read indeed in the last of St. Mark, that when the
holy Women entering into the Sepulcher, saw a young man clothed in a long white
garment, they were affrighted. But St. Matthew informs us, that his countenance
was like lightning. No wonder then if they were afraid. 'Twas the habit wherein
Angels by the will of God almost constantly appeared: The color which our
Blessed Savior chose when he entertained his particular Favorites with some
gracious manifestations of his Majestatick presence, and was transfigured
before them: His raiment was white as Snow, beyond what any Fuller on earth can
white it. Such Vests the glorious Saints are described, to our understanding,
to put on in heaven, as clothed there in pure white linen. But after all that
has been spoken and written heretofore in defense of the Surplice, if any still
are troubled in Conscience at it (for that he means by frighting the weak and
simple Children) we must tell them, They are afraid where no fear is: and the
Psalmist makes that no very good Character; And we must advise them out of the
Apostle; Brethren, be not Children in Understanding, but in Malice be ye
Children, but in Understanding be men.

But now he offers at a Reason for laying aside the Ceremonies upon the same
prudential consideration that prevailed with the Reformers from Popery to
retain some of them: because then the People were for them, but now they are
passionate against them.

To this he first answers for us, and perhaps with more reason than he is
aware, that many of our Flook are as zealous for these things, as others
against them. It may be so, and I hope they are as zealous as they ought to be,
for it is good to be zealously affected always in a good thing, Gal. 4. 18.
And we (says he) had rather gratify the obedient Conformers, than the
Disobedient Gainsayers.

And that the rather because it cannot be gainsaid, but the obedient
Conformers are very considerable too for their very Numbers, as well as for
their exemplary Piety to God and their eminent Loyalty to the King. A certain
importunate Mediator (such an one as our Author makes himself) for the
Dissenting Brethren, argued thus with a Reverend great Prelate. My Lord (said
he) Why will you give offense to so many of us by imposing several things which
your selves confess not necessary? Why (said the Bishop) and your selves
confess those things are not unlawful; O but (replied the Advocate) some of our
Party think those things unlawful, and some of ours (answered the Bishop) think
them Necessary (and for order and decency some Ceremonies sure are Necessary.)
Well, but cannot you persuade your men (said the Other)? and cannot you (said
the Bishop) prevail with yours? So the Dispute ended, nor was it indeed
possible for any Solid man (granting that we do not clog our Communion with any
thing unlawful) to say more for them, without speaking against them, and
confessing their weakness, or their wilfulness, that they could not, or would
not be persuaded. And if this be reason enough why they must be gratified and
humoured in every thing, then it follows that only Knaves and Fools must govern
the world.

Secondly I answer, if the Surplice with other things were (as he confesses)
wisely and piously retained by the Reformers from Popery, when probably many
long nourished up in those Ceremonies, would not have come into the Church, had
all those been cast out; Then it would be imprudently (not to say impiously)
done of us (who ought in pursuance of that most blessed work, the Reformation,
to make it still our aim and design to bring the Papists at home and abroad
into the Communion of our Church) if we should set them further off by turning
out all our Ceremonies; several of which ('it is true) are theirs also; but many
Ages before they were either theirs or ours, they were the Primitive Church's:
and therefore to think them Popish for being also theirs, is as senseless as to
think there was Popery before Noah's Flood. And if the Church of England, which
is now the terror of Rome, and the glory of all Protestant Churches, be thus
considered as a part (undoubtedly the best and happiest part) of the Catholic
Church, whose members are innumerable, and all of them, both in the Greek and
Latin Churches, nay in several of the Protestant Churches, especially the
Lutheran, are far more addicted to Ceremonies than we in the Church of England,
and use almost all the same Ceremonies, and others like them; then certainly we
should give offense to almost the whole Christian world (whereas we ought to
give them none, though they were Jews or Gentiles) if we should abolish all our
Ceremonies. Then how ill does this Author argue in crying, the People, the
People are passionately against the Ceremonies, and putting the business on
this issue of counting Noses?

But thirdly I answer, this is Trying the Church of England, as they did its
Sacred Desender in the name of the Commons of England, when they had not one in
ten of their Party. Nay perhaps Dissenters properly so called, are not in some
Dioeceses above one in twenty. Many absent themselves from our Churches out of
pure Indevotion and Laziness. Many frequent the Meeting Houses out of
Curiosity, and many for want of room in their Churches and Tabernacles at
London, or because of their distance from their own Parish Churches in the
Country. The stiff and irreconcilable Dissenters appear to be a handful of men
in comparison.

And this I hope is enough to answer this old bug-bear-Argument started by
those that found out the trick of gathering hands, and mustering up the
Broom-men and the Chimney-sweepers to cry no Bishops.

Then he raises an Objection for us, and answers it after a fashion. But you
have no hopes of gaining him: you believe it is not Conscience but Faction and
wilful perverseness keeps him off. Oh! do not despair, believe better of him,
etc. We are very far from Despairing, if good means be used, and the right
course be taken. And we can hardly believe worse of the Dissenters, than this
Author would make us believe of them; for p 24. this Author styles them blind
and wilful Separatists. And is it not apparently wilfulness and faction? I
beseech you, my Brethren, take heed of thus dissembling with God and the World,
or take heed of giving your selves up to the Delusions of a mistaken Spirit.
And p. 65. it is most evident their Spirit savours something of the Pharisee,
the proud Pharisee. But whereas he is pleased to reinforce these Objections
against the Dissenter in our behalf, But you know it is so with him; (viz. that
we have no hopes of gaining him, etc.) Indeed we know no such thing; but the
quite contrary, we know very many that have been as highly prejudiced in their
Education, and yet have submitted afterward to clear Conviction, and are now
very useful men in the Church of England.

But I take no pleasure in giving this Author the mortification of answering
himself by his own contradictory Propositions. That here which bears any color
of Reason, is only this, that we should yield the more to save his soul: and we
should cover a multitude of our own sins. I answer if that be true which he
says, and which I fear, that they do thus dissemble with God, then to frame a
new Law to serve their turn, is to countenance, and as it were establish
Hypocrisy by a Law. If they have covered their sin, like Adam, and hide their
iniquity in their bosom, this would but make them add sin to sin: and so
instead of covering a multitude of our own sins, we shall only follow a
Multitude to do evil.

His next address is to the Bishops, with, Oh! my Fathers, my Fathers. But (oh!
the pity of it that twenty such Oh's will not amount to one Reason;) his humble
request to them is, that they would vouchsafe to read the fourteenth Chapter to
the Romans. Since he is not pleased to draw any Argument thence into any form
(and because I shall meet him again pelting of this Text anon) my humble Answer
shall be likewise by way of request to him, that he would vouchsafe to read
Bishop Sanderson's Excellent Sermon upon the third verse of that Chapter, Let
not him that eats not, despise him that eats, etc. That Bishop I hope was
no Persecutor, and yet he plainly shows, that restraining some men's
Extravagancies by good Orders, and requiring Obedience to those orders, is not
that which this Author is pleased to call Restraining the Liberty of the
Gospel to the rigidity of their Discipline.

Then he bids us gravely to build our Church on a Rock, and not on the Sand of
Ceremonies. And again, this is a very sandy and dirty foundation. Our Church
(God be thank't) is not now to be built, but upheld against such as himself,
who, like Her in the Proverbs, plucketh it down with his own hands. Who ever
before wandered into such an Extravagant Supposition, as if we made our
Ceremonies our Foundation? yet, by his favor, as contemptible as these
Materials are of Sand and Dirt, if every one may be allowed to pick out all the
Mortar that is made up of them, the House must fall. But is not the Body more
than Raiment? Substance more than Ceremony? Little did our Savior intend that
saying against the Surplice. But (to follow this Author in his aerie race) what
if the Body (that is the Substance) be more than Raiment, (that is than the
Ceremony)? yet the Ceremony is not nothing. And if he takes away all the
Raiment with his Naked Truth, he will leave it such a Naked Church, without
either Ornament, or Covering, that it shall never be able to hold out against
the storms with which he thunders and threatens us.

To his next fine mock at our Ceremonies, as if they were Novelties, and
saying, that in those great Storms, when the whole World of Jews and Gentiles
were Enemies to the Church, there was not one of our Ceremonies to preserve it.
First, I demand, Is it Reason the Church should be as Unceremonious now in the
times of her Settlement, as then in the days of her Persecution? Now that there
is a Church at the end of almost every mile, as then when there was hardly one
in twenty miles? Now when the Sovereign Powers of the World spread their wings
to cover and protect her, as then when they stretched out their Arms to vex her?
Now when Kings and Queens, her Nursing-fathers, and Nursing-mothers, bid her
quit her Cave and show her beauteous face in stately Cathedrals, as then when
she was fain to hide her self in the Wilderness, and her Members were forced to
wander about in Sheep skins?

But then again he contradicts himself to say there was not one of our
Ceremonies in those Primitive Times, for p. 10. he contends the Superstition of
the Cross (as he very mannerly terms it) was in use in the second Century. That
the Cross was used in Baptism very betimes (which is the only superstitious use
we make of it) there are Testimonies enough. St. Cyprian's known words (de laps.
in principio) are these, Frons cum signo Dei Pura, Coronam Diaboli far non
potuit, Coronae se Domini reservavit. Those Foreheads which the Sign of God had
purified (viz. in the Baptismal Ablution and Confirmation) abhorred the
Garlands of Satan, and reserved themselves to be crowned by God: And the same
Father again (Tom. 1. lib. 4. ep. 6. Pamelii) Muniatur Frons, ut Signum Dei
incolume servetur. Arm your Foreheads unto all Boldness, that the Sign of God
may be kept safe. A parallel place. to which is that of St. Austin (Tom 8. p.
262. E.) upon Psalm. 68. Frontosus esto: Quid times fronti tuae, quam Signo
Crucis armasti? (i. e.) Be not weak foreheaded (viz. in the Cause of God) why
art thou afraid for thy forehead, which thou have armed with the Sign of the
Cross? For the Surplice, the Testimonies of St. Chrysostom and St. Hierome,
that the Priests in the ancient Church officiated in white Vestments, are well
enough known. For kneeling at the Eucharist, and bowing at the Altar, I give an
account of their Antiquity, when he leads me to say more of them. If he wonders
why I bring but three or four Testimonies for our 99 Ceremonies (as he calls
them afterward.) I answer, there are but three or four Ceremonies that I know
of; But for a need there are 99 Testimonies for them.

By this time he has spoken so much against the Surplice, that now he thinks it
his part to say something for it: and at the same time to tell us why he
appears so great an Enemy to it; (for he confesses he is so) because such dirty
nasty Surplices, as most of them wear, and especially the Singers in
Cathedrals, where they should be most decent, is rather an intimation of their
Dirty lives: and has given his stomach such a surfeit of them, as he has almost
an averseness to all. This is a strong Line and a weak Argument: Such another
weighty exception to the Surplice, as was made by the merry Country Parson, who
called it a Rag of Popery: and when he was cited for it into the Spiritual
Court, he made it appear by the Parish-book of Accounts, that their Surplice
was bought in Queen Mary 's days, and therefore it was truly a Rag of Popery,
being worn all to pieces: But if the Parish would provide him a new one, he was
ready to put it on the next Sunday. The honest man was dismissed with his Jest:
But alas! our Author is in earnest. Though a Laundress may answer this, as
easily as a Semstress might answer the other Argument. Mean time we can only be
sorry that he is so squeamish, and that his sick fancy should be so much too
hard for his Judgment; for in the foregoing Sentence, he, in his own Judgment
much approves a pure white Robe on the Minister's shoulders, to put him in mind
what Purity becomes a Minister of the Gospel. He much approves it, yet within
the compass of six lines, he has almost an averseness to all of it. But we must
not change whatsoever is Ancient and Decent in our Church, as often as any one
(whoever he be) pleases to change his note, and to acquaint us in the same
breath with his admirable Sympathies and Antipathies to the same thing. His
laying this ugly charge to most of us, that we wear such dirty nasty Surplices,
is to fling dirt enough that some might stick. As for the Singing-men in
Cathedrals, if they are so much to blame, as he supposes they are, either for
their dirty Surplices, or, as he intimates, for their dirty Lives, yet order
may be easily taken, that neither of these (to follow his noble Metaphor) shall
escape a scowring, without taking quite away either the Surplices or the
Singing-men out of our Cathedrals. But if he follow the grain of this old
threadbare Fallacy, from the abuses against the use of any thing, whither will
it carry him? The Surplices in Cathedrals are commonly foul, therefore let them
be taken away for ever: so the Cathedrals themselves sometimes are none of the
cleanest, therefore (instead of sweeping them) let them be pulled down and
taken away too.

His next Effort is against bowing toward the Altar; which in his own Judgment
he allows and practices in some measure. Then, I hope, the thing it self is not
unlawful. No; but truly many of our Church men give great suspicion to the
People, that they also believe (as the Papists) Christ corporally present
there. If we give this great Suspicion, we give great Scandal, which is a great
Crime in us, if it be true. But it is a great Scandal to say this of us, if it
be not true. But how do we give this great Suspicion? because (says he) the
Minister or the Reader does not only how once at his entering into the Church,
but bows again as he has occasion to pass and repass by the Altar; Surely (says
he, speaking the Apprehension of the Vulgar) in reverence to the King of Kings
he supposes there sitting. What! even at those times when there is no
Communion? and yet at those times there is the same bowing. This is
demonstration enough against such an odious Supposition of our believing Christ
corporally present there. We do not then give them this great Suspicion: it is
not a Scandal given, but causelessly taken. So, for any thing he has done upon
this point, I may conclude it as he does, it is done with little or no Reason,
and with a great deal of Superstition.

He proceeds to that grand debated Ceremony (as he calls it, and therefore we
must dwell the longer upon it) of kneeling at the Lord's Supper. And first, he
honestly grants that we are to perform this act of Devotion with all possible
Reverence. I ask no more. But he quickly nulls his grant: Is this (says he) to
be expressed altogether in the outward posture of the Body? No certainly: nor
altogether in the inward posture and frame of the Soul: but in Soul and Body
both together: or else, I trow, there is not all possible Reverence. Well, If
outward Humility be the thing we contend for, we ought to show it to our God in
the humblest way, and that is by prostrating rather than kneeling. Pray let
them voucsafe to kneel with us before they talk of falling lower. Kneeling is a
posture of greatest Reverence in these Western parts of the World, where
Prostrating is not much in use: and it is a Gesture most convenient for the
Devout Receiver, who as he kneels may abase himself to the Dust, and again
(with the Royal Votary) may lift up his hands to God, and may look up.

But he runs away with it for certain, that our Lord Christ administered the
Sacrament, and that the Disciples received it sitting. And sure he remembers
our Savior best, who does every thing as he did, both in Substance and
Ceremony; and so we find the Primitive Christians did, etc. In answer to this I
demand how does it appear that the Apostles received it sitting? because they
sat down to supper? But it appears from the Text, the posture they used at
Supper was altered before they communicated. St. John's words are express, that
Supper was ended, and that Jesus rose from Supper, and then washed the Disciples
feet. Now the word (...) alone without (...), where does it ever signify the
Lord's Supper? it seems that followed after it. So this Author can never bring
the least good proof from Scripture that they sat at the first Eucharist. Now
for any one to fasten that upon Divine Revelation, which he has no ground to
infer either from the written Rule or the Church's Testimony, what is it but
adding to the Word of God? And then let me ask him his own Question, p. 3. How
they will avoid that curse in the last of the Revelations, if they add to the
words there written?

Sure I am that in whatever Posture the Apostles were first admitted, which is
uncertain, yet it was such as wise and sober men, and the custom of the Country
allowed, as a Posture expressing Reverence, because (as this Author himself has
set it down) Sure Christ would not have allowed any unfitting posture. In the
mean time the Dissenter cannot deny but that the words of Administration, The
Body of our Lord Jesus Christ which was given for thee, preserve thy Body and
Soul to everlasting Life, are an excellent good Prayer. Now if they will not
give us a reason why it is unlawful to kneel, I will give them a reason why it
is simply unlawful (except in case of necessity, as for those that lie on their
Sick-beds, or the like, etc.) to sit and pray solemnly, (for I speak not of
sudden, short, ejaculatory Prayers, but) I say, it is simply unlawful to pray
thus solemnly to the most high God in a sitting posture; because it is simply
unlawful to pray most solemnly in an unpraying posture, (if I may use such a
word). Therefore this Author is too liberal of that which is none of his own,
in allowing, that a man may receive sitting without any Irreverence.

But he tells us so we find the Primitive Christians did. What does he mean?
(for here he is somewhat obscure) that the primitive Christians received it
sitting? or that they did not always receive it kneeling? It Is true, the
Ancient Church many times receive it standing, as all the fifty days between
Easter and Whitsontide, and on some other Festivals. There Is a fair difference
sure between sitting and standing. Standing we find is a Posture for Solemn
Prayer in the Scripture: so is not sitting. But let him show, if he can, that
the primitive Saints, on other days, working or fasting days, (for St.
Augustine and St. Basil both agree in witnessing that sometimes there were
Communions on Wednesdaies and Fridaies) let them prove, I say (or else they
prove little to the purpose) that on those days, when they kneeled at the
other Prayers, they ever rose to receive the Communion standing. For the
Fathers tell us plainly, they forbore kneeling then merely out of an Excess of
Joy. Most plainly Tertullian renders a general account why they intermitted all
their strictness, that is, all that might infeeble the Knees, or weary the
Flesh at this season, Quid impedit, nisi necessitas gaudii? What hinders (says
he) but the necessity of Joy or Exultation? But it is certain the primitive
Christians were very far from sitting at the Holy Eucharist, which this Author
rashly concludes they did; for they did not at any of their Prayers or
Religious Offices: much less at this the most solemn of all their Services. For
Tertullian upon that Supposition which was generally received, that the Holy
Angels were invisibly present at the devout Prayers of the Church, or of good
Christians in private, to offer them up to God (not that he supposes those
Angels had any Prayers offered to themselves, for all they were supposed to be
so nigh at hand; as the Prophet Elijah, when he knew God's Army of Angels
actually incompass't him round, yet prays to God, and not to the Angels, or
any of the Captains of that heavenly Host, that his affrighted Servant might
have the Grace to see them, Lord open his eyes; And Abraham's Steward the good
Eliazar, though the Prophet his Master had told him that God's Angel should go
along with him in his way, yet all the way he prays to none but to the Lord
God of his Master Abraham; yet upon this supposition, that an Angel always
stood by whilst men were devoutly praying, Tertullian) in his Book de Oratione
cap. 12. is highly displeased with those that offer to sit down immediately
after their Prayers are done: and how much less is that than to sit at their
very Sacramental Prayers? But I do not allege Tertullian for this or that
zealous Opinion of his, but as a Reporter of the Church's practice, and there
where he is plain and full (as he is here) he may be allowed for a Demonstrator
in matter of Fact. And thus he declares himself in this place, which is not so
commonly noted, against those that did but sit down at their ease just after
their Prayers. Eo apponitur and irreverentiae crimen, etc. To this (says he)
may be added, that it is such a criminal irreverence, as may easily be
understood even by the Heathens themselves, if they have any sense about them;
for sure it is irreverend to sit down under the view, and placed as it were
over-right the view of that Person for whom you have the highest Reverence and
Veneration, how much more is it not most irreligious to do so in view of the
Living God, while the Angel that attended at the Prayers is yet standing by;
unless we have a mind to upbraid God that our prayers have tired us? But if we
pray with Modesty and Humility, we shall so much the more commend our Prayers
to God. Now let Heaven and Earth judge, whether the primitive Christians sat at
receiving the Sacrament or no? I shall make one Observation more upon this
whole matter, that although comprehension be the only thing he pretends, yet
there must needs be Toleration at the bottom of it. It Is true indeed that p.
23. though he desires such a form of Service, such Ceremonies also to be
established, as may give most general satisfaction, yet he desires what is
established may be generally observed, and not a liberty left (as some do
propose) to add or detract Ceremonies or Prayers according to the various
Opinions and Humors of Men: for certainly this would cause great Faction and
Division, etc. I suppose he means well here, but quite contrary to his own
Principle, p. 19. where he treats about kneeling or sitting at the Eucharist,
and concludes that in these things no man ought to obey till we can rectify
his judgment. Now suppose the Injunctions for kneeling were taken away, are we
sure that all they and we should have such rectified judgments on the sudden,
as to agree together about Receiving, either sitting or standing, or all in any
one posture? Nay, are we not morally certain of the contrary, that there could
be no such agreement? therefore he does well in adjuring us to admit them in
any posture, which is Toleration. Now consider, pray, in this one point, what a
Confusion would ensue when in the same assembly, One might Receive the
Communion decently kneeling: A second (believing that to be Superstition)
demands it sitting: A third (because it is reported the Pope himself sometimes
receives it sitting) judges that (as much better he may) to be Popery,
therefore he will have it leaning or lying along, as he thinks the Apostles had
it. A fourth would be better pleased with a running Banquet, because the Jews
eat the Passover in haste; and because they have it so in some places beyond
Sea, every one en Passant. Would not (as St. Paul concludes in another case)
any that should come into such a Congregation, think they were all mad? Oh! but
if they come in sincerity of heart, etc. He may well make an If of it. But if
they are never so sincere, yet alas! what is their, or our heart in comparison
of Christ's heart? and yet he kneeled in several places, we read, and lifted up
his Eyes, and lifted up his hands toward Heaven. And yet it is Superstition in
us to kneel at receiving the Body and Blood of Christ. But let us be tender and
compassionate to our weak Brethren. If any tender Consciences, that is (as he
explains the word) weak Judgments (and I am not so uncharitable as to doubt but
there are many such) be seriously troubled at kneeling, we are heartily
troubled too at their Discontents. We kneel to God, and pray for their
Conversion and Satisfaction. We could even kneel to them that trouble them with
vain Scruples, and pray them (with St. Paul) to study to be quiet. We readily
offer our selves either to answer their Reason (would they bring those could
speak it, or rather, write it in strict form of Argument: which yet they would
never do, but only make these Orations) or else if we could not answer it, then
we would quit our Opinion, and embrace their's. But if they have nothing to
oppose to us but only this, and if this suffices that they are offended at it;
at this rate there can be no settlement in the World, either of Church or
State. For they may deliver themselves from all its Injunctions, if they please
but to take a Caprice against them. This is assuming to themselves a perfect
Negative Vote against any Law, without giving any reason against it. If such a
Spirit as this be not destructive of Christianity, nay, of all Civil Society,
and the ready way to set the Heels above the Head; we understand not any thing.

He huddles up the rest concerning other Ceremonies, Cross in Baptism, Ring in
Marriage, etc. slighting them all, and giving them up, without the least shadow
of an Argument: Except this be one, Wherefore I conclude (says he) this point
of Ceremonies, with St. Paul, He that regards the day, regards it unto the
Lord, and he that regards not the day, to the Lord he does not regard it,
etc. So he that kneeleth, kneeleth unto the Lord, and he that kneeleth not, to
the Lord he kneeleth not. Now do but examine this Conclusion, and whence he
draws it. Consider (pray) that regarding or not regarding these days, that is
the old Jew^sh Holy Days (as presently I shall make it appear) was neither
commanded, nor forbidden by the Christian Church, but left indifferent: Is
kneeling at the Blessed Sacrament left as indifferent? is it not commanded by
the Church? do not they that refuse to kneel disobey the Church? So then his
Argument in the Parallel runs thus, He that regards the day, regards it
unto the Lord, and he that regards not the day, to the Lord he does not
regard it, etc. So he that kneeleth, kneeleth to the Lord, and he that kneeleth
not, to the Lord he kneeleth not; that is, to the Lord he disobeys the Church,
and refuses to kneel.

But I must needs take notice of his next passage, because it is a pleasant one,
and because he desires us to observe it, how St. Paul in this place, Romans 14.
calls the zealous Observer of Ceremonial matters, the weak Brother, and
commands the strong not to despise him. So that now the Tables are turned, and
we of the Church of England (our poor weak Mother, as this Author would make
her) are the weak Brethren. But what (I pray) were those Ceremonies which the
Apostle thought it a weakness in some to Opiniator? Is it not evident they were
the Jewish, out-dated Ceremonies? which the Apostle allowed them to Bury
honorably, and therefore was con^ented they should fall gently, and sink by
degrees. Yet he was discontented at their untimely Zeal, that urged them still
as necessary, and obligatory upon the Christians. He permitted them to have
some regard to a day (viz. an old Jewish Holiday) and if they were over-fond of
it, he charged those that better understood their Christianity, to bear with
their weakness. But if they obstinately persisted to Judaize, as if they were
still obliged to it, then he tells them, Galat. 4. 10. (a place undoubtedly
parallel to that urged here, Romans 14.) Ye observe Days, and Months, and Times,
and Years, I am afraid of you. And to assure us he strikes at those who
maintained the old Mosaic Rites, contrary to the new Christian Ordinances, he,
following the same thread of Discourse, enters his Protestation, Chap. 5. v. 2.
Behold, I Paul say unto you, that if you be circumcised, Christ shall profit
you nothing. Tertullian, one of the most Learned Fathers, (whose authority is
great, where he reports) descants upon these passages of St. Paul smartly, and
fully to my purpose. Then (says he) we do Galaticari, that is, act like the
Galatians indeed, when we observe the Jewish Ceremonies and Legal Solemnities,
for if the Apostle intended in this place to take away all devout observance of
Days and Months, why (says he) do we celebrate Easter every year in the first
Month? (that is, in March) why do we go about and carry with us Joy and
Exultation, wherever we come for fifty days after? It Is apparent then, St. Paul
calls them, and only them, weak Brethren, who having embraced Christianity, yet
hanker'd after the Jewish Festivals and their other Ceremonials. Now to say
that all Christians, who contend for the keeping of the Festivals, and
observing the Ceremonies of the Christian Church, are guilty of Judaizing; and
that all such Ceremonies are to be abolisht (all which if it be not said, there
can nothing be drawn from St. Paul to this Author's purpose) would be spoken
almost as senslesly, as was that saying of a certain weak Brother indeed, that
Christmas was a Jewish Ceremony abolisht at the coming of Christ. Or to infer
(as this Author is pleased to imply) because the Zealous observer of some
Ceremonial matters is styled by St. Paul a weak Brother, therefore all Zealous
observers of any Ceremonies are weak Brethren? it is argued much at the same
Rate, as another inferred, from some other words of St. Paul, Acts 17. 22. Ye
men of Athens, I perceive that ye are in all things too superstitious. But
Athens, (said he) was an University: whence I conclude (said he) that all
Universities are much given to Superstition.

What follows to the end of this Chapter, is so thin spread, that I cannot
bring it all to make up any thing like one solid Reason; and it seems he is not
studying Reason, but Every man in his humor, for (he tells us) Man has a Will
as well as a Reason, and will have his own Will in many things: Even the Godly.
So then the Godly will have the Ceremonies down, because they are our
Will Worship (as they use to call it;) But they will have their own will, that
is, they will set up a certain Idol, called Propria voluntas, or
Self-will-worship.

For the overture he makes us at last of a New Set of better Ceremonies one
day, if we will part with these; though we beleve his Interest may do much with
the Anti-ceremonian Party; yet we dare not trust to that in this affair,
because he would have the New Ceremonies to be such as shall be Edifying, but
he does not consider that such would be Significant Ceremonies: which has been
the great Objection against ours, ever since Bishop Morton undertook their
defense. So that if any be introduced in lieu of these, they must be
Insignificant, that is, Impertinent Ceremonies: Therefore without trying his
Experiments, we desire to retain those we have already.

But with what Forehead does he charge us, in Christ's name, with proceeding so
severely against them in our Courts of Judicature, p. 20. and with our violent
pressing of Ceremonies, p. 21. which he humbly conceives has been a great
hindrance from embracing them; Men fearing our Intentions herein to be far
worse (that is, more Popish) then really they are? Whereas every body may see
with half an eye, what patience and gentleness has been exercised toward this
Party: and how that has emboldened them to stand upon such terms, and at such a
distance as amazes the Protestants abroad, those at Geneva, and those in
France: as the Reverend and worthy Dr. Durell has made it sufficiently appear
from the Letters and Expresses of his Learned Correspondents in those parts. In
short, if there be no such fears of Popery coming in, then has this Author
written a dangerous Pamphlet to instill into the People such dreadful
apprehensions of it, as of a thing almost unavoidable, unless this project of
his can prevent it; and then there is not that danger which he supposes, of
pressing the Ceremonies, and standing our ground: and if there be just fears of
Popery coming in, then those he Patronizes against any severe Proceedings, are
men of exceeding honesty and prudence to stand out all this while, and venture
all, themselves and all, by not coming into the Church of England; and if they
have a reserve to themselves, that they will run into it one day; then is it
well or wisely done of them, to weaken the Fort, by pulling down as much as
they can of it, when they mean to enter at last, and trust themselves in it?

But as he is blaming us for being so hard-hearted, and preaching to us not
only Comprehension but Toleration, as I showed before, he has one expression
toward the end of this Chapter, p. 20. so extremely pleasant, that I confess
it inclines me after a great deal of dullness to no unpleasant thoughts: That
expression of his is this; that We may break the heart strings of many in
winding them up so high, and thus crack all their Religion: and perhaps we
should find it so our selves, had the Non-conformists the screwing Us up, as we
Them. Why, this of the Screw is neater Rhetoric than that of his nasty
Surplices, or the Winding Sheet, or the Nuts to an Ape, or that of knocking
Faith into the head with a hammer, or that of a King leading on a Morris dance,
capering and frisking most featly, when his Country was invaded. But although
this Author declares himself not much a friend to any thing that is
Mathematical, yet his cho^ce Metaphor of Screwing up the Non-conformists as an
Instrument of Music (as if we meant to make Organs of them) puts me in mind of
a rare Engine, an extraordinary kind of Organ, which I have seen described in
words at length, and in a Figure too a Brass-cut, in Gaspar Schottus the
Jesuite's Mathematics, or Mag. Univers. To^ 2. l. 6. p. 2.
rather Mechanical Tricks. He describes (or rather borrows from Kircher, his
brother Mountebank, the description of) a Musical Instrument found out (he
tells us) by an Ingenious fellow, to divert a certain great Prince from a fit
of Melancholy. So he took a company of Cats all of a different size, and
consequently (says he) of a different Tone or Note: all these he put together
into a kind of Chest that was framed for the purpose, and placed them so, that
their Tayls should be gently screwed up through certain holes in a board; and
so they should be fastened all along in a row, and Needles under their Tayls so
disposed or placed, that as the Musician struck the Keys, the Needles pricked
their Tayls, which so nickt the Cats, when the Organist came to play a lesson
upon them, that still as they were touched they set up their Notes, some high,
some low, according to their several Capacities: which made such harmony (says
he) as made the Rats dance, and the men ready to burst with laughing.

Just such a Machine of a Church would this Author make us, as this Musical
Instrument, if instead of our Screwing up the Non-conformists (which we do not)
or their Screwing us up (which once they did sufficiently) he could screw them
into the Church, without more ado, by this Project of his for Universal
Toleration (at least of all, or very many Sects, except the Papists;) for by
what he delivers, not only concerning the Ceremonies, but also concerning
Articles of Faith, we may well conclude, that he would not only have the
Presbyterians (who seem to stand out only upon Punctilio's of Ceremonies) but
also Independents, Anabaptists, and I know not how many more Sects (if they
call themselves Protestants) taken into the Church: or rather into the Drag-net
(as Bishop Laney calls it in his Sermon about Comprehension) large and
capacious enough to hold the Leviathan himself: whom this Author follows a
great way in his Notions of Sufficient or Insufficient Means for Peoples
Conviction. And when all such are received into the Church, what will they do
but set up their Cries, and make their rude Noises in it, if any thing in it
afterward happens to pinch them? Then instead of any Harmony or Concord, I
doubt there would be nothing in the Church but such a Discord, as would make us
only ridiculous to all that come near us.

Animadversions upon his Chapter concerning Church Service.
HIS next discourse concerning Church Service is all of a piece with the
foregoing one about Ceremonies; but one comfort is, it is not of so great
length, and every whit as remarkable for shortness of Reason. Yet here, as he
makes his entrance, he is a pretender to Reason; for he slights and passes by
some, with whom he has no Reason to expect that reasonable Arguments should
prevail. Is he then for Reasonable Arguments? But he should have added this
Caution, Provided they be not deduced from Scripture, for you have seen he
thinks it unsafe to make Deductions, that is to Reason, from thence. Well, he
Supposes there is nothing in our Common Prayer Book that is directly contrary
to the Word of God (and I may justly suppose, till the contrary be proved, that
there is nothing in it contrary to the Word of God, either directly or
indirectly;) and p. 29. He also Conceives it absolutely necessary to have some
Form prescribed to be used by all, etc. But now, In Christ he humbly beseeches
the Governors of the Church calmly to consider, Were it not better to have
such a form of Service as would satisfy most?

It is to be doubted, or rather it is out of doubt, that most who are so
unsatisfied with this, are disgusted with all Set Forms, or would not be
satisfied with any other. Therefore we must be excused from trying his trick,
till he or some other Undertaker have corrected Magnisicat, and the People, the
People (whom he would have so caressed) have declared themselves satisfied with
it, or else have subscribed a Blank, to be satisfied with whatever the New
Projectors shall introduce.

His next Pique is at our saying the Second Service at the Altar, which (he
says) was retained by the Fathers, and first Reformers from Popery, as
carrying some resemblance with the Mass, the Peoples delight, which being now
become the Peoples hate, should for the same Resemblance by the same Reason be
taken away.

For our Reading the Second Service at the Altar, any one that can but read,
and is not a mere stranger in the Old Liturgicks, knows that the Prayers were
at the Altar, many whole Ages before Popery, either Name or Thing was heard of.
Therefore, unless this Author knew the Reformers thoughts, he can have no
reason to put it upon them (not at all for their honor, though he would fain
have it so) that they prescribed this as carrying some resemblance to the Mass,
the peoples delight. Why should he dream they did it to follow the Multitude in
the Novelties of Popery, and not rather to follow the Primitive Church? I
suppose the Reformers meaning in prescribing the Priest's going up to the Altar
still, was to declare and testify to the Christian World, that the Church of
England highly approves Communion upon all High Days, as the Christian
Sacrifice of Commemoration, and the most Sacred Office in our Public Worship:
and as it was constantly used in the Ancient Church upon every Lord's Day, and
every Solemn Festival. They would no longer allow the Priest to receive the
Sacrament alone, because there was no ground either in the Scripture or the
Fathers for such a Solitary Communion. The very terms sound like a
Contradiction: But for all that, the Refor^ers from Popery kept up the
Communion Service at the Communion Table, and so the Rubric orders it still,
where the Place will bear it (for it must be confessed, many of our Parish
Churches are so built, that the Second Service cannot be audibly read from the
East end: But where it can, there it ought to be) for a very sufficient reason,
that the mem^ry at least of Weekly (if not Daily) Sacraments might not be lost:
and that, if the Peoples Devotion could be raised again, which the Monkery of
those times had turned into the Formality of Communicating once a year (as the
Roman Church requires no more of Lay persons) then the Priest should be in his
station to show himself ready to Administer, not only thrice a year (which is
all our Church has thought fit to exact hitherto) but every Sunday and
Holy Day. It were better then that we fell to our prayers and endeavors, that
the People may be so well fitted and prepared to Receive, as the Primitive
frequency of Sacraments may be restored, than to sit and make wishes, that
Reading the Second Service at the Altar may be taken away.

How consistent he is with himself in that which follows in the same page,
requiring Uniformity and Conformity after such and such Amendments, I have
already discoursed, and showed it unpracticable even upon his own Principles.
As for his varying the Phrase, and saying that again p. 24. which he had said
over and over, that Certainly his Religion is vain, that would abandon the
substance for want of the Ceremonies; which he acknowledges to be no way
necessary; I answer, that certainly his Religion is as vain, if not vainer,
that would abandon the Substance (as they do that are guilty of Schism) for the
Ceremonies, which he must acknowledge to be no way Unlawful.

But his next Figure is a rare one. Surely a very uncharitable mind that would
not leave ninety and nine unnecessary Ceremonies, to bring one sinful strayed
Sheep into the Congregation. An admirable Metamorphosis! Ninety Sheep in the
Text, turned into Ceremonies by this Commentator. And would the Author of Naked
Truth have all these poor Innocent Lambs, otherwise called Ceremonies to be
left naked and shivering in the Wilderness? But (as one replied upon the like
Exposition of another Text, Nonne sunt december Mundi? Englished by one, Are there
not ten Worlds?) Sed ubi sunt Novem? Where are the Nine? much less Ninety nine
Ceremonies. Sure he must take in all the Ceremonies at Court, and the Inns of
Court, the Sergeants Coifes, and their Men's party-colored Coats, and all our
University Ceremonies; (for we shall see anon, he is no great admirer of
Universities;) all these put together will hardly make up Ninety nine
Ceremonies, though we take in the Batchelor's Hoods and Lambskins: and why must
these be exposed to be devoured by Wolves? And yet we will go as far as he to
bring one sinful strayed Sheep into the Congregation, and convert him from the
error of his Nonconforming ways; and therefore he does ill to reflect upon us
thus, Yet these men will most passionately (and pardon me if I say, most
uncharitably and irreligiously) cry, Away with these Idiot-Sectaries and
Phanaticks: let them wander and perish in their own wild Imagination: We will
not leave one Ceremony, nor any one line of our Common prayer book to gain
Thousands of them. No, if you alter that, we will rather leave the Church and
go the Papists Mass. Whose words are these, but his own? Which of us ever said
so? therefore to retort him part of his own Censure, this is said Passionately,
I will not say, as he speaks, Uncharitably and Irreligiously.

After he has Complemented both Parties, calling us, too zealous Ceremonists;
Them, blind and wilful Separatists; He takes his leave: assuring us, that after
our charitable Condescension, their Populous (I suppose he means Popular)
pretenses will be so confuted, their mouths so stopped (or opened to ask the
more, but that is all one;) as for mere Shame, if not for Reason or Religion,
they must come into the Church: and their Pastors coming in, the Sheep will
follow. (Alas! it is rather the custom of these Shepherds to follow the Sheep,
whatever Toy they take.) So the Shop-prating Weavers will soon be deserted,
seeing their own Naked Folly; (somewhat akin to this Author's NAKED TRUTH).

Animadversions upon his Chapters concerning Preaching, Confirmation, and
Church Government.
I Knew a Scholar, a man of Wit, but no very hard Student, that quickly after
the Church was restored, would needs become an Author upon this Subject, How
necessary all the parts of University Learning are for a Divine. One of his
Books he presented to an Eminent Person, who told him pleasantly, that he was
extreme happy in the choice of his Subject, for he could not fail to
demonstrate effectually, whether he writ upon it Learnedly or Unlearnedly, what
need a Divine had of University Learning. Our Author in his Chapter upon
Preaching has very sufficiently proved the same thing, even where he makes it
his business to prove the contrary. Little did we think at this time of day to
hear of a Second part of Mr. Dell against Universities. The two Authors have
many Expressions in them so exactly parallel (if it were worth our while to set
them in two Columns, over-right one another) one would suspect the Junior of
the two for a Plagiary.

Yet have I no quarrel to him for his blaming that way of Preaching, upon this
or that nice Speculation, or that way of keeping always in Universals, and
never coming to Particulars, the Duty between Man and Wife, Parents and
Children, etc. or that way of Dividing and Subdividing into Generals and
Particulars, the Quid, the Quale, the Quantum; though he will find, if he looks
abroad, that this is at a very low ebb, and the Tide runs now another and a
better way. We care as little as he for a witty Rhetorical Harangue, or a
cunning Syllogistical discourse in the Pulpit: and it is almost as ill a
Character as can be given of a Sermon, or a Catechizing, to be ridiculously
Learned: yet to talk, as this Author does, as if University-Learning were
unnecessary to a Preacher, is to be ridiculously Ignorant of the use, or rather
the necessity of it as matters stand. He beseeches us to tell him, Did not
Christ and his Apostles preach the best way? and are not we to follow their
example? And I beseech him to tell me, Do not many good Divines preach the same
way, as far as it ought to be followed by those that only sit at the Apostles
feet? that is, Do they not with all plainness prove from Scripture all that
they deliver as God's Word? This is our Unapostolick way of Preaching (as he
calls it) the vain unedisying practice we now are in. Indeed we have no
Miracles at command to prove what we say (as the Apostles had) and therefore
must do it by Reason, which serves us to prove the Apostles did such Miracles:
and that again rationally demonstrates the Scriptures to be God's Word: and
then by the Testimony of the Church in several Ages (besides the understanding
we must have of all the Internal Arguments for it;) we must be able to show
that these are the Books of Scripture: and after all this, the same Reason must
be employed to establish the true sense and meaning of them. In order to these
great Ends, Reason must be improved by the studying of Arts, Sciences, and
Languages; unless we had all these infused as we needed them, we must acquire
them. Therefore his Argument is so far from holding good, God thought the gift
of Tongues needless after the Gospel was once spread over the World: I pray let
us be no wiser than God and his Christ; that is, Let us think the study of the
Languages needless: (for that he means, or nothing:) Yea, rather the study of
Tongues is therefore necessary because the Gift is ceast, and they cannot be
had without study: For the certainty of the Christian Religion, and the verity
of the Original Scriptures cannot be defended without a go^d measure of skill
in the Languages, Arts and Sciences, which every one that is not unworthy to
wear the Name of a Divine, should be competently able to do. Thus much the
Apostle St. Peter (1 Pet. 3. 15.) requires, even of the Laity in their degree,
that they be ready always to give an Answer to every man that asks them a
reason of the Hope that is in them. Now (to sum up the Argument) where is it
almost possible for these Acquisitions to be made, except in Universities?
Therefore we are still in that vulgar Error which he taxes as the General
Opinion, p. 27. that (except some very few extraordinary Instances to the
contrary) none are fit to be admitted into Holy Orders, but such as have
studied in the University.

But I beseech you (says he in the same page) what have these Sciences (falsely
so called) to do with the Gospel? and he instances presently in the
Mathematics as a Science (it seems) falsely so called. His quarrel at the
Jesuits in China, I must needs say, is an idle one, for recommending
themselves to the King and his Courtiers by the Skill some of the Society, whom
they sent for, had in the Mathematics: Whereas their Errand thither was to
preach the Gospel. What of all that? are these so Heathen-Studies, that they
are not to be tolerated even then, when they help to introduce Christianity?
But he seems to have the same compass of understanding in these Arts and
Sciences) (falsely so called you must think) that a certain old Head of a House
had, who coming one day by chance into the Colledge-Library, and finding there
an ingenious young man reading Christoph. Clavius (the Jesuit) upon Euclid,
Now a shame take thee (said he) why do thou not get thee some Protestant
Mathematics?

But sincence his greatest Pique is at Logic, and he can never leave
inveighing against Syllogisms and Human Deductions, and still he is rating off
his Preachers from Plato, Aristotle, Euclid, Scotus, Aquinas (so he puts them
together, p. 28. very Chronologically) and then very Logically
contradistinguishes Mathematics, Logic, Physic (whether Medicine or Natural
Philosophy) to Gravity, Sobriety, Meekness, Diligence, and the like. I should
not sufficiently acquit my self in the Defense of Universities (which I have
undertaken, for the Church of England no where looks more hopefully than in the
Universities) where the faculty of disputing is so well taught, as it can
hardly be learnt any where else, if I should not vindicate this Faculty from
being that, with which (he says p. 15.) God will not endure to be fettered, as
with Philosophical Sophisms and Human Consequences, but beyond his promise (I
suppose the very words of any Promise, as he explains himself, ipsissimis
verbis) he is not sure of any thing, though it seems ever so rational. It were
in vain to produce St. Augustine's Testimony (l. de Ordine c. 17.) where he
praises Logic, for he was one of the Fathers who by this very means defaced
and spoiled Christianity. And I know not whether Bishop Davenant have any
better Credit with him, who in his Learned Commentary on the Colossians, Chap.
2. falls into the same Heresy, and bestows great Commendations on that Noble
Art or Science. Perhaps it will be to no purpose to put him in mind that our
Blessed Savior was pleased to be a kind of Quaestionist (as our University
Statutes call young Logicians) when he disputed with the Doctors, being himself
but twelve years of age. And if I should tell him of St. Stephen's disputing
with certain of the Synagogue of the Libertines, who were not able to resist
the Wisdom, as well as the Spirit by which he spoke. Or if I should urge the
Example of Apollos an eloquent man, and mighty in the Scriptures, as well as
fervent in spirit, who mightily convinced the Jews, and that publicly, showing
by the Scriptures that Jesus was Christ: that is (no doubt) by deductions from
Scripture; Perhaps he would fancy still that they used some other Logic than
what we study at Universities, for which we are so much beholding to some
Heathen Philosophers, as if it were for the Honor of Christian Religion, to
have a Logic made on purpose to justify its Doctrines, and as if it were not
much more for its Honor to be able to maintain those Doctrines by the same
standing Rules which all the World, even the Heathen World, found out and
established, as immediately founded upon Natural Reason. I will therefore show
him that Christ and his Apostles did many times Argue explicitly in Mood and
Figure: and sometimes only so implicitly, that Men may be damned for not making
such Deductions as they ought to make from Scripture. As in St. John 8. 47. our
Savior tells the Multitude, He that is of God, hears God's words; ye
therefore hear them not, because ye are not of God. It Is a Syllogism in the
fourth Mood of the Second Figure, and runs thus:

Whosoever is of God hears God's words: But ye do not hear God's words;
Therefore ye are not of God.


St. Paul, Heb. 12. 7, 8. Argues in the same Mood and Figure.

Every Son is chastned by the Father: But ye are not chastned by the Father;
(on supposition that they would not endure to be so) Therefore ye are not Sons:
that is, ye are Bastards.


In the 22th of St. Matthew, Christ in his Dispute with the Sadduces calls that
Siripture, which was only a Rational deduction from Scripture: and they are
pronounced by our Savior to err and not to know the Scriptures, which did not
know how to collect a true Inference from Scripture, though they knew the Words
well enough. And yet our Savior's Argument cannot be explicated without two or
three Syllogisms, which may be these.

1. God is the God of the Living: God is the God of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob;
Therefore Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob live.


2. They that live not now in their Persons, but live unto God, must be raised
from the Dead: But they (viz. Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob) that live unto God,
live not now in their Persons; Therefore they (viz. Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob)
must be raised from the Dead.


3. They that now live only in their Souls, live not now in their Persons: But
they (viz. Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob) now live only in their Souls; Therefore
they (viz. Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob) live not now in their Persons.


Now what if the propositions of such a Syllogism happen to be disjoined in
the Scripture being about the same matter? is it not lawful and safe to put
them both together, and make the Deduction? For Example, a great Divine (who is
now a Reverend Prelate, the present Lord Bishop of Ely) was arguing with a
Person of Honor and Learning of the Romish Persuasion, against
Transubstantiation; and in that Discourse the Doctor ask't him, If the
Substance of the Bread and Wine remained no longer, but was done away, then
what did the wicked eat and drink, that eat and drank unworthily? nothing but
Accidents? The Nobleman answered, That they eat the Body, and drank the Blood
of Christ. Whereupon the Doctor urged him with this Syllogism:

Whosoever eats the Flesh of Christ and drinks his Blood has eternal life,
abiding in him, Joh. 6. 54. and 56. But no Murderer has eternal life abiding
in him, 1 John 3. 15. Therefore no murderer eats the Flesh of Christ, and
drinks his Blood.


The Major Proposition is Christ's own words; the Minor is the Apostle St.
John's words; the Syllogism is true in the form, as well as in the matter;
therefore the Conclusion is firm and certain. But that Honorable Person
smiled, and ask't the Doctor (in this Author's way) Whether he would have him
build his Faith upon Syllogisms? As if a true Syllogism, both for matter and
form, were any thing else but true Reason: And as if any part of our Faith were
(not only above our Reason, but) unanswerably contradictory to Reason, and to
the rules of Reasoning. Sure if the Apostle prays for a Deliverance from
unreasonable men, for some men have not Faith; implying that such men as have
not Faith are unreasonable in that, (however rational they be in other
affairs); Then we may safely and truly convert the sense of that Proposition,
and conclude, this or that (as Transubstantiation in the Case before us) is
indeed unreasonable, therefore it ought to be no part of any man's Faith.

A thousand more such Instances may be raised out of other Texts, but these may
suffice. This is that which St. Paul calls (...), to convince Gainsayers, the
very word of Aristotle, which is honor enough for that Philosopher.

If he had his wish (which is ours as well as his) that only grave, discreet,
and conscientious Persons we^e put into the Ministry: then he foresees, and
foretells that many Persons of good rank and estate, would think it no
dishonor, but rather an high honor to enter into it, as they did in the
Primitive Times. Though we cannot show so many Heroic Examples of this kind as
were in those blessed times, yet, thanks be to God, many persons of good rank
and estate do think it no dishonor to be Clergymen: and perhaps there were
never so many well-born men in the Church since the Reformation, though he
takes no notice of it, but rather implies the contrary, that men of Quality
count it a disparagement to be in Holy Orders. He might consider that two of
our greatest Prelates are Sons to Peers of the Realm, and that my Lord's Grace
of Canterbury my L. Bishop of Winchester, and my L. Bishop of Hereford (besides
several other Bishops) are Gentlemen of ancient Families, and Honorable Names
in this Kindgom: and always must be. Of such as these, the Prefacer to Mr.
Herbert's Country Parson speaks thus, with holy and lofty Eloquence; These
Noble Persons so excellently qualified with Virtues, Learning, and Piety, by
bringing along with them into the Church, the Eminency of their Birth also,
have cast a luster upon the Clergy, as greater Stars help to brighten up their
less shining Neighbors: and have advanced their Christian Priesthood to the
height it was at, under the Law of Nature, when it was the hereditary Honor
and Prerogative of the Firstborn, or chief of the Family, to be the Priest of
the most High God.

But whether University men or not it matters not, so as fully instructed in
the Doctrine of the Gospel by sound Commentators. And, why matters it not?
Where are they like to be so fully instructed in the Doctrine of the Gospel? or
even in sound Commentators (if they are all in all with him) as in
Universities? But, I suppose, he means some English Commentators, such as the
Assemblies Notes: for Dr. Hammonds will mislead them concerning Episcopacy. For
such as were never Academians, the Latin they bring from School, together with
some Hebrew, and little or no Greek, will hardly carry them farther, except
into some renowned Postillers. Yet these are the men whom he would set up to
Preach, with that which he calls the Demonstration of the Spirit. By which I
cannot gather what he means from all that he speaks, unless it be to speak (as
he does) Magisterialy: But that that is not to speak with Demonstration of the
Spirit, I refer him to the first part of the Friendly Debate, where that is
cleared sufficiently.

But, to return to the point we were upon, the Interest of Universities, Would
he have Men of Quality come into the Church, and not be capable of its highest
Dignities? And would not this be a rare Breeding for such as should be designed
for our greatest Dignitaries and Praelates, never to come near either of the
Universities, but to live in the Country poring upon his Commentators? A good
way indeed to make them Gentle-Readers; as he tells us, Julian the Emperor's
Kinsman, and afterward Emperor himself, was admitted a Reader in the Church:
or for a need, to make them such Lecturers as he is forming in this Chapter: or
such, as one verily thought King Henry the Eighth had been, when reading his
Life as it is written by my Lord Herbert of Cherbury; instead of the words of
the Noble Historian, which are these (p. 2.) His Education was accurate, being
destined (as a Credible Author affirms Council. ^r^d. l. 1.
) to the Archbishopric of Canterbury, during the life of his elder Brother
Prince Arthur, he mistook and read it, His Education was a Curate, being
destined to the Arch bishopric of Canterbury.

For Confirmation, he is in the right where he urges the Necessity of it: And
perhaps not much in the wrong, where he proposes an Expedient for the Bishop to
appoint some discreet Conscientious Ministers (as our Deans Rural should be) in
several Circuits to examine. Though it is a little hard that he will not trust
every Parish Priest with Examining, praeparatory to Confirmation, when he makes
them one and the same Order with the Bishops themselves. But whereas he adds,
to Examine and License to the Lord's Table; (for I pass it as granted, that
Confirmation is no Sacrament;) so do I take it for granted, that it is not only
a License to the Lord's Table, and to think it is only so, is to run into one
extreme of speaking too meanly of it to avoid the other of such as call it a
proper Sacrament. For by his favor, our Youth may receive the Sacrament before
they are Confirmed. To what purpose then does he put the case so tragically
against the Bishops? It may often happen (says he) that a pious Child, well
fitted for the Holy Sacracrament, and perchance being weak, earnestly desires
it before his death, yet must stay some years till next Visitation, or take a
long journey to the Bishop, for which he may want strength or means to support
him. No, his pious Child need not stay some years, nor yet some hours for the
Sacrament, nor travel any farther than the Rubric (which one would think this
Author never saw;) the words of which are these, And there shall none be
admitted to the Holy Communion, until such time as he be Confirmed, or be ready
and desirous to be Confirmed.

It is indeed not possible for a Bishop in a large Diocese and Triennial
Visitation to perform this Necessary work as it ought, if there have not been
good Catechizing and praevious Examinations: but (supposing those) Why may not
Priests, nor Bishops, perform it? And why must Confirmation be taken out of the
Bishop's hands upon this wild account? When St. Philip had converted Samaria,
Acts 8. 15. whilst the Apostles were at Jerusalem, can we think, when some of
them came thither, that they Personally examined all the People in that place,
who with one accord gave heed unto those things which Philip spoke? And yet
they laid their hands on them, being I presume well satisfied with Philip's
account of them, and they received the Holy Ghost. For Philip's Examination of
them was in order to Baptism, and after that it was usual to administer
Confirmation, and the Eucharist also to Adults at the same time.

For his Exception at Baptizing, tolerated in Necessity to Midwives; and he
would gladly see any such thing in Antiquity. Tolerated by whom? by the Church?
Pray let him look upon the Rubric concerning Private Baptism before he writes
again, where the words are these, First let the Minister of the Parish, or in
his absence, any other lawful Minister that can be procured, with them that are
present call upon God. Yet were Tertullian now alive, who knew the Customs of
the Ancient Church as well, I suppose, as this Author; he would not have
censured our Church for Tolerating so much in that point: For sure he goes much
farther, and will show him somewhat more than this in Antiquity, in case of
Necessity (such a Necessity they did believe of Baptism) his known words are
these, that in such a case, Quilibet Laicus ting it. And I know not in this
case, and according to this Author's Principles, what a Layman can do more
than a Woman.

For the great things he speaks of the Power of the Keys in his Chapter of
Church Government, they are well and truly spoken: but so is not that which
follows, Yet this is in a manner quite relinquisht to Chancellors, Laymen,
etc. The Church perhaps was never happier since the Reformation in men of this
Profession, that fill up those places with great Ability and Integrity, and I
add, with great deference to their Superiors the Bishops. No doubt they are
most capable to examine and declare upon matter of Fact, whether or no this or
that person have done the fact, to which the Canon has decreed Excommunication:
but they understand too well to think they have the Power of the Keys,
wherefore the Sentence (where things are regularly done) is pronounced by a
Priest, not by a Lay-Chancellour. And his Similitude of the Parish-Clark
jingling the Keys when the Rector has locked any one out of the Church, to which
he likens those proceedings in the Spiritual Court, is a Jingle it self and no
better. You will answer me (says he) The Bishops themselves pass it over, etc.
Truly in this you have reason, and the blame must wholly light on them. No, I
will not answer him so, but I will ask him one plain Question: Are the Bishops
wholly to blame, that the Canons of 1640 are not observed, which make abundant
provision against such Abuses? or rather, Are not those to blame who explode
these Canons?

He tells us, that in the times of Popery, when Spiritual and Temporal affairs
were all intermingled and horribly confounded, the Bishops were frequently
Lord-Keepers, Treasurers, Chief-Justices, Viceroys: and what not? which is
strangely Unapostolical and unlawful. No men were greater Blessings to their
times, even in those times of Popery when they sat at the Helm, than the
Bishops. 'Twas Bishop Morton's Industrious brain that made up the Fatal breach,
and United the two Houses of York and Lancaster, in the happy marriage between
King Henry the Seventh and the Lady Elizabeth; and it was under the Ministry of
Bishop Fox, who was Lord Privy Seal, and by his reaching Parts, that the
grounds were laid for a more happy Union between the two Kingdoms of England
and Scotland in that Marriage, which was designed with a deep and long train of
memorable Policies, that the eldest Daughter of Henry should marry James of
Scotland, and the younger should ma^ch into France, that so if ever they should
come to inherit, Scotland might be the Annexe to the Imperial Crown of this
Realm, and that England might never be in the nature of a Province to France.
In the Old Testament there are Examples enough of Priests that were Ministers of
State; those I confess were Unapostolical, that is, long before the Apostles,
but he will have much ado to prove them unlawful. He might have omitted
Lord-keepers and Treasurers for Bishop Williams and Bishop Juxon's sake: one of
them as able in the Chancery as the other in the Treasury. And whereas the King
is graciously pleased at this time to bestow the great Seal of Ireland upon a
Reverend Praelate there, I hope this Author will not deny, but his Majesty has
put him into a lawful Calling.

But whereas in the end of this Chapter he justly complains of exempt
Jurisdictions as merely Papal, and a thing altogether unknown to Antiquity
(wherein he is much in the right) I wonder he does not discern his own Scheme
concerning Bishops and Priests to be Papal too, and that Presbyterianism has no
pretense to Antiquity, but what it has from Popery. It was Pope Innocent the
4th. (whom for such pranks as these his Party celebrate for a most wise Pope)
who decreed, that ex dispensatione and deputatione solius Pontificis Romani,
one Priest might ordain another: whosoever then writes the History of
Presbytery should make it begin from Rome, and not take its rise from Geneva;
who does not know that the Popish Schoolmen and Canonists have made it their
business to degrade their Bishops, and confound them into one and the same
order with the Presbyters? to exempt the Regular Clergy from Episcopal
Jurisdiction, and as many of the Secular as they please? who made the
Cardinals, that were but mere Parish Priests, and many of them no Bishops to
this day, superiors to all the Bishops, nay, Governers and Judges over all
Prelates in the vacancy of the Popedom? The Consistory of Cardinals is then
their only head of the Catholic Church upon earth, which is all one as if it
were headed with a Geneva-Consistory; both Papists and Presbyterians take down
the Superior order and advance the middle, only Mr. Calvin and his Followers
will have all this depend immediately on Christ himself, whereas the Romish
Party makes it depend immediately on one they call Christ's Vicar: For how
vehemently did the Papalins, even in their Council of Trent, urge and press it,
That the Power and Jurisdiction was wholly given to the Bishop of Rome? and
that every particular Bishop being only de Jure Canonico, may be removed by the
Pope's Authority? he that would see more to the same purpose, let him consult
the Cardinal Pallavicino (if he will not trust Padre Paolo) where he may read
the long Speech of Father Laynez, all to this effect. But though I had prepared
some Animadversions upon this Chapter too concerning Bishops and Priests, yet
it has been so learnedly confuted in a Sermon preached at Whitehall, which I
hear is to be published by His Majesty's special Command, that I shall not
need, nor presume to touch that Chapter.

Animadversions on his Charitable Admonition to all Non-conformists.
I Find little to complain of in his Charitable Admonition, but that it is no
longer: O si sic omnia dixisset! In the Close he bespeaks them at this rate;
and I will do him the courtesy to transcribe a great deal in his own words,
that so they may be reprinted with a License, though they were printed without
one.

I beseech you (says he) to consider the great mischief you bring upon this
Church and Nation by your Separation from the Church; you pretend to be the
great Zealots against Popery, and yet give me leave to say, your indiscreet
disobedient Zeal mainly brings it in; your separation, and many following
divisions, have caused many to abhor our Church and turn to Popery, and
doubtless you are to give an account to God for the ruin of those Souls; for I
can never yield that you have any reasonable and true conscientious cause of
Separation, but merely mistaken-Reason and Conscience which I much pity, but no
way approve; and therefore I must lay the advance of Popery to your charge, to
your Separation, for I am sure it is the main Snare wherewith they catch
unstable Souls, persuading them our Church is not guided by the Spirit of
Truth, seeing it is so confounded by the Spirit of Division, it cannot be of
God, who is both Verity and Unity. Now, though it be well known to the Learned,
that their Church has neither Verity nor Unity, yet this is not so discernible
to weak Souls, etc.

It Is true indeed, after great Searchings of heart occasioned by our Divisions,
many set up their rest upon Popery: though the Principles upon which the Church
of Rome pretends to judge o^ Controversies do clash and fight even with one
another, and therefore are most unfit to quiet other men's thoughts, yet because
that Church is a Great Promiser, they take Sanctuary there, resolving as Joab
did, that if they Perish, it shall be at the Horns of the Altar. But I would
fain know of this Author, if our Divisions fright so many from our Church, then
would not streightning the Terms of our Belief, as in his Chapter concerning
Articles of Faith, and abolishing all our Ceremonies, and blending our Orders,
be the cause of more Divisions, and consequently of more Separations from the
Church of England? Would not this give the highest advantage to the Romish
Party? And would not they be sure to urge it upon their coming Proselytes, that
we had abandoned our former Principles? That we had receded from our own
Articles, by which we gave so good an account of our selves to the whole
Christian World at the Reformation? That we had banished not only all exterior
Beauty, but Order and Decency out of our Public Worship? That we had been
false to God, and to the Church of God, in breaking so many Protestations as we
had made heretofore against such proceedings as these, and consequently false
(as all Cowards are) to our selves? Therefore whilst he has so much Charity for
some that will have their own will (as he tells us) he must be entreated to
have a little Charity too for our Understanding; and not to expect we should
give away our Religion in a fit of Complaisance, and throw our Church out at
window in a frolic. His greatest Argument why all this ought to be yielded, is
grounded only upon Policy. And perhaps he is as much mistaken in his Policy, as
in his Divinity. They are not born to be any Repairers of our breaches, that
are the Authors of such rash Counsels as these, which are worse than those
Dolabella gave Cicero his Father-in-law, when the Commonwealth was in a manner
lost, Reliquum est, ubi nunc est Respublica ibi simus, potius quam dum illam
veterem sequimur, simus in nulla: But this Author would not have us take things
as we find them, but make them worse, because they are no better. Thus, What
the Romans scorned to do after the battle of Cannae, What the Venetians never
did, when they had lost all their Terra firma; That Men are Now taught to think
a Virtue, and the sign of a Wise and good man, Desperare de Republica. They are
the words of the Christian Cicero (as I presume to style him) the present Lord
Chancellor in his Speech to both Houses of Parliament, April 13th. 1675. And
since I am fallen by chance into the Roman History, I will conclude with a
remarkable passage out of Livy (lib. 5.) When the Gauls a Barbarous People had
sacked the City of Rome, and cut the Senators Throats as they sat in the
Streets, and when afterward Camillus a Banished man, had driven them away, and
restored the Commonwealth; yet the People seeing the City so defaced and
spoiled, were importunate to remove the Imperial Seat from Rome and settle at
Veii; whilst the Senate were debating it very warmly, and rather inclining to
remove; as the Regiment that had the Guard that day passed through the Forum,
the Centurion that Commanded gave Orders aloud, so that the Senate overheard
him into the Senate House, Signifer statue Signum: Sta miles: hic optime
manebimus. Ensign set down the Colors; Soldiers stand; this is the best place
for us to make our Station. Whereupon the Senate took the Omen, rose
immediately from their Consultation; and all the People approved their Generous
Resolution. There is a Thundering Legion of those that are at their prayers and
tears, and who keep as it were God-Almighty's Watch for the preservation of the
most Apostolical Church in the World: And as a Holy Bishop bid Monica the
Mother of St. Augustine, before he was any Saint, go away and be comforted, for
it was impossible the Son of so many tears as He had cost her should perish;
(And this, says that good Father, was received as a Voice from heaven.) So I
hope the Mother, over whom so many of her own Sons are weeping, and as it were,
wrestling with God in secret, can never miscarry. But if the Question be now,
whither we shall remove the Ancient Landmarks, and carry our Church either
toward Rome, or Geneva; the miraculous Providence of God in restoring it
together with his Majesty, after so many years Banishment, and ever since
preserving it, may, as a voice from Heaven, animate us to resolve, that this is
the best place where we are fixed, and here may we keep our station.

FINIS.

