A LETTER Written to a Friend in WILTS, Upon occasion of a late Ridiculous
PAMPHLET, Wherein was inserted a pretended PROPHECY OF THOMAS BECKET'S, etc.

ANTONIN. (...).

LONDON, Printed by R. D. Anno Dom. 1666.

To My Worthily Honored Friend T. G. Of A. Esquire.
Dear Sir,
THE Stoics have ranked all the concerns of man under these two heads, (...)
and (...), such things as are under the jurisdiction and command of his Will,
and such as are not. In the former every Virtuoso of the Sect fancied himself
in the Poets Ironie to be uno minor Jove, an Imperial Monarch, and his Throne
but one step below Jupiters, his Will his Scepter, and his Passions his Empire.
And whoever had not advanced unto this Sovereignty within himself, was to be no
Saint in their Calendar, no King in their Chronicle. For the latter (I mean the
various rencontres and occurrents of life, which they never challenged for any
Subjects of their Kingdom, but honestly resigned them to their respective
Lords and Masters, especially to the Lord Paramount of all) they seemed to have
very little or no concern, enjoining their Disciples to lie with as much ease
and satisfaction in Phalaris's Bull, as on a Bed of Down. Now, Sir, though I
look upon these Stoics as mere Hectors in Practical Philosophy, yet so far we
agree, that men ought to be severe and curious in the menage of what is any way
in their Power, to provide honest things in the sight of God and Man. But as
for such events as no Wisdom or Virtue of theirs can hinder, (...), to be
content with what comes next, and in all to act and suffer (...), as becomes
men of Reason and Magnanimity, or rather as becomes the spirit of a Christian.

Sir, the Solemnity of this Preface may possibly invite you to some higher
expectations then I have designed it for. The truth is, I should be heartily
ashamed to give you the trouble that follows, but for some more urgent (reasons
I cannot call them, but) occasions then I could at first Imagine, and which I
shall freely deposite in your bosom at our next meeting.

We live, Sir, in a world that lies in folly and wickedness, and though the
Grace of God (without which we are nothing) may secure us from scandal, or any
deserved blame from man, yet it does not exempt us from malice, or mistakes in
others, nor from the stroke of a foolish or reproachful Tongue. The last time I
had the contentment to see you, you were pleased to mention a late senseless and
ridiculous Pamphlet, wherein the most accomplished Publisher ('it is a pity he
concealed his Name, otherwise it is like enough, it might have made noise
sufficient:) He, I say, has lately Printed a certain Prophecy pretended to be
Thomas Beckets, where after some very irreverent and rudely simple Reflections
upon diverse Eminent and Worthy Persons (that could no way become his quill to
mention) He quotes a Letter of mine written to a private Friend (Mr. Y.) a
grave Divine in the Country, and a constant honest Member of the Church of
England: where also to the high uncivility of naming Me upon that occasion, he
thought fit to super-add this either hasty or impudent untruth, that I (amongst
so many of worthier names) delivered as my own judgment what he has placed in
the Margin of that Prophecy. I may possibly know the first Letter of the
Publishers Name (with its alias, if it have one) but out of my respect to his
supposed Profession, I think not fit to mention my conjectures of it in this
paper. Only Sir, I have received such a Character of him I take to be the man,
from some of unquestionable credit, that know him very well, as renders him
very capable of doing such or far nobler exploits, whereof he may in due time
give some account to his Superiors.

But Sir, to present you with a true and plain account of the whole matter on
my part, thus it was. A little after Christmas (as I remember) that pretended
Prophecy was brought from Abingdon to this Town, and sounding in the general
such a Harmony to the genius of the Time, it presently became both the Music
and discourse of all, not as the Publishers Ingenuity has phrased it, the
unanimous resolve of all -- as if forsooth a Convocation had been called about
it: This pretended Prophecy was, I confess, sent by me enclosed in a Letter as
the News of the Town to Mr. Yeates, together with a small key to the Text in
the Margin, which I borrowed for that occasion of the common Discourse; and
indeed, excepting but one clause (for the barbarous Latin in another, is not
considerable) I see nothing in the Prophecy of so much depth, as to need a
Delian Diver (of which sort I am far from being one my self) to fetch it up.
The Comment Sir was none of mine more then the bare Transcribing; and this is
all I am responsible for: the Ingenious Publisher must answer for the rest. So
that if you will have the state of the case laid in short before you, you know
well enough it will amount to this conclusion; I wrote a Letter to a Friend,
wherein I enclosed a piece of innocent News, generally discoursed off, and
received with much seeming contentment by all, and the Publisher thought fit,
in the depth of his wisdom, to give it Press*mony, that so it might march along
with him in his hungry (if not worse) design, for the comfort and satisfaction
of His own words.
all his Majesty's loving Subjects. Now Sir, to this day, I am so dull of
apprehension, as (after all my pains and curiosity of research) not to
understand where lies my fault. For as to the (...), I grant it was in my power
to write, or not, to send harmless (nay generally applauded) News, or not; and
so it is, and has been in the power of worthier men then my self, who yet have
not been afraid to use their liberty for fear of a small free-boter in the way,
that might possibly make prize of the frait. As for the taking and exposing of
it to open Port-sale, with a flourish of foolery and nonsense into the bargain,
I take my self to be no way concerned in that, ipse viderit.

Sir, I must again profess to you my shame, that I should causam dicere in such
a very trifle, in which I have no ground of doubt, but that besides your self,
I have many worthy and ready compurgators, whose quality, judgment, and
honesty, are my sufficient protection against such a nothing as this. Neither
is it that I fancy my name (which yet should be valuable to my self) of any
such consideration, as that you, or any other of my worthy Frinds should be
much concerned in its defense. But seeing so many other both greater and better
names embarked in the same passive contumely, I hope I may have leave to use
this Letter of Reprisal; and so enough (if not too much) of that.

As for my own Judgment of that, or any other Prophecies of the like nature, I
shall briefly and freely impart it to you thus; I deny not

1. But that persons of little or no acquaintance with the Spirit of Truth and
Holiness may yet be endued with a Spirit of Prophecy. Thus was Balaam who
loved the wages of iniquity, a man whose eyes were open (as he speaks of
himself) enabled (amongst other less concernments) to point unto the Star of
Jacob, to Christ himself. And I have no cause to doubt of the same influxus
Propheticus (or Prophetical Spirit) in the old Heathen Sybils, some of which
you know are quoted by Virgil, and their famed Acrosticks mentioned in the
general by Cicero in his Books of Divination, and particularly set down by
Eusebius, nay their Authority urged ad Homines De Vita Constable.
against the Infidel Heathens by several of the Primitive (especially of the
Greek) Fathers. You have their Poems and Prophesies compiled in this last Age
into one Volume by Opsopoeus, though (as he complains himself) with several
justly suspected Interpolations and Corruptions, which may pass either amongst
the piae frauds, or strong Credulities, or some other ordinary misfortunes of
times and persons, from which no age, and perhaps but few of the more eminent
elder Writings of Religion have been free. But that such Prophecies there were,
and that they delivered high ones of Christ himself, I see no cause to
question, with the good leave of an Excellent and Learned Person, who has
argued the contrary, but upon such grounds as I am confident his great
Abilities had not exactly weighed, and which are sufficiently refuted by our
Learned Montague in his Apparatus. And the reason is plainly and briefly this,
because the Spirit of Prophecy is not gratia gratum faciens, but gratis data
(as the Schools have phras'd it,) conferred sometimes upon such as neither well
understand, nor be any way suitably affected with their own praedictions: and
it is I must confess quaestionable to me, whether such Revelations of the way,
the truth, and the life, though somewhat dark and enigmatical to the Gentile
World of old, and those advantages which are (though more remotely) in the
power of the Heathen world to make use of now by their actual, or possible
commerce with Christendom, will totally acquit them in the Day of Judgment
from a positive Infidelity, such at least indirectly and by just
interpretation: seeing it is not ignorance which excuses, but that which is
absolutely invincible, nor is it a sufficient discharge to any man from his
duty that he had not the promulgation of the Law, unless upon the use of all
the means that were morally possible he yet remains in ignorance that such a
Law there is. But I find my self on a sudden (when I thought I had been
coasting along the shore) in a wide working Sea, it is time for me to make to
Land again: for though it were no impossibility to enlarge into a Volume upon
this Theme, and that which occasioned it, yet I must remember I am writing a
Letter, and that we may farther discourse it, when you please and God shall
permit.

Nor 2. do I question but even since the great infusion of the Holy Ghost upon
the Apostolic times, men eminent for Sanctity and Holiness of Life, may be
inspired with power to foretell some things to come. For what wonder if they who
converse so much with Heaven, and lean as it were with Saint John in the Bosom
of Christ, be sometimes admitted to his open Breast? The examples I confess in
no Age after that of the Apostles are numerous, nor is there any such visible
necessity of Prophetical spirits since, as then, and in the general (and almost
continued) great Apostacies under the Law. Besides the gifts of the spirit are
his own, and he dispenses them as he pleases. However I could furnish you
(though I believe your own indefatigable reading may save me the labor) with
several instances in some few later Centuries of unquestionable reputation. But
as for other vagrant Praedictions which fly about among the Vulgar, I look
upon the most as poor easy cheats and mere designs, (though of several
complexions) and I think it were no difficult matter for a man of ordinary
parts to make twenty such in a day: for either (pardon the soloecisme) they are
made post factum, and so are not Praedictions, but Histories, (of which sort no
doubt the world is full) or they are sagittae volantes in tenebris, arrows shot
at futuritie upon adventure, which flying in the dark may be thought to fall
whither they were never directed, unless out of a deceitful Bow.

Barclay (as I remember) in his Icon Animorum, is very peremptory in his
Character of the English Genius, Gens Anglorum semper dedita Prophetiis, that
we are great admirers of Prophecies, he means it I suppose of the common sort.
Perhaps he had seen or heard of an Act of Parliament in Edw. the Sixth's time,
which looks severely upon that piece of curiosity, and thence possibly took the
measures of his conjecture, and for my part, I intend no petition for the
Abrogation of that Law. Baronius ad ann. 178. tells us of Marcus Aurelius the
Emperor, that he banished (relegavit in Insulam) one that had foretold the
Tyranny of the Rebel Cassius, and withal made a Law (as he quotes it out of
Modestinus) that all such Prophets should expect the same punishment, Qui
aliquid facerent quo leves hominum animi superstitione numinis terrerentur,
designing (as he thinks) especially the Christians: which if it were so, the
chief ground of his mistake, was no doubt his misery; but, setting that aside,
the Law might be rational. For experience sufficiently informs us how the
doting humor that raigns among the vulgar upon these humane (and commonly
designed) predictions, takes them off from the nobler and more Christian
Contemplations of their Duty both to God and man. I have often wondered to
observe men that my Charity bids me hope are Pious, and that are otherwise
learned and sober, so sick of this disease.

For the Scriptural Prophecies, which are either known or handsomely supposed
to have had their accomplishment already, we have more cause to applaud, then
condemn their Industry, who have rationally attempted to give them more light
to the world; it is a pity if the clouds and mists which veil the face of
humane Story and Chronology, have in any circumstance injured the success, and
set learned Brethren as well by the ears, as the tongues, together in the dark.
But as for the rest, that are yet but in the womb of History, (or Providence if
you please) the time of their Birth being so very uncertain; if men will needs
be Godfathers, me thinks they might have patience till the Child be born, and
not by their hasty confidence force it out into the world before its time. I am
not censuring the modest or ingenuous conjectures of men in these cases, but in
our converse with the Bible, I wish the humor were not so common of beginning
at the wrong end, and so conning the Revelation before Genesis, rolling the
Prophetical Scriptures with delight under our tongues, but either spitting out,
or hastily swallowing unchew'd the plain and practical dictates of the Holy
Ghost. Nor is our modesty here a slur upon the darker Oracles of God, as if
they were delivered in vain. He has showed thee, O man, says the Prophet, what
is good; he has writ thy duty with a Sunbeam, and if in some more speculative
concerns the cloud dwells upon the Sacred Tabernacle, yet even there also, the
glory of the Lord appears. I bless God for Saint John's Apocalypse, as well as
for the more lightsome Scriptures, and I hope receive benefit by its darkest
pieces, though I cannot apprehend with one of our Countrymen, that in this, or
the other passage, such or such an English great Lord (by Name) is designed.
The number 666, which of late has made so much noise in the world, and is by
many looked upon as fatal to this present year, I meet with in that Sacred Book,
but whether it must needs be applied to the course of time, and if so, whether
to our computation of the year, I have neither the skill nor confidence to
assert. However, I cannot but applaud the very ingenious Labors of sundry late
Writers upon that Prophetical number, especially those of Mr. Potter, and of a
nameless Author in a small Book of his Printed ann. 662. Entitled, Christ and
Antichrist, or 666 multiplied by 2, who has trod a different path from all
others I know off in his new Algebra of two years, and, in both which, (though
I dare not say there is demonstration enough in either to satisfy the
judgment, yet) certainly there is curiosity enough to entertain a Learned Fancy
with delight.

But Sir, neither the Prophecy which gave occasion to this Letter (nor any of
the like nature) must think to come in competition with those that own no other
but the Father of Lights for theirs.

For the pretended. Author of the former, or any Prophecy of his, I have but
little to say. Our Chronicle has given us such an account of him, as that
(excepting his zeal for his Holiness) I can find no traces of extraordinary
Sanctity, as might entitle him to the gift of Prophecy, and upon what other
account he should be capacitated for it, I know not.

But, Sir, we have a more sure Word of Prophecy, unto which we shall do well
if we take heed, without regard to idle Dreams, or studied Delusions, or humane
pretended Revelations whatsoever. This every where acquaints us that if we
Repent, iniquity shall not be our ruin, but if we shall still do wickedly,
the just God can Plague us yet seven times more for our Abominations, 'til we
know that the Most High Rules in the Kingdoms of Men, and that he will not be
mocked or braved by Worms of the Earth. And had we store of such examples as
Your Self, Sir, who think it no solecism to be Great and Good, then why might
not David's Motto be Englands too, Quem Timebo? Of whom shall I be afraid? But
as Pliny minds me, Et hoc amantis est parce laudare: I shall release your
modesty, and discharge your trouble from this Paper with one word, which I
dare say you will own for the Child not of my Tongue, but of my Heart, namely,
that I am by a Thousand Obligations, but by none more then those of your
Exemplarie Worth and Virtue,

Dear and Worthy Sir, Your ever most Affectionate Servant, T. T.


