A CHARACTER OF Charles the Second WRITTEN By an Impartial Hand, and exposed to
PUBLIC VIEW For Information of the PEOPLE.



LONDON, Printed for GABRIEL BEDELL, and are to be sold at the Middle Temple
Gate in Fleetstreet, 1660.

A Character of CHARLES the Second.
IF the Naturalists pretend to give a reason why the Son of Croesus, who had
been dumb from his Infancy, seeing a Soldier ready to kill his Father, cried
out, I^ is the KING! The force of Natural affection breaking those strings,
which, until that moment, had tied his tongue: Who will wonder that a man, who
on the busy Theater of his Country, has hitherto presented the Person of a
Mute, should violate his resolutions of continuing silent, when he sees the
cursing Shimei's of this depraved Nation, going to murder the good fame of his
Master, his Sovereign, and the common Father of the People? Therefore since my
zeal to Truth, my veneration for Gods Anointed, and my tenderness for my
Country has loosened my Tongue, I have taken the boldness to inform the
deluded People what manner of Man he is, against whom these Serpents have spit
their Venom.

And who may pretend to be better heard, or more believed, then a Person who
has past eighteen Years of his Time, in the Service and Court of this
Illustrious PRINCE? And who dares challenge the World to find in the whole
process of his Life, one instance of the least deflexion from the severest
rules of sincerity; which yet he does not vainly urge to enhaunse his
Reputation, but to strengthen his evidence, humbly acknowledging, that he does
not owe this steadiness to the complexion of his spirit, but to the goodness
of Almighty God, who resists the proud, and gives grace to the humble.

But before I begin to trace the first Lines of this Piece, I conceive it very
necessary to discover those Incidents, which have conspired to abuse the
Judgments of many disinteressed, well-meaning Persons, who were otherwise
sufficiently fortified against the practices of notorious Enemies.

So great have been the distresses of his MAJESTY, since he has been exiled
from His Kingdoms, that he could not possibly support those many Retainers to
His Court and Cause, which have been involved in the common Fate of his Party;
and it is so natural for all men to overvalue their own merits, that they think
themselves very much injured, if they are not admitted to equal shares with the
rest of their fellow Servants, though far more eminent for their services past,
and better fitted for present employments; so that neither his MAJESTY'S
insuperable necessities, nor the disparity of their deserts, could hinder these
presumptuous Persons, from murmuring at his Ministers, whilst they were abroad,
and blasting of his personal virtues when they returned home, and many of these
unworthy men having been honored either with some Domestic relation to his
MAJESTY, or at least, with free access to his Court, had such pretenses to be
credited in all their reports, that whilst the KING was not known to the
People, who are ever inclined to believe the worst, they easily perverted the
candor of their opinions, either by wounding the Judgment of His MAJESTY in
the choice of his Ministers, or profaning His Character by most impudent
slanders, especially, during the Tyranny of the late Protector, and the vile
Instruments of his ambition, who having murdered the Father, and seized the
Inheritance of the Son, knew that there were no better means to preserve their
Possessions, then by recriminating the Person of the Lawful Pretender; and
therefore they were so prodigal of their rewards to these Apostates, that in
the vast Profusion of the public Treasure of the Kingdom, the (...)at unhappy
(...)etch Man(...)ng (when he (...)as a Prisoner (...) Colen) con(...)ed that
his (...)lary from the (...)otector was (...)00.L a Month.
Salaries of these Villains will be found one of the most costly Items. It Is
true, the Persons and Practices of many of these graceless men were a long
time since very particularly known, but such has been the iniquity of the
Times, that men might perpetrate the blackest Crimes with more security, then
impeach a Criminal: and who then could expect that there should be found any
Martyrs for the Truth, when it was become a Principle in their Religion to abet
the present Power, which is, To lie for their Interest. So that at my return
into England, after Eleven years absence, truly I was astonished to find that
this Poison was not more diffused, considering the activity of the Deceivers,
and the Slavish remisseness of those who should have generously opposed them.
But it has pleased Almighty God marvelously to preserve his Majesty's good
Name, against the malice of those wicked men, who went about to slander the
footsteps of his Anointed.

And now finding a dawning of Liberty to assert the Truth, I am bold to expose
his Picture to the public view, whose Person will hereafter (when his Luster
shall break through the Clouds of his misfortunes) prove the Delight of our
Eyes.

Though Plato has made the Soul to be the Desinition of man, allowing the Body
to be only the Carriage of the Spirit, yet since we receive our Information of
Corporeal Subjects, as well from our Sense as our Understanding, I think it
very proper to describe his Majestics Person as well as his Qualities.

He is somewhat Taller then the middle stature of English men; so exactly
formed, that the most curious Eye cannot find one Error in his shape. His Face
is rather Grave then Severe, which is very much softened whenever he speaks:
His Complexion is somewhat dark, but much enlightened by his Eyes, which are
Quick and Sparkling. Until he was near twenty years of Age, the figure of his
Face was very Lovely; but he is since grown Leaner, and now the Majesty of his
Countenance supplies the Lines of Beauty. His Hair, which he has in great
plenty, is of a shining Black, not frizled, but so Naturally Curling into great
Rings, that it is a very comely Ornament. His Motions are so easy and
graceful, that they do very much recommend his Person when he either Walks,
Dances, plays at Pal Maille, at Tennis, or rides the great Horse, which are
his usual Exercises. In sum, his Meene does denote his Quality; and
wheresoever he appears, he easily obtains the respect and affections of all
that approach him; To the gracefulness of his deportment, may be joined his
easiness of access, his Patience in Attention, and the Gentleness both in the
tone and style of his speech; so that those, whom either the veneration for his
dignity, or the Majesty of his presence have put into an awful respect, are
re-assur'd as soon as he enters into conversation; and this I have often heard
observed by many persons of quality of several Nations, especially by the
French, who are naturally more serene and jovial, then the People of these
Northern Countries, who at first approached him with some constraint, until his
MAJESTY was better known to them; but to deal ingenuously, these advantages
were not borne with him, for he was too reserved in his youth, but he owes
these (with many other excellencies) to his misfortunes, which forcing him to
communicate himself to all sorts of people of the several Nations where he has
sojourned, have cultivated his manners, and rendered his perfections habitual.

Amongst his acquired endowments, these are the most eminent, He understands
Spanish, and Italian; speaks and writes French correctly; He is well versed in
ancient and modern History, has read diverse of the choicest Pieces of the
Politics, has studied some useful parts of the Mathematics, as
Fortification, and the knowledge of the Globe; but his chief delight is in
Navigation, to which his Genius does so incline him, that by his frequent
conversation with Mariners, and his own observation, whilst he rid six weeks
in the Downs, and in his passage into Scotland, he has arrived to so much
knowledge in this Science, that I have heard many expert Seamen (whose
discourses are not steered by the compass of the Court) speak of it with
delight and wonder; in general, He is a true friend to Literature, and to
Learned Men.

But I conceive my self obliged to be more particular in my discourse upon his
Natural qualities, because they import the well or ill-being of all those who
are under his Dominion; for though his outward accomplishments may sufficiently
recommend him to disinteressed strangers; yet they are only his genuine
Virtues, which can render him agreeable to his own Subjects; amongst which I
will assign the first place to his Understanding, since without this, the rest
of his virtues will have little signification toward the happiness of his
People; for if he wanted that, it were more to the purpose to describe his
Ministers then his MAJESTY; and it is they would have the dominion over the
People, whilst he represented only the sign of a King: But I date assure the
Nation that this will not be our case, for his MAJESTY has not only a solid
judgment, which (if the method of this discourse would permit) I could evince
by many pregnant instances, as well as by the universal concession of all the
Judicious men that know him. but He is so well, yet so modestly persuaded of
it, that he dares trust himself, and is not capable of being carried about with
every Wind of Counsel; so that it will prove to be as truly said of his
MAJESTY, as of his Grandfather, Henry the fourth, He that would corrupt his
Council, must first begin with the King: And when his subjects shall consider
the advantages of his Education, the different Nations and Factions that he
has had to deal with, the direct opposition of his Enemies, and the treachery
of his seeming Friends, the necessry of his treating with several Parties in
Person, (because they would not trust those who were about him) the Variety and
Force of his Experience, from the distinct knowledge of the Natures of the
People of several Countries, of their chief Ministers of State, with the
Intrigues of Government, both in their Chirches and Commonwealths, which other
Princes have not had the opportunity, or misfortune to discover, and all these
Lessons derived from their natural Springs, and learned in that excellent
School of Adversity, which opens the Understanding, and confirms the Judgment;
when these particulars are well considered, I believe, I shall not be put upon
my Oath to prove this Article.

Though the Sagacity of his Spirit may be of great advantage to himself or
Friends, yet it will have no comfortable influence upon his Subjects in
general, unless it be also accompanied with Justice, and therefore this is the
virtue which is next to be considered.

If Justice be well desin'd by the Moralists to be, The constant Will of giving
to every man his due; then may I safely pronounce his Majesty to be a Just
person. And though I have met with some reports which seem to impugn this
Assertion, yet upon due examination of them, I am the more confirmed in this
Character: For though the defection of some of the Royal Party has given his
Majesty general grounds of suspicion, yet there is no man more averse then
himself to entertain an ill opinion of any person, of whose honesty he has had
experience. But it has been his fortune (as what Prince or private person can
avoid it) to have had some absent persons of Merit and Integrity misrepresented
to him by such subtle Arts, as humane wit could not at the present find out
the falsehood. Some of these innocent sufferers, either from the confidence of
their own Sincerity, or, possibly, from their indifferency for his Majesty's
good Opinion (he not being in a condition either to reward or punish) have
neglected their defense, and lain for some time under his Displeasure; but as
soon as he once discovered the Abuse (though without their applications) he
has not only made them very Honorable reparations, but marked the Informers
with a public Character of Infamy: And of this particular I have so distinct a
knowledge, that I do as confidently believe he is Just, as that he is a Man.

These generous Qualities are actuated by the Magnanimity of his mind,
expressed in his Fortitude and Courage, which I may best compare to one
another; for his Majesty has showed as great Courage in his attempts, to
recover his just rights, as Fortitude in his submission to Providence, in the
decision of the Battle against him; and yet there have been some infectious
breaths, who have endeavored to blast his just Reputation; but he has so
signalized his Courage wheresoever he appeared, that even his inveterate Enemy
- Cromwell himself, could not refuse him his just praises, though it was not
his custom to give his Enemies their due honor, or to tell a truth, that
might redound to his prejudice: But as this Character is not doubted by his
Friends abroad, so I wish that it may never be known by experience to his
enemies at home.

But that they may not be alarmed by this last Period; I do assure them, that
Clemency is as natural to his Majesty, as Courage: which is a Proposition that
proves it self; for there is no Man truly valiant, that can be cruel; and it
were to degrade himself, not to pardon injuries; for in taking Revenge, a man
is but even with his Enemy: but in passing it over, he is become his Superior.
These are general notions which I must apply to their particulars whom it may
concern: His Majesty's genuine Clemency is confirmed by his veneration for his
Fathers memory, who left him his commands to pardon his Enemies (even those
Enemies who mingled their hands in his innocent blood) as his last Legacy; and
I do know, that he is convinced, that it is his interest to forgive those that
have opposed him, if they produce any seasonable Testimonies of their return
and good intentions toward him; knowing that the despairs of his Enemies may
produce cruel effects to his Friends: and he desires to make his access to his
Throne as Innocent, and as certain as he can; and therefore as the common
Father of his People, he endeavors that we should reconcile and embrace like
Brethren; and concludes, That the best means to restore the crazie Body of the
Kingdom to its former health and vigor, is not to cure one part, by afflicting
of the other; but to heal those wounds which are already festred by their
proper lenitives, and to remove (as much as lies in his power) all the causes
of future Animosities; and this (to the best of my remembrance) is the
substance of a discourse, which I have lately heard from his MAJESTY'S own
Mouth upon this Subject.

But His MAJESTY'S Natural Clemency may possibly want the desirable Effects
toward penitent Offenders, if he be not possessed of a Religious fidelity of
performing his Promise, and a Constancy of Resolution: If at least the ill
advised Passion of the parties that have suffered should ever incline them to
importune him for their revenge, under the Style of Justice; To this I reply,
That Perfidiousnesse and Irresolution are so directly opposite to those
Qualities which I have already enumerated in his MAJESTY'S CHARACTER, that they
are altogether inconsistent; and if he should have the least inclination to
Hypocrisy, that which I have hitherto said of him cannot be true; but he knows
very well that the Reputation of Faithfulness is one of the chiefest Pillars
of Regal Power; and that even his Friends may reasonably suspect the
performance of his Promises to them, if he breaks his Faith to his Enemies.

But to be more particular, I have often heard his MAJESTY declaime against the
perfidious practices, which he had observed in the Negotiations of some Public
Ministers abroad; and Men do not use to declare an open War against those
Vices, to which themselves are obnoxious; and I could name some Persons whom he
is pleased to honor with a particular esteem, that have no other conspicuous
Virtue besides their impregnable Honesty; for there is nothing in Nature more
productive of friendship, then some resemblance in manners: But the narrowness
of his Fortune not suffering him to supply some empty men, as profusely, as
they had promised themselves; they have, branded His MAJESTY with Ingratitude,
and Unfaithfulness, Sins which he abhors both from his Nature and Judgment.

A Man that is only Innocent, and not actively Virtuous is so near to
imperfection and weakness, that it is hard to distinguish their confines; and
if it be granted that His MAJESTY does possess these Illustrious Qualities, yet
if he wants the Nature to produce them by Practice, they may serve his
Flatterers for Panegyricks, but they will be of little benefit to his People;
therefore it is necessary to evince his Industry, to confirm the Character of
an accomplished Prince.

There was for a long time so dead a Calm in his business, his Enemies being
so strong at home, and his Friends so engaged abroad, that he could not make
one notorious, prudent step toward his recovery, which his cautelous Enemies
have represented to the undiscerning people under the reproach of Laziness. But
the best of it is, he has had an Army of his own Subjects for the Witnesses as
well of his Industry as Courage: And if these uningenuous censurers had been of
his Train the last Year, when his Majesty rid Post above two hundred Leagues
through France and part of Spain, in the heat of Summer, I persuade my self
they would have confessed their own weariness, though possibly they had denied
his Diligence: And he spares his Mind as little as his Body, for besides his
conversation with Books, he consults and instructs all men that address to him
in his business; and amongst his Correspondents (which are not few) it may be
there will scarce be found One to whom he owes a Letter.

Amongst the Moral Virtues there are some which have not such glorious Names as
these which I have already mentioned; but I think they are very considerable,
because they are more diffused into the ordinary Actions of our lives. In this
number I reckon Temperance in Speech, wherein his Majesty so excels, that I
have often thought of it with admiration; for though I have sometimes seen him
very justly angry, yet the hardest expression that I have ever heard him use to
a Gentleman, was once, and but once, when he told one of his domestics, That
he was an Insolent fellow: And though the Author of A late Letter from a near
Attendant on his Majesty, dated from Brussels, and written at London, may
possibly be displeased with this contradiction, yet out of my respect to Truth,
I am bold to affirm, That to the best of my remembrance, I never heard his
Majesty swear an Oath in my life: But it is well known out of what Quiver these
poisoned Arrows come, which being shot against the impenetrable Buckler of his
innocence, will rebound upon the faces of those wicked men that did first level
them.

To this may be joined his Sobriety in Diet, in which he seldom makes the
least excess, though he stands not in awe of his Constitution; for he is of so
healthful a Temperament, that I have not known him above thrice sick these
eighteens Years: But he so Naturally hates Debauchery, that his severity to
this vice has cured some habitual drunkards, who have chosen rather to part
with their beloved sins, then with his Majesty's Favor.

Though I can neither impugn nor defend the constant austerity of his
Majesty's Life, since it is possible that in the heats of his Youth he may have
rendered to the powerful charms of Beauty; yet I am certain that for many years
he has been so Chaste and Cautious, that I have not heard the leaft whisper of
any indecent Gallantry: And yet his impudent Enemies have not only reproached
him with habitual Incontinence, and farc'd their slanders with false and
frivolous tales, knowing that Fame, like water, bears up light things and
swallows the heavy; but they have suborned their Mercenary Prophets to denounce
Gods Judgments against him, for these supposed Frailties, and to infer with as
ill Morality as Logic, That his Majesty is unfit for Government, because that
in his Youth he may not have been stronger then Samson, wiser then Solomon, or
more holy then David. But whosoever will impartially consider his just
Character, and compare him either with the Ancient or modern Princes of the
World: will hardly find a precedent where so many shining qualities are
assembled, or so little shadowed with any inclinations to vice: and if solid
Virtue and Abilities for Government were a just title to Dominion, the British
Ocean would not be the confines of his Empire.

These Excellent Qualities are the products of a happy Nature, or a generous
Education, but as the soul informs the body, so it is Religion which animates
the Character of Christian Princes, and crowns their moral perfections, and
therefore as the most eminent, I have reserved that to finish this Piece.

For his interior Piety, I leave it to the Searcher of thoughts, in whose
hands are the hearts of Kings; for to us, the Tree is only known by the fruits;
neither will I extend my self upon the discourse of his Humility, Meekness,
Charity, and other divine Graces, since these produce the same effects (though
more raised, because they are derived from a higher Cause, for Christian
Religion is only Reason sublimed) which I have already treated under other
names; and they are fitter for the Pens of those who have entrance into the
Sanctuary, then for a secular Person; therefore I shall only insist upon His
MAJESTY'S Firmness to his Religion, as the most conducing to our purpose.

And in this particular, he has given such signal testimonies to the world,
that I wonder at the folly, as well as the malice of his Enemies, that have
planted their Batteries against this point; but it is a Maxim derived from the
Father of Lies, To calumniate boldly, that something may remain, and the People
are so susceptible of tales, that it is hard to invent a Fable which is above
their Faith.

His MAJESTY having passed ten years of his exile in the territories of
Catholic Princes, in France, Germany and Flanders, it cannot be doubted that
he has been frequently importuned to change his Religion, either by those, who
out of a firm persuasion of the verity of their own belief, have thought it a
charity to make him a Convert; or those who from the presumption of their great
abilities in Controversy, have had the ambition to add so illustrious a
person to the number of their Proselytes, or those Politicians, who (despairing
of his re-establishment, unless by the assistance of Catholic Princes) have
urged his conversion to the Roman Faith, as the best means to take the
benevolence of his Allies: but they have all encountered such an immovable
firmness in his MAJESTY to the Principles of his Religion, that they have
retired from the assault with no other effects, then the satisfaction of having
discharged their Consciences, by their officious Counsels.

Amongst many other Champions of the Roman Church; His MAJESTY was frequently
attacqued (whilst he remained in France) by Monsieur de la Melitiere, a man of
an excellent spirit, who had been formerly a Calvinist, and by Monsieur
Salmonet, originally a Scotch-man, and favorite to the Cardinal de Retz, who
have since printed and published the Arguments of their conference; and there
is hardly any Roman Catholic of note for Piety or Learning in any part of the
World, where his MAJESTY has been, that has not joined his Forces to combat
him for his Religion.

And shall he that has passed so succesfully through a ten years War in the
defense of his Faith, be robbed of his Triumph, and of his Highest Title, by the
tongue or pen of a perjured Villain? We must then conclude, that Justice is
fled to Heaven, and has left us nothing here but her Balance, in which these
wretched men do weigh their worldly Interests, against all the moral and divine
Virtues; but Truth will be justified of her Children, and His MAJESTY'S
perseverance in his Religion will be dear to the truly pious People of this
Nation, when the faces of these slanderers shall grow black with confusion.

But his MAJESTY'S Fervor for his own way of Worship does not invade his
Charity to dissenting Christians: He is convinced by his Experience, as well as
by his Reason, That Consciences are not to be forced, and that men may
reasonably suspect the truth of that Religion, which uses the Sword for her
Argument; since it is as much against Reason as Charity, to persecute those who
may be in the right, or if not, shall by this means be kept longer in the
wrong; And therefore those tender Consciences, who worship God in the sincerity
of their spirits, and do not diffent from their Brethren, to advance their
humane Interests, ought to join in their Prayers to Almighty God, with the rest
of the People, ^o place this Religious, Virtuous King in Peace, upon the Throne
of his Ancestors.

And if the Illustrious Birth of His Sacred MAJESTY, His Just Title to dominion
over us; warranted by the Laws of these Kingdoms, and marvelously asserted by
the Providence of God; and who (besides his Acquired Perfections) is possessed of
Wisdom, Justice, Fortitude, Courage, Clemency, Faithfulness, Industry,
Temperance, and Steadiness in his Religion; If these Eminent Qualities may
derive happiness to His People, Then it is in our power to be happy, and He is
bold to pronounce this to his Fellow Subjects; Who is so far from betraying his
Country for his Prince, that he would not betray a Private Person, either for
his Prince or Country.

FINIS.

