Tulse Mayor.
Curia special. tent. die Mercurii in Hebdomad. Fest. Pasch. secund. April.
1684. Annoque Reg. Regis Caroli Secundi Angliae, etc. xxxvi.
THIS Court does desire the Right Reverend Father in God, Francis Lord Bishop
of Rochester to Print his Sermon, Preached in St. Bridgets Church on Monday
last, before the Lord Mayor and Aldermen of this City.

Wagstaffe.

A SERMON Preached before the Right Honorable Sir Henry Tulse, LORD MAYOR OF
The City of London: And the COURT of ALDERMEN, Together with the Governors of
the Hospitals.

AT The Parish Church of St. Bridget, on Easter Monday, March 31. 1684.

By the Right Reverend Father in God FRANCIS Lord Bishop of Rochester, and
Almoner to His Majesty.

LONDON: Printed for Be^j. Took, at the Ship in Saint Paul's Churchyard. 1684.

To the Right Honorable Sir Henry Tulse, LORD MAYOR OF THE CITY OF LONDON: And
to the Honorable Court of ALDERMEN.
My Lord,
AS I showed the just Deference I had and must ever have to your Lordship, and
to all the worthy Governors of this great City, when upon the first Intimation
of the Choice you had done me the favor to make of me, I was ready to serve
your Devotions, so upon the signification of your pleasure, that I should
publish this Discourse, though fitter for a Popular Audience, than for the Press,
it would ill suit with the Office I have the Honouor to bear of Distributing
the Royal Alms, should I any longer delay so slender a Contribution as This to
the City-Charity, to be one of your Remembrancers, and Solicitors in that
behalf.

My Lord, While I Exhort you to do what is not only your Duty but your
Practice, I take the only course that is proper for One in my Station to Adorn
you and yet not Flater you, nay to Commend you without any Complement;
especially for your perpetual and most Loyal Care of the Public Peace, which
does so mightily befriend all Public Works of Charity, you that preserve it by
duly Exercising your Authority, though you are far from Affecting the style of
Benefactors, yet you are such and more, in subordination to His Majesty; who as
from His First Wonderful and Happy Restoration He may justly Wear That
Glorious Title, The Repairer of the Breach. So upon the Late no less happy, and
perhaps all things considered, no less wonderful Re-Establishment of the
Government, and Re-Settlement of so many Disordered Corporations, He may be
truly styled, The Restor^r of Citys to dwell in: For a Great City grows an
Inhospitable if not an Inhabitable Place, and may be properly called a Great
Wilderness, when the Bonds of Civil Government, which is so absolutely
Necessary to keep Humane Society together, are broken asunder: Your Names will
be famous in our Story, who under God and the King, have been so Instrumental
in bringing back Excellent Order where Confusion, or which is all one, the
Multitude began to Reign: That it may please God to Prosper and Perfect all
Your Honorable and Charitable Undertakings is my Hearty Prayer.

My Lord, I am Your Lordship's most Obedient and most Humble Servant, Fran.
Roffens.

A SERMON PREACHED On St. Luke xiv. 13, 14.
But when thou make a Feast, call the Poor, the Maimed, the Lame, the Blind:

And thou shall be Blessed; for they cannot recompense thee: for thou shall be
recompensed at the Resurrection of the Just.


WELL and Wisely has the Piety of those that went before us, (a Piety worthily
followed by the present Noble Senators of this Great City) Ordained and
Appointed, that these Holy Festival-Days, which wait upon Easter Day, should be
Honored with these solemn Assemblies, and that in order to these two Great and
Good Ends; in the first place, That of Praising God with the rest of the
Christian World, for the Glorious Resurrection of our Blessed Lord and Savior;
in the second place, That of stirring up our Affections to such Good Works and
Alms Deeds, as shall not fail to obtain their Ample Recompense at the
Resurrection of the Just.

Now both these weighty subjects, the Resurrection and Charity, which shall
then receive its Everlasting Rewards, are joined in my Text, and it will
challenge your best and most awful Attention, if you will but consider how
Christ has put them together in another Text; where he gives us the same
comfortable Expectation as he does here; but also a terrible warning that the
particular Test and Trial of all men at the General Resurrection shall be,
their having performed or neglected these Offices of Charity to the Poor, the
Hungry, the Naked, or any way distressed Christians.

To find out and show you the full extent and design of our Savior's words in
the Text, it is necessary to look back and lay before you the Occasion upon
which they were spoken; Our Lord you know was so Charitable, so Condescending
as to make himself Familiar, and in a manner Domestique to those that were none
of the best, because he was still in hopes of doing them some good; and having
been reflected upon by the Pharisees for Eating with Publicans, now to prevent
their Murmuring he suffers himself to be over-entreated and invited by one of
the Chief of the Pharisees to Eat Bread in his House; where it quickly appeared
they had at least as much need of his Advice to Cure the Distempers of their
minds, as had those whom they contemptuously styled Sinners; for presently it is
sed, that against all the Laws of Hospitality, they watched Him, that was, to
steal His Words, or to find somewhat in his Actions to Accuse and Defame him;
the Bait they had laid as most likely to take him, was a Work of Charity, A Man
to be healed of a Dropsy; But it was their Saboath-Day, and when he puts them
the Case of Conscience, Whether it were Lawful to heal him then or no, they
held their Peace, but with intent to make noise enough of it afterward, in case
he proceeded to work the Miracle of Mercy, which nevertheless he did with a
generous undaunted freedom, and then what he had done he maintained with that
strength of Argument, as he reduced them to an absolute Incapacity of Answering
him again to these things.

Now though they had utterly spoiled the Grace of the Treat they had given him,
by making his Table a Snare to him, yet he whose Meat it was to do the Will of
him that sent him, and to finish his Work; resolves to make a Spiritual
Entertainment for them, who had pretended to oblige him, by Inviting him to
partake with them their Corporal Food; and first he gives them to understand,
That he would not Abridge their just Liberties of Entertaining, nor even of
Feasting one another; but he would Regulate these Civil Meetings of theirs,
when he marked how they chose out the Chief Rooms; he directs them how they may
turn such Commerces and Correspondences as are necessary to support the Dignity
and Comfort of Human Society, into the Exercises of Virtue, of that fundamental
Virtue profound Humility, if they will change their Practice which savored too
much of Pride, and if they will take his Counsel, To go and sit down in the
lowest Room.

And having Preached to them Humility at their Public Feasts, then he goes on
to Teach and show them a more Excellent way, as the Apostle calls it, that is
Charity; Addressing himself to him that bade him to Dinner, and with him
probably many other Guests, Friends, Brethren, or Kinsmen, or rich Neighbors,
with an eye to some mean Advantage or pitiful Interest, that they should make
him a suitable Return either in the same kind, or in equal value; he does not
forbid this mutual kindness between Relations, as if it were a Crime in it
self, but he puts him in mind, that all this may be no Virtue, that this may be
nothing to Charity, nor yet advance one step in the way to Heaven. But if in
sted of the Rich he would Call the Poor, in sted of his Kindred the Stranger
that is in Want, in sted of his Friends and Neighbors that do not need a
Meals-meat from him, and can afford him as good Cheer again, he would make much
of those that can do nothing to help themselves, The Maimed, the Lame, the
Blind, such as cannot Retribute any thing to him their Entertainer and
Benefactor: then would the Hospitality be of the Noblest Kind, it would be
perfect Charity, and he should be Recompensed at the Resurrection of the Just.

The words then are easily divided into these four Parts:

First, Here is a general express Precept for Alms-Deeds, A Charge to them that
are Rich in this World, that they be ready to give, and apt to distribute, Call
the Poor: It Is spoken to the Master of the House, and in him to all others of
the like Ability.

Secondly, Here is matter of Precept mixed and joined with matter of Counsel and
Advice, concerning the Manner, the Measures, the Rules of Proportion and
Decency to be observed in doing our Alms-Deeds: Here are excellent Directions
given us to do them presently, and with our own Hands rather than leave them to
be done by others after our Deaths, to do them Diligently, Cheerfully,
Plentifully, nay Openly sometimes, as well as Secretly at other times; to do
them with all the Condescending Kindness of Entertainers, for such good natured
qualifications as these are implied in these words, When thou make a Feast,
Call the Poor.

Thirdly, The Choice of fit Objects for the Charity of the Rich is here
determined, they must be such as are Poor indeed, for such they are not, nor
are they properly so called that are in condition to help themselves, they must
be really helpless Creatures, the Maimed, the Lame, the Blind. Fourthly and
Lastly, Here is set before us the most forcible Inducement, the strongest
Motive to Charity, the great Reward of it, and the greater by far the later it
is Repaid; the Danger is only least a Recompense be made thee too soon; but if
thou can be Contented to stay a while, here is offered the sirmest Security,
that thou shall be Recompensed at the Resurrection of the Just.

First here is a general express Precept for Alms-Deeds, A Charge to them that
are Rich in this World that they be ready to give, and apt to distribute, Call
the Poor: It Is spoken to the Master of the House, and in him to all others of
the like Ability.

For as Christ made this Exhortation to one of their Chiefs, so by parity of
Reason it extends it self to those, and to those especially that bear Rule, Men
Renowned for their Power, Leaders of the People by their Counsel, Rich Men
furnished with Ability, living peaceably in their Habitations; These are the
Titles of Honor which the Book of Wisdom bestows upon you, and to such as you
is this word of Command given by the Lord of Life, that ye consider the Poor;
for to this the Providence of God in the Beautiful Ordering of the World, and
Ranging Mankind into several Degrees and Ranks, has given you a special Call,
to look down from your High but Slippery Places, with an Eye of Pity upon those
that lie at your Feet and can fall no lower; such is the wonderful and useful
variety of Gods Dispensations to Men, that some even hired Servants in our
Father's house have enough and to spare, while many a Son (and he not always a
Prodigal) is ready to perish with Hunger; and though King David after very long
Experience was able to say, I have been Young and now am Old, and yet saw I
never the Righteous forsaken, nor his Seed begging their Bread, that is, not
Abandoned to a state of Beggary or craving of Alms without finding Relief, such
a heavy Curse as that was denounced by David only against the Children of the
Traitor Judas, to be Vagabonds and beg their Bread, to seek it also out of
Desolate Places; yet that there should be some in a mean and low Condition, is
as necessary as that others should Abound; for an equality of Wealth and Honor
would be impossible, and a Levelling Principle can never be reduced to
practice: For if all Men were Princes whom should each Govern? if none were
Poor, who should do servile Offices, and who should then supply the Necessities
of the Rich? I am apt to think that the greatest Alteration that ever happened
in these Western Parts of the World, except when Christianity came in, was,
when That by degrees turned out Slavery, the Roman Absolute Slavery, under
which an incredible number of Men were subject to their Masters as to so many
Monarchs that had Power of Life and Death* over them; but what a Change would
it be, if not only Slavery were gone out of the World, but Service also and
Dependence of Inferiors upon those that are Exalted with Honor, of the Needy
upon those that live at Ease and in Plenty; All those who know not now what it
is to want, the Scene being so changed, would stand more in need of help than
any do now of relief; Consider it then as a Bounty of God to the Rich, that the
Poor shall never cease out of the Land, it is a Promise, a Gracious Promise,
Deuteronomy. xv. 11. And Bless Almighty God for providing you these, not only as
hewers of wood, and drawers of water, not only as helpers and supporters of
your Temporal State, for the daily pressing necessities of Human Life, but as
improvers of all your Spiritual Graces, Objects of your Comiseration, such as
may call incessantly upon every tender Passion within you, such as may stir up
Resentments of Gratitude to that Good and Gracious Master, who might with
perfect Justice have laid you as low as others whom you see in the Dust; such
as may excite you to produce continual Acts of Love to that Blessed Savior,
who shed his most precious Blood, the Blood of God, for the very least of
these; and has prepared a Receptacle in some of the many Mansions in his
Father's House, for many a wretch who during his Pilgrimage here, takes up that
Lamentation, I have no place to flee in^o, and no man cares for my Soul; yet
it is most dear unto God, and precious in the sight of the Lord, is the death of
any Saint; though he be as contemptible as Lazarus was in the Eye of the Rich
Man, yet the Angels of God are to carry his better part into the place of Rest,
if he be Rich in Faith, if he well perform that Part which God has Appointed
him in this Life; for as Human Life is aptly enough compared to the Acting upon
a Stage, so he that Acts the Beggar well, and throughout maintains the decorum
of the Person whom he sustains, deserves to be sent off with as great Applause,
as he that stands for the Great Man in the Fable, since he is only the Richer
Pageant of the two, and if it be truly said by the Psalmist that every Man is a
Lie, then it may not be altogether improperly said, the Greater Man the Greater
Lie. But if on the other side you see yet a sadder Spectacle, that is pinching
extreme Poverty with lewd manners, for alas desperate wickedness, and cruel
want, are often found to join their hands, how useful is even such an Object of
Sin and Misery together, in those whom the Psalmist describes, that will run
here and there for Meat, and grudge if they be not satisfied, it is well if they
do not Curse too, how instructive are such miserable sights to make us pray
heartily with the Son of Syrach, Give me neither Poverty nor Riches, feed me
with food convenient for me; not Riches, foreseeing an evident Danger of
Luxury and Epicurism leading to direct Atheism, lest I be full and deny thee,
and say who is the Lord? and Danger too on the other side, lest I be Poor and
steal, and take the Name of my God in vain; either forswearing himself to get
off from Punishment, facing Almighty God when he sneaks and shrinks from Man,
or else it is meant of habitual common Swearing, which heretofore few would be
guilty of (so Abject a Vice it was thought) but the meanest People of as little
Honor as Conscience.

But besides such Reflections as these, which the sight of the miserable will
suggest to raise and keep up Piety, it is our Advantage on another and greater
Account, that the Poor we have always with us. Our Savior has said it as it
were Congratulating us the never-failing Opportunities of Exercising our
Charity; for were it not in Charity to us as well as to them, that we may do
our selves good, has God any need of our Aid to provide for those whose
Condition seems so necessitous? Thou Lord of thy Goodness have prepared for the
Poor, says the Royal Prophet, it is his Goodness to those that give and not only
to them that receive, that he will convey his Largesses through our hands to
theirs, for all the Beasts of the Forest are his, and so are the Cattle upon a
thousand Hills: If I be hungry, (says he the Great Creator, and so if the least
of his Creatures be hungry) I will not tell thee, for the whole World is mine,
and all that is therein: Is there not Silver and Gold enough in the bowels of
the Earth, and Pearls in the bottom of the Sea enough to satisfy all Men's wants,
and leave none to complain in our Streets: or is God's Hand shortened that he
cannot rain Quails again with Manna every Morning? so all Men should Eat Angels
Food, and have Meat enough; but the Divine Wisdom is not wont to be lavish of
Miracles, and it is perfect Goodness to make us Men, God's Instruments, good
Angels as it were to Guard and Assist our fellows in their Extremity; nor is
this left to our Choice to do it, or not to do it. I called it a Precept or a
Command to the Rich, and it was the very form of Asking an Alms by the Poor
among the Jews, Give me as God has appointed or bidden you to do.

It Is an affirmative Precept, Call the Poor, and being such does not oblige ad
Semper, as the Schools use to speak, that is, it does not bind us to do it at
all times or without any Intermission, whereas Negative Precepts as, Thou shall
do no Murder, does so perpetually oblige, that we may at no time break them;
but perhaps there are few more dangerous fallacies, yet none more common than
this, because I cannot Charge another for wanting Charity, tho he be not
opening of his Hand, and giving every minute of his Life, the Man, but it is the
Old Man still within us, will be apt to Conclude, if the duty of doing his Alms
takes no fast hold of him now, nor to morrow, nor at any set time hereafter,
then when does it lie upon him? on this supposition i^ will be very rarely or
never Practiced: It gives little less than a general Dispensation, tho not by
Absolving a Man from any Tie upon him, yet by representing it as no moral sin
to defer it as lon^, as he pleases; yet all this while his Conscience may quiet
it self: This was the Case of the Rich Young Man in the Gospel, All the
Commandments, says he, have I kept from my Youth. St. Chrysostom and most
others are of Opinion that he was no Hypocrite, yet we are sure that he was not
sincerely a Saint; but he did not lay his uncharitable Omissions to Heart, for
he that loved his Money better than Christ, must needs have been guilty of
shutting up his Bowels of Compassion many a time, when he saw his Brother have
need, though his own memory could not perhaps reproach him with any one Odious
Instance of having denied an Alms, when he thought himself strictly bound in
Conscience to bestow it. But now to state our own Obligation.

First you may set it down as a certain Truth, that our Savior here calls upon
us to get the Habit of Charity, for the Habit of Uncharitableness is utterly
inconsistent with a state of Grace: Now a Habit of this nature cannot be gotten
but by many Acts; and to think that one or a few inconsiderable Acts in the
course of a Man's Life, will suffice to acquire and confirm this excellent
Grace of Charity, it is as wild Divinity as that in the Jesuits Morals, where
they have the hardiness to maintain, That one such Act of Love to God, though no
more be exerted by one Man, may serve his turn and Save him: Once then for all,
we may take the perfect notion of this or any other Acquired Habit, from the
great Philosopher, who if he were not more a Divine, yet was less a Heathen is
then many of those Romish Casuists. A Habit is then atrain'd when we have
gained the Point upon our selves, to work as we ought, with little or no
difficulty; If then we give not easily, willingly, constantly, or at least very
frequently, we are still to learn and to seek for the Habit of Charity.

I must needs say in the second place, That some extraordinary Object of
Compassion may be so pressing and lie so hard on the Conscience of any
Christian, as to bear it down, and the feed of Grace the Vital Act in the Heart
may be utterly destroyed for the present, if he turns away his Face and does
not put forth his hand to save his Brother, for whom Christ was pleased to Dye.
The Priest and Levite who past by the Poor Man that had fallen among Thieves,
and left him there weltring in his Blood, they drew it no doubt upon their own
heads, and are Condemned by the Mouth of our Blessed Lord, for so not loving
their Neighbor, as if they had been Accessories to the killing of him: nay
Principals not only in mortally Wounding his Body, but their own Souls.

But I must also offer this as my Third Conclusion, That a Passionate, a
Vehement, an Affectionate, or for want of an English word to hit my Conceptions
fully, give me leave to call it an Affectuous setting the Heart upon Wealth and
worldy Goods, more than upon Heaven and the way to Heaven by Charity, is a
state of Sin and of Death: tho the Conscience like his who had great
Possessions be so partial to its self, as being not thoroughly Examined, to make
a Return not Guilty of any Gross Omissions in this kind, or of any notorious
Act of Uncharitable dealing, or of any Habit to make one appear Hard-hearted,
yet if your Treasure be upon Earth and your Souls be set upon it, they must
needs be staked down here too, and mount no higher; for it is a Judged Case,
and with all the Reason in the world, That where your Treasure is, there will
your Hearts be also.

But it may be Objected and Thoughts may arise in your Hearts, if there be so
much danger of doing too little and too slender Alms; then What is enough for
the Rich to bestow upon Charity? shall I say, whatever they can spare from
their own Occasions? that will not advance one foot toward stating the
Question; it is only raising another, a harder Question, which the best Casuists
will never be able to settle. De abjiciendo Superfluo, of the parting with our
superfluity to relieve those in need or necessity. But what is superabundance
to some, is scarce a Competency to others in different Circumstances; Upon the
whole matter, no precise bounds and limits can be set for all Men, nor for any
two Men in the World, tho we could suppose them exactly alike in Minds, Bodies
and Estates; It must be when all is done, in taking the measures of this or any
other Christian Graces, prout vir prudens definiverit, as Old Philosophy could
never otherwise assign the constant Exercise of moral Virtues its just
Ampliations and Restrictions, but only as Prudence should define them in
particular Cases; indeed to suit this with Divinity it must be Christian
Prudence, that is well guided Piety or Conscience wisely directed; Nor does the
Apostle St. Paul go very much farther toward fixing the definite Proportions
of Charity in the almost infinite Circumstances of men, than the Masters of our
morals had gone before him, in describing the Lines and Limits of what they
called Mercy; only St. Paul seems to enjoin one thing necessary to Enter and
Engage good Christians in a Course of Charity, that they all should have set
times as they are the Stewards of God, to make up their Accounts for Pious
Uses, that these set times should be so near one another, as to keep the Trade
of Charity quick, upon the first day of the week let every one of you lay by
him in store; But when it comes to naming the Sum that every one must allow,
St. Paul himself could not offer any common measure, he does not decimate or
call upon them for a Temh, nor yet for a Twentieth Part, or Exact upon them at
any determinate Rate, But let every one lay by him in store as God has
prospered him.

If it be Replied that this is to leave our Duty at such Uncertainty, as makes
it hard to know when our Righteousness, that is, our Charity exceeds theirs who
shall by no means enter into the Kingdom of Heaven: my Answer is, All such
Scruples are easily removed, if insted of disputing how much it is our
Obligation to give, we fall to practicing and abounding in the Work of the
Lord, this is to take the safe and the highway to Heaven. And this falls in
with my second Part: Here is a matter of Precept mixed and joined with matter of
Counsel and Advice concerning the Manner, the Measures, the Rules of Proportion
and Decency to be observed in doing our Alms-Deeds, Here are excellent
Directions given us to do them presently, and with our own hands, rather than
leave them to be done by others after our Deaths; to do them Diligently,
Cheerfully, Plentifully, nay Openly sometimes as well as Secretly at other
times, to do them with all the Condescending Kindness of Entertainers, for such
good natured Qualifications as these are employed in these words: When thou
make a Feast, Call the Poor.

This saying differs much from that other saying; Sell what you have and give
to the Poor, so says our Blessed Savior, St. Luke xii. but it is a plain Case,
That was only proposed and advised to some, never imposed by Christ upon any
but one, that Rich Young Man we spoke of; His Case was singular; Our Lord
discerned him to be as worldly as wealthy, therefore it was necessary for his
Eternal Salvation, to part him and his Great Possessions; But good Amends would
have been presently made him, he would have been admitted to be one of the
Peculiar Followers of Jesus, and probably the Power of working Miracles would
have been given him: But for the Generality of Mankind they are left free, and
forced upon none of these Extraordinary Seize, whether they will or no;
He that lied to the Holy Ghost in the matter of Alms was told by St. Peter,
While the Land remained was it not thine own, and after it was sold was it not
in thine own power? that is to do what he pleased with the Money paid fot it.
And yet such as sold their Lands, and laid the prices at the Apostles feet,
and Distribution was made unto every man according as he had need, these have
that Character immediately given them, that Great Grace was upon them all.
Notwithstanding which, to say that our Saviors words in St. Luke, Sell what
you have and give to the Poor, obliges the Rich to part with all, or as Zacheus
did, (and it was well done of him) with the one half of his Goods to the Poor,
this was one dangerous part of Pelagius'es Heresy. Therefore Christ did not
pr^ss that Publican to so vast a Proportion of Alms as he gave unaskt, and then
Christ Graciously Accepted it; nor does Christ Labor the Pharisee in my Text,
to divest himself of his whole Estate at once; But implies sufficiently that it
was Lawful for him to keep up some port, and to abide in a Condition of
sometimes making a Feast; Nor can I think it unlawful for you that are Managers
of useful Bounties, to keep up the Honor of this Renowned City, as well as you
are Stewards and Governors of Public Charitys, that you maintain these your
Hospitable Feasts, to encourage more such Charitable Benefactions, by the
memorial of those whose Names are as precious Ointment; nor will I go about to
stint the Allowance of your domestic friendly Meetings by the Fannian Law,
which permitted the Citizens of Rome in the height and flourishing of their
Empire, to spend no more at a Feast, and the Sempronian Law no more at a
Marriage Feast, than would amount to a Crown of the Sun in the modern Coin; I
will not presume to contract your Entertainments by so strict Laws as those,
any more than I would confine your Estates by that Agrarian Law which the
Common-wealths-men (that would gladly have a share in your Lands) would fain
introduce upon you; But though I do not prescribe to your Liberality at the
Table, hitherto shall thou go and no further; for abundantly enough and to
spare is allowed to a Feast, as our Blessed Lord approved by his own Practice,
when he Treated the Multitude, there were taken up of the Fragments twelve
Baskets full: though I do not offer to set you such bounds as you shall not pass
in your Civil Entercourses, yet I must needs Add, there is danger enough when
the Rich do but Feast one another, else it would never have been given in
Caution, When thou shall have Eaten, and art full, then beware lest thou forget
the Lord; whom they are least apt to remember, who lie upon Beds of Ivory, and
stretch themselves upon their Couches, and Eat the Lambs out of the Flock, and
the Calves out of the midst of the stall, that drink Wine in Bowls, but they
are not grieved for the Affliction of Joseph: there is hazard also of feeding
the disease of our nature, too worldly Affections in Treating our Friends and
Relations. The first great Feast we Read of was Genesis xxi. A better Man than he
that made it, or a juster Occasion of Feasting could scarce have been found,
Abraham the Father of Isaac and of all the Faithful, kept it in Token of
Gratitude to God for the Son of his Old Age, and the Heir of Promise, yet it
proved of Melancholy Consequence; it ended in Abraham's Sorrow and Ishmael's
Banishment. But if our Feasts bear no resemblance with the Ancient Feasts of
Charity, if there be no Consideration had of the Empty Souls, while we have
enough and to spare, if God were Angry with his Peoples Fasts in Isaiah, for
want of Alms joined with them, then how much more will he be with our Feasts,
if we let our Brethren starve while we are indulging our selves; But if to keep
far enough from that uncharitable wasting Sin (as Divines call it) we aim at
Charity in an Heroic Degree, Christ here chalks out the way to it, When thou
make a Feast, Call the Poor, that is make it sometimes on purpose to Solace
and Relieve them; wherein there is

First implied a Seasonable Advice for those who have not the Courage to give
as long as they have the Power to keep any thing, but talk of Bequeathing much
when it shall be no longer their own; they are Fools if they do not know what
they Tempt those whom they pinch, to wish and pray for, and they are the
greater Fools if they deny the Poor and themselves too, yet so do most of the
Covetous, but he that Counsels us here to Feast the Poor, intends we should do
it before there is nothing lest us but to feast the Worms; I confess if men
have a fixed and sincere Intention of giving all in a lump to some very great
and good Work for which they gather, God may be honored by such a whole
freewill Offering from them Living or Dying; but yet it is surer a great deal
which is so given already as to be without power of a Revocation; it is safer to
distribute with your own hands, than to trust in others what you could not
obtain of your selves to perform; it is greater consolation to see with your own
Eyes so many of your good Works upon the sile, and it is more efficacious than
any thing to increase your Charity, or even to inflame it, when the Head, the
Hand, the Heart, is constantly exercised and yet never weary of well-doing;
This is to keep up a Trade of Charity, where it may be truly said, that the
light Gains make the heavy Purse, continual Acts of Mercy and spreading our
Alms thin on many lesser Objects of our Compassion: This is most properly
Sowing, and sowing plenteously, it is laying up a growing Treasure in Heaven,
it is gathering to ones self a good Reward against the Day of Necessity, and
think what a folly it is to leave the Torch behind one, being to go through a
dark and dismal Passage, what madness to leave what thou love so well in the
place from whence thou art going, instead of sending it before to that abiding
City.

Again, When thou make a Feast, Call the Poor; it supposes a carefulness for
them, a double-diligence first to find out and invite them, then to receive and
refresh them; This is so extremely far from turning away thy face front any
Poor Man, as rather to travel in quest of such pitiful Objects, this is what
David calls, Considering the Poor and Needy, Laying out our Thoughts for them,
and sending out our Messengers, as did the Venerable Hospitable and Charitable
Old Man; When I saw abundance of Meat, said Tobit, I said to my Son, go and
bring what Poor Man soever thou shall find out of our Brethren, who is mindful
of the Lord.

Again, to Feast them means to Relieve them Plentifully, though it does not mean
a Miser's Feast, for one Luxurious Meal, nor should the Poor be Treated with
meats compounded and metamorphos'd by the Rules of Irregular Gluttony: yet let
it be a Feast, a frugal one but still a Feast to them, enough to satisfy the
Soul of the Hungry should be sometimes prepared on purpose for them, and thus
has God provided for them, that some of the best and most delicious Meats are
the very cheapest and easiest to be had; since it was not only the Privilege of
the Land of Promise, but a Common Blessing almost upon all Lands, to flow with
Milk and Honey.

Again, When thou make a Feast, Call the Poor, and if this can hardly be done
so silen^ly, but that some little Notice will be taken of it, then be not
Ashamed of seeming to do that Good which really thou do; as this is a common
Fault, now Piety is driven into Corners, and Charity it self is become a
pusillanimous, a blushing thing before the Men of a Giant-like mind, who make a
mock of Sin and of Virtue too; nor be Afraid to let thy Light shine before Men,
since all manner of Good-Works that happen to be seen of Men, are not therefore
unpleasing to God, but only such as are done with so vile a principal End as to
be seen of Men, and not with a primary Intent, that those Men may Glorify thy
Father which is in Heaven.

Lastly, When thou make a Feast, Call the Poor, that is Call them to be thy
welcome Guests, thy humble Friends, thy Spiritual Kindred; since Christ has
Called them his Brethren, since he has made them Heirs and Coheirs with himself
and thee; Lay aside thy supercilious Demeanor toward them, nay put off now and
then that Awful Distance which Decency requires thee to keep at other times;
Let some of them at these good Times be seated at thy Table with thee; thy
Betters have used them more familiarly, they have girded themselves and served
them with a Real not an Affected Humility; The Greatest Kings and Queens have
not thought it too little for them to wash and kiss their Feet, in Imitation of
him that introduced the same significant Ceremony, proposing it for a Pattern
to his Followers; and where can even Royal Dust and Ashes lay themselves low
enough in an Office of Devotion to him in the Proxies or in the Persons of
those that are his, when he the Son of God, he who thought it no Robery to be
Equal with God, yet took upon him the form of a Servant, and was content to
Abase himself, even to kiss the Feet of the Traitor Jud^s. But tho we are not
obliged to fall so low to the Poor as always to set them above us, yet there is
one Complement essential to make it a Feast, in all thy Gifts show a Cheerful
Countenance, says the Wise Man, for God loves a Cheerful Giver, says the
Apostle; and then there is felt and enjoyed true pleasure in the Act of
Charity; when Cheerfulness dilates and enlarges the Heart of the Alm'ner as
well as the Soul of the Alms-Man.

But now it is high time for me to interpose one Caution, and that Caution will
naturally meet me upon my third Head of Discourse: That fit Objects for the
Charity of the Rich must be such as are Poor indeed, for such they are not, nor
are they properly so called that are in condition to help themselves, they must
be really helpless Creatures, the Maimed, the Lame, the Blind.

For to nourish Idleness, the certain forerunner, if not the Companion of
Wickedness, is but mistaken Charity, and those that have two hands left them to
feed one Mouth, are to be counted with those that are Rich enough, if they are
no way disabled; from such our Alms would be more kindly withdrawn than
extended to them; or rather instead of these External Works of Mercy, those
which the Schoolmen call Internal, should be applied to them; such as Good
Counsel, with Assistance toward their Settlement, to make them some way useful
to their Country, or at least no longer Burdens of the Earth; or if Advice be
lost upon them, another Office of Charity to their Souls at least, even
Castigation and Compulsion upon them is but their Due as well as our Duty to
solicit it. I must have leave in this place to lament the miserable Abuse of so
vast a Fund for Charity, as perhaps no Kingdom under Heaven can boast the like,
I mean that Yearly Treasure raised by virtue of that exceedingly well meant and
ill managed Act for every Parish in the Nation to maintain their Poor, who
thereupon make themselves such on purpose, and are become perfect Oppressors in
the Land, which they will not set their Hands to Cultivate, how low soever the
Husband-man's Trade is grown for want of Laborers, that Honorable thriving
Profession heretofore, but now decayed and fallen together with your Rents;
which is all for want of Executing with that wholesome Statute Law, the same in
substance with that Apostolical Canon, If any one would not Work neither should
he Eat.

But on the other side I must needs highly commend and congratulate this City,
so many Workhouses to Chastise and Reduce the Vagrant and Vicious Poor; so
many Late useful Inventions to Employ the Willing-Poor, and to put even such as
are half Cripples in a way of getting their Bread; so many worthy Active
Undertakers to find'em work, that they may Eat the Labor of their Hands,
whoever they are that Engage in this Labor of Love, to Gather the Dispersed
from door to door, and to make 'em live by themselves and their own handyworks,
they do as it were treat them every day, and may the good Conscience of their
own deeds be to themselves a continual Feast! But the most goodly sight of all
in this noble City are so many fair Hospitals, either to i^close those whom the
Hand of God has touched with Lunacy; or to breed up poor Children abandoned to
the narrow mercy of the wide World; or to keep those from starving that are
poor indeed, the Maimed, the Lame, and the Blind: Let me but Read you a true
Report, etc.

Now I hope Strangers when they survey these M^numents of Ancient and Modern
Piety, will not say that the Church of England owns any such Solifidian
Doctrine, as tends to the Disparagement of Good Works, none will imagine that
our Reformation is not a Soil for Charity to prosper upon, where has it grown
or flourisht more than it has among us both heretofore, and of late? I have
been Asked abroad by way of Reflection, Who Built our Churches in London? I have
Answered, The Old ones were most of them built before the Corruptions of Rome,
and since the Fire of London we know who Rebuilt 'em. But no where does the
City-Charity look more hopefully, nor promises greater Advantages to the
Public as well as to the Poor, than it does in those several Royal and Ample
Foundations lately Repaired and Restored to receive those wretched Infants,
exposed to a Condition well nigh as deplorable as that whom the Prophet
describes; to these the King is insted of God, and not only says unto them when
they are as it were in their Blood, Live; ^ut takes such honorable Care of
their Education, that they may not live in vain; may God Almighty add to the
King's Life those Years which the King by his Bounty and Goodness has prevented
from being cut off, from the Lives of these Little Ones; or from being so
misemploy'd as would in all likelihood have brought 'em to shameful Deaths.

And may his Majesty live to perfect his other most Royal, most Christian
Design in the Neighborhood of this City, that stately Pile whose Walls are now
happily rising for the reception of Lame and Maimed Soldiers; that after Brave
Men have served the King in his just Wars, they may not want a provision and
place of Retirement in their Old broken Age, where they may end their Days in
serving God, and still praying for the Life of the King.

Such as these be they Young or Aged, as long as they are incapable of
subsisting by themselves, our Savior in the words of my Text, effectually
recommends them to be treated with all Humanity and Tender Mercy; such Poor as
these are the Wealth of a Christian Corporation, as that holy Deacon S.
Laurence Answered that Cruel and Covetous President, who demanded of him the
Gold and Silver rising from the great Oblations at the Altar where he
Ministered, he mustered up a vast number of Poor Saints, some without Eyes, some
whose Arms were quite withered away, others decrepit with Age, who had lost the
use of their Feet, and ranging all these miserable creeping things so as the
Governor might have his full view of them, Behold (said he) these are the
Churches hidden Treasure: but I may say these are not only as the Public Stock
of your City, but as its Walls and Bulwarks: and the mercy ye show to such as
these, is as one of the Ornaments of your Power, like one of your Gold Chains,
it is Solomon's Comparison and not mine, Let not Mercy forsake thee, bind it
about thy Neck. Prove. iii. 3. as if Solomon himself for outward Glory had never
been arrayed like one of those, who shine within and without by their noble
Acts of mercy.

And thus I am coming into my fourth and last part, the Glories of this Grace
or the great Reward of Charity, so much the greater when it comes the longer it
is a coming; And thou shall be blessed for they cannot recompense thee; they
whom thou choosest to Relieve in thy dis-interested Charity cannot if they
would repay thee, but he that Assuredly can, Infallibly will; so this is
placing our Charity as Usurers do their Money, most willingly on good Security
to those that will keep it longest, so they shall be certainly paid Use upon
Use for it, and considered for the very forbearance of their Interest: Not that
the Charitable Man goes without a Blessing in this Life; the Poor have a
special Prerogative from God to Bless; and as Rich as Job was before his
Adversity, he was highly pleased to receive their Benedictions; When the Ear
heard me then it blessed me, because I delivered the Poor that Cried, and the
Fatherless, and him that had none to help him, the Blessing of him that was
ready to perish came upon me; And well may their Blessings be desirable, when
on the other side their Curses are so formidable; for sure the Son of Syrach
knew what he said, Turn not away thine Eye from the Needy, and give him none
Occasion to Curse thee; for if he Curse thee in the bitterness of his Soul, his
Prayer shall be heard of him that made him: Strange that an Imprecation should
be called a Prayer ^ such a Prayer as is turned into Sin upon him that puts it
up, and yet is received by God as a Petition or Charge upon him that provokes
and extorts it; But on the other side, how many are the Blessings that are even
heapt upon the Liberal Soul that devises Liberal things, and by Liberal things
shall he be established; If Blessing him in his Person that considers the Poor
and Needy, If delivering him in the time of trouble, If preserving him and
keeping him Alive that he may be blessed upon Earth, if Comforting him when he
lies sick upon his Bed and making all his Bed in his sickness, if these are
mighty Blessings, all these are put together in one place, and a Concordance
would help me to a thousand more such places, full of Blessings as great and as
certain as these, and all these on this side Heaven: But the strongest motive
of all is that in my Text, the most unresistible Argument for giving Alms, tho
'Hoping for nothing again in this world, is That thou shall be Recompenst at
the Resurrection of the Just.

It is not said thou shall merit Heaven by thy Good-Works, the best, the
noblest Act of Charity must needs be that, to lay down our Lives for our
Brethren; yet Martyrdom it self ought not to be put into the Scale, as if it
were Weighty or Worthy enough to deserve an exceeding and eternal weight of
Glory; for I reckon (says St. Paul) that the sufferings of this present time
are not worthy to be Compared with the Glory that shall be Revealed in us, yet,
says the same Apostle in an other place, our light Affliction which is but for
a moment, works for us a far more exceeding and eternal weight of Glory; so
our Doing Good as well as our suffering Evil are a sure means to Obtain though
not to Merit, and as the certain Recompense in the World to come is here made a
most forcible Argument for Charity, so the Charity that some Exercise without
receiving their Recompense in this World, is an invincible Proof of a World to
come.

For now suppose a man with all this heap of pitiful Accidents upon him which
our Savior puts together in the Text, Poor, Maimed, Lame, and Blind, add to
these the Torments of Cramps and Stone, to keep him perpetually on the wrack
from his Childhood to extreme Old Age; and yet this poor man perseveres in the
Faith, and practices more Charity even that of Alms, than do all the Rich,
parting with his two Mite^ (as the Widow did with all her Living) when he
hears of one in more immediate danger of starving than himself; he will trust
to him that feeds the Ravens, to supply his next days Exigence; tho his patient
Continuance in well-doing may qualify and enable him to cry out, Centuplum in
hac Vita, that God has given him a hundred fold in this Life, of Joy in the
Holy Ghost, and Expectations of Bliss, yet it can never consist with the
Goodness of God to suffer any perfectly good Man feeding himself with such
Expectations, to be at length defrauded and disappointed; and the Justice of
God requires that he be one day recompenst, seeing it is a Righteous thing with
God, says the Apostle, to recompense Tribulation to them that trouble his
Saints, And to those who are troubled rest with us, when the Lord Jesus shall
be revealed from Heaven with his mighty Angels: And seeing it is a Stoical or
rather a Chimical, an Empirical Divinity, that by making Virtue its own Reward,
prepares a great Dissolvent to Annihilate Virtue it self, and bring it to
nothing, then since that God is Just and most perfect Justice it self, there
needs must be a Day of Recompense, a Time of Refreshing, a time when every
Lazarus that received his Evil things shall be Comforted, and when every Rich
Man that has already Received and Abused his Good things shall be Tormented;
But this Time and that Recompense cannot be to a Man in such a Case as I have
supposed, till after this Life, therefore it proves sufficiently that there is
a Life to Come.

But if such a practice of Good Works in the midst of such almost insupportable
Evils of this Life, be a Reason strong enough to prove there is a Life to come,
so that a Man shall say verily there is a Reward for the Righteous; then such a
Life and such a Reward once proved, is the strongest Argument in the World, and
the most persuasive to the Practice of such Good-Works: only to mention this
Argument of a Recompense at the Resurrection, were Charity never so cold, were
sufficient to raise it up from the dead again; to think that many a poor Good
Man, whom you have seen frozen almost to Death this last hard Winter, and have
supplied him with the means to warm him till his loins blessed you, many a Blind,
Maimed or Lame, whom you have as it were led by the hand out of his present
misery, shall one day become a Guide to you as you were to him formerly; that
he shall have the Agility of a Spirit, and the discerning power of a Spirit of
a Just Man made perfect, to behold you coming toward the place of Bliss, and to
call you as the good Angel did the Apostle, Come up hither; if this will not
prevail with you to Call the Poor, and give them a little Comfort in this
World, nothing will ever move you: this is that Powerful Motive our Savior
uses, to make our Selves friends in Heaven, by giving Alms upon Earth, that
when we fail they may receive us, that the Heirs of Salvation may be allowed
and sent forth by God to meet us when we enter into the New World, that they
may Conduct us into their Everlasting Habitations; for as St. Chrysostom Argues
upon that place, If we go to a strange City we need a Guide, much more to
another World, when the Soul is torn away from the Body, the staff upon which
it leaned, then it has Dreads and Horror (say he) when it quits this Flesh. And
if you will forgive me the laying of one Quotation upon another, St. Cyprian
speaks so pathetically to the same Purpose De Morta^ltat^.
how they shall welcome us into the Other World, for whom we had Charity or
Kindness in this, that with a Lively Description and Discourse of His, since I
cannot with a better, I shall Conclude mine. Who is there (say he) who being to
sail homeward to his Friends does not make wishes for a prosperous Gale, that
he may quickly embrace those whom he loves so dearly? Let us account that
Paradise is our Country, as we have looked upon the Patriarchs to be our
Parents; why do we not hasten and move forward apace to see that Country of
ours, and salute those Parents? there are a vast number of Persons very dear
unto us that expect us, our Forefathers, our Brethren, our Children, a numerous
Company that long for our coming to them, being secure of their own, and still
solicitous for our Imortality: to see them again and grow into Embraces with
them, How will it Affect and Transport both us and them? what kind of Bless is
there in those Heavenly Kingdoms, which consists with no fear of Dying, with an
Assurance of Living Eternally? there is the Apostles glorious Quire, there the
Prophets honorable Senate, there the Legions of Crowned Martyrs that Dyed and
Suffered Valiantly, there the Triumphant Virgins that have subdued and tamed by
the mighty hand of Continence the Carnal Desires of the Body, there the
merciful Men who have dealt their Doles and Largesses to the Poor and Needy;
Let us hasten away to these, winged with a fervent desire to be with these, to
be with Christ. Let this be the Aim of all our wishes, Let God see such
thoughts in us, Let Christ see the Travail of our Souls, the Intent of our
Faith, who will assuredly give them larger Rewards, whose Souls are more
enlarged toward Heaven and Eternity.

Now unto the King Eternal, Immortal, etc.

