A DISCOURSE OF THE Government OF THE THOUGHTS.

By GEORGE TULLIE. Sub-Dean of York.

LONDON; Printed for Ric. Chiswell. at the Rose and Crown in St. Paul's
Churchyard. MDCXCIV.

Imprimatur.

Aug. 17. 1693. Geor. Royse Rmo. in Christo Patri ac Dom. Dom. Johanni Archiep.
Cantuar. a sacris Domest.

TO THE Most Reverend Father in God JOHN By Divine Providence Lord Archbishop
of York, His Grace, Primate of England and Metroplitan.
May it please your Grace,
THAT I take the liberty to Prefix so Great a Name to so small a Treatise, only
the Dignity of the Subject, indeed makes some Compensation for the defects and
meanness of the Present, for the Argument is Truly Great and Noble in it self,
and what would deserve a much abler Pen, more leisure for Abstractions, a more
Philosophical Genius, and both a wider compass, and a closser collection of
Thought, than any I can pretend to. Thus much however may be said, that a sense
of that Edification, which ought always to be the chief aim and Design of the
Pulpit, which first gave Birth to this Discourse, obliged me to write as
familiarly and Practically as the Subject would well admit of. Such as it is,
My Lord, my Relation to the Church of York, the Just esteem one has for the
Concurrence of so many excellent qualifications in one Person, and my
particular obligations to your Grace makes this public Acknowledgment of them
a Just Debt from,

My Lord, Your Graces Most Dutiful and Obliged Servant. GEORGE TULLIE.

THE PREFACE.
THO I have no great opinion of Prefaces, to small Tracts especially, that seem
not to require any Prolegomena, and so consequently designed none, yet, since
the printing This off, I find my self under a sort of obligation to say
something that way, having been informed by some Friends that there was a
Treatise lately published (which has since come to my hands) with the same
Title I designed for mine, and with a great name annexed to it, and that both
the Book, and the Vanity (as they thought it) of the Title page passed for mine
with those that did not know me. From which imputation the publishing of this
will, I hope, sufficiently clear me.

As to the Tract it self I shall make no other reflection on it, than that it
were indeed to be wished that That excellent person, whose name the Author is
pleased to make use of, had carried on his Meditations from The Government of
the Tongue, to the Springs and Wheels of all its motions, those Thoughts that
set it a going; for then we might have expected a just discourse indeed upon
the Argument.

I have little more to add, but that I am sensible the subject I have here
undertaken might be managed after a much different manner from what it is by
me, and that without running out either into the wide field of Logic or the
Passions, which are distinct Arguments, both in themselves, and from what I
here intended.

A Man who can turn his eyes vigorously inward, and read the hidden and
mysterious part of himself, might, no doubt, make several reflections
thereupon, not unworthy the observation of the thinking World; as, that in our
most abstracted researches after Truth, our notices of things are fetched more
from extrinsick and accidental hints than a just and regular inquiry, and a Man
often falls upon a lucky thought as casually as Printing and Gunpowder were
invented; that if the motion of our Thoughts in composing, etc. like that of
the Sun, be both quick and bright too, that yet something of Earth, as the
objects of sense, a fume or vapor in the head often interposes betwixt us and
the Sunshine we enjoyed, and Eclipses the expected discovery; that sometimes a
sudden flash of Thought breaks in upon us, but either so faintly bright, that
it but just gildes our Understanding, and then flies off, or so plentifully,
that it dazles and overpowers our Faculties, that we cannot retain it, as Meats
of too high a Taste are not easily digested by a weak Stomach; that if our
Thoughts run turbid and lutulent, as the dregs and sediments of Mortality will
often make them do, that then they rise not up to the height of their Subject,
if quick and nimble, that they seldom prove solid and weighty, as the same
stream is rarely rapid and deep too; that the Position of a Chain of Thoughts
may be easilier banter'd than confuted, and that their Succession is by no
means so fortuitous a thing as unobserving men are apt to apprehend it. He
might show particularly, and at large, how the prejudices of Education,
Interest, Passion, etc. pervert the Sentence of the Understanding, when it sits
upon its Object; that hence principally derive those different sentiments of
things and persons, that so much imbroil the World; and that were it not for
these bribes that corrupt our Thoughts, all Mankind would think a-like here, as
it is certain they will do in each different state hereafter, since Truth in
every thing is still the same, and like its Great Author, can be but one, a
straight line that admits of none but it self betwixt the same indivisible
points, and that it is therefore in a considerable measure the obliquity of men's
Wills and Affections that hinder their thoughts from running parallel with it
and one another.

Thus a man by observing the working of his Thoughts upon all Occasions,
whether of speculation or practice, might furnish the World with such Remarks
as would carry both Pleasure and Profit in them, and let us more and more into
the knowledge of the terra incognita of our own lesser World, show us both how
we think, and how we might improve the mighty Talent. And herein the Genius of
Aristotle was admirably great: He read himself, and therein all Mankind, in
their true light and proper colors; for one man, stripped to his reason and the
due use of his faculties, is but the counterpart of another. His Logic was the
pure result of his own Observations upon the working of his Thoughts and the
proceeds of his Reason: for Logic does not teach us to argue, Nature did that
before it, but reduces our arguings into rules and methods, and shows us how we
do it.

These Reflections I have only briefly and hastily huddled together, that if
they chance to fall in with any happy and observing Genius, they may set it on
work, and be the fortunate occasion of more perfect and consummate productions
in this kind, and then I should think this lame and imperfect Essay infinitely
better bestowed than otherwise it is like to be; for I am so sensible of its
Imperfections, that I could beartily wish it in my hands again. But it is now
out of my own power, and so I must be content to lie at the mercy of the Reader
for venturing with so small a force of Thought on so great and noble an
Argument; for he that writes on Thoughts, writes on the pride and perfection of
Humane Nature, on that which must yield us in a great measure the Satisfactions
or Torments of the other Life, Thoughts excusing or accusing their Owners. He
writes on that which is an unanswerable Proof of a divine, spiritual, and
immortal Principle of Life and Motion in us: For I defy all the Advocates of
Deism or Atheism it self to conceive matter, howsoever thinn'd or modified,
capable of thinking; for no man, I am sure, if he rightly consults his own
Principle of Thought, can possibly reconcile himself to this apprehension, that
Matter, pure Matter, can think, meditate, deliberate, reflect, be witty, argue,
infer, pursue long chains of Consequences, and impart to man that vivacity and
sprightliness of Spirit, and that vastness of Genius that displays it self in
him.

In a word, if any one is made wiser, but especially better by what is here
offered, I have my end.

THE Government OF THE THOUGHTS.
CHAP. I.
HE that designs to write of Thoughts, had need tell the World, in the first
place, what he means by the Subject of his Discourse, for this is a vast
Argument in the general, as wide as the exercise and dominion of all the
Powers, and Faculties of the Soul, and had need therefore be determined to some
particular kind or Species of its operations; for there is no sailing to any
profit or pleasure in so wide an Ocean, without knowing first whither you are
bound, and what determinate Port you steer for.

1. THEN by Thoughts we do not understand those motions that pass in the lower
Region of the Soul, the Passions or Affections that are excited in the Will, or
in the sensitive Appetite, as some love to speak; these may indeed be touched
upon now and then, by the by, but not otherwise. For besides, that it is not my
design here to write a Book of Ethics, as the Argument, considered in that
latitude, would oblige me to do, the Passions or Affections are not Thoughts,
in propriety of speech, but the effects or products of them, Thoughts are the
Parents, Passions the offspring, for by thinking, reflecting, and the brooding
of the upper powers of our Souls, our Passions are formed and brought forth in
us; as the musing on an agreeable object, that we apprehend as present, raises
in us joy; on one that is yet in expectation, hope and desire; as, on the
contrary the Thoughts of an object that is disagreeable, creates in us fear,
anger, or sorrow, according as we conceive it present, or in futurity. Nor

II. DO I intend to speak here of all the several operations that are
transacted in the upper Region of the Soul, the Understanding, as of its simple
perceptions, forming of propositions, discussive, and retaining or recollecting
power; the government of the Thoughts, in this acceptance of the Word, would
oblige me, to direct how to form true, and discover false reasonings, which is
the Province of the Logicians, and would oblige me to run out into those jejune
and dry speculations, that are improper for a practical design.

I mean then by Thoughts here, neither the Passions, nor yet the reasoning,
deliberating, and arguing faculty of the Mind, but that power chiefly, whereby
we first of all gaze at, contemplate, muse upon, and converse with those images
of things, which our senses, for the most part originally represent to our
fancies, and our fancies from them, paint forth in our minds. Any man who gives
himself the liberty to think, and can make his Understanding the object of its
own contemplations, is conscious to himself of these primary interviews of his
mind with the objects let into it, and must own them antecedent to, and
consequently distinct from, both his passions and reasonings about them, for a
Man must first think, or look upon and view the ideas in his mind, before he
can be any ways affected with, or argue or deliberate about them, as a man, for
instance, must first think upon a formidable object, before he fears it, or
reasons with himself how to escape the danger, that threatens him.

NOR can it possibly, in the Third place, be expected that I should treat of
Thoughts in this limited acceptance of them, according to the vast variety of
objects, that are their subject matter, for these were an argument, in the
language of the Book of Job, as high as heaven, what Chapter 11. v. 8, 9.
can thou do, deeper than Hell, what can thou know? The measure thereof is
longer than the earth, and broader than the Sea. Nor God, nor the whole frame,
and economy of Nature terminate the Horizon, or bound the ramble, and
excursions of our Thoughts, which extend themselves even to things that are
not, that have no other being but what they borrow from a confused imagination,
for our fancies, by a tumultuary compounding of ideas, instead of real, can
create fictitious objects for their entertainment, and divert themselves as
well with a chimaera of their own manufacture, as with the most real and
substantial Being.

IT will be sufficient therefore, and indeed all that can well be performed on
this argument, to draw the great and general lines of several of those
excentric motions incident to our thoughts, and to endeavor to prescribe the
regulation of them.

BUT to recommend a design of this nature to the minds of men with better
success, it will be requisite, in the first place, to premise some of those
many obligations that lie upon us to govern our Thoughts as well as our
exterior words and actions.

SECT. 2.
AND first, we are obliged to this government of thoughts, because we may
transgress the divine Law by them, as well as by the transactions of the
outward man. 'Twas a fundamental slaw in the Righteousness of the Scribes and
Pharisees, and indeed of the generality of the whole Jewish Nation, that they
thought an external obedience to the Law, which exempted them from all temporal
penalties due to the violation of it, sufficient to denominate them righteous,
without any regard had to the innocence of their hearts and affections. It Is no
strange thing indeed that the Heathens generally, who were left to discover the
divine Nature with the naked eye of their own faculties, should content
themselves with such an external righteousness, or obedience as this, which
reached the outward man only, but it is a very surprising consideration that the
Jews themselves should take up with it, who knew their Law to have been enacted
by a God, that is a searcher of hearts, who requires the service of the spirit,
and will be loved and obeyed with all the powers and faculties of the mind. But
yet thus it was with that slow and carnal people: they had very little concern
upon them for the observance of the Precepts, that related to the regulating
the motions of the inner man, for there being no penalties expressly annexed to
them, they looked on them as advice rather than precept, Great. in Matthew. 25.
or at worst, that the guilt, contracted by their mental sins, was so done away
by their sacrifices, that God would remember them no more. They understood
little or nothing beyond the political Covenant, the terms whereof chiefly
influenced their obedience, and so took up with such a political righteousness,
as consisted in the obedience of the civil Laws of the Jewish Commonweal;
hence it is that Trypho the Jew, disputing with Justin Martyr, says, that the
Gospel Precepts, meaning those that command the obedience of the heart and
affections, seemed to him incapable of observance; and that Josephus reprehends
Polybius the Historian, for ascribing the death of Antiochus to sacrilege
intended, though not committed by him, (...), For as long, says he, as he did
not actually execute his intentions, he deserved no punishment; and that this
was the old received notion of obedience, appears plainly enough from our
Saviors correcting this misprision, in the 5th. of St. Mat. ye have heard,
says he, ver. 21. that it was said by them of old time, thou shall not kill;
if a man did not actually murder another, he was thought to have kept within
the bounds of the eight Commandment, as indeed he did, as to the temporal
penalty annexed to the violation of it, which was then principally regarded;
but our Lord tells them plainly, Verse 22. that the guilt in this particular,
lies as deep as the very beginnings, the first efforts and sallies of an angry
mind toward a foolish quarrel that may end in blood, in which sense St. John
affirms, that whosoever hates his brother is a murderer, is already so, tho
his sword be still unsheathed, and he has stabbed him only in effigy; again,
says he, to the same purpose, at the 27th. ver. ye have heard that it was said
by them of old time, thou shall not commit adultery, if a man did but refrain
from the actual embraces of a forbidden bed, how keenly soever he debauched by
the strength of an impure imagination, yet he was, for all that in their notion
of obedience, a chaste and modest man still, but our Savior tells them a rape
may be committed in the fancy, and adultery by a wanton glance. And that this
Jewish notion of obedience, is not yet altogether antiquated under
Christianity, seems but too evident from that trite proverbial saying amongst
us; that thoughts are free; as if when men durst not let loose their hands, or
their tongues, to work wickedness, yet they might give their desires and
imaginations their full swing; and muse, and wish, and contrive, and please
themselves with the Invention and Images of those things which they think it
not safe to put in execution; whereas, on the contrary, the Laws of our Lord
prescribe to our affections, set bounds to our fancies, regulate our desires,
direct our intentions, govern our wishes, strike at sin in embrio, and check
the first voluntary motions and tendencies of the mind to evil. Voluntary, I
say, because it is hard to imagine that those motus primo primi, as the Schools
speak, those first stirrings of Concupiscence which come not within the verge
and compass of the Will, should fall under the lash and censure of the Law; a
Soldier is not punished for having an enemy to encounter, but for not doing
his duty to repel his assaults, if, instead of watching and repressing his
motions, he rather entertains him, then, but not till then, let the Law go upon
him. God will certainly punish no man for an imperfection that is not in his
power to prevent, and which he did not himself voluntarily contract, will not
call us to an account for being proper Subjects of the Operations of his Grace,
but for misusing it, and will not require it at any man's hands that he has the
Seeds of evil scattered in his composition, but for suffering them to fructify
in the soil. However, it must still be owned that as to all the irregular
motions of the inner man, that fall under the disposal of our Wills, God has
concluded them all under sin, that, by the wicked man's forsaking his thoughts,
the numberless vain thoughts that fly up and down his mind; he might the more
abundantly pardon, Is. 55. v. 7. accordingly the same Prophet tells us of those
that err Is. 29. 24.
in spirit, Solomon of those that err in imagining evil, Prove. 14. 22. and
Micah denounces woe to the devisers 21.
of iniquity. Hence the same wise King of Israel tells us in one place, that
the thought of foolishness is sin; Prove. 24. 9. Prove. 14. 22. Prove. 15. 26.
in another place, that they err who devise evil; in a third, that the thoughts
of the wicked are an abomination to the Lord; as his Father David had before
observed of some that their inward parts were very wickedness, Psalm. 5. 9.
Psalm. 58. 2.
and tells us of others that in their heart work wickedness, hence again it is
that St. Peter requires Simon Magus to repent of the thoughts of his Acts 8. 22.
heart (for what is the subject of our Repentance but our Sins,) that St. Paul
requires us to bring into 2 Cor. 10. 4.
captivity every thought to the obedience of Christ, which supposes that of
themselves they are naturally rebellious; that our Savior reprehends the
Pharisees for thinking Matt. 9. 4. Matt. 15. 18, 19. Matt. 5.
evil, and affirms of evil thoughts that they defile the man, as well as when
they shoot forth into the exterior actions of murder, adultery, etc. The very
intention and desire whereof he elsewhere equals with overt transgressions of
the kind. The reason of all is, that God being the Father of the Spirits of all
flesh, and the Kingdom of his Son a spiritual Kingdom too, it is congruous both
to the divine Nature, and ours, which is a stricture of his, that his Laws bear
sway in our spiritual part, in our hearts and souls, our wills and affections;
for would we have an infinitely glorious Spirit served by dull flesh and blood
only, and not rather like himself, in spirit and in truth, with those prime
productions, those first born Sons of the immortal Nature in us? Has God made
us men, and would we pay him but the spiritless homage of the animal part of
us? Has he implanted a noble and immortal principle of life and motion in us,
and shall it not share in our obedience to him, and consequently in the guilt
of the transgression of his Laws? He is the natural Lord of both Soul and Body,
has bought them with a Price, and therefore all the Reason in the World the
Obedience we pay him should be commensurate to the extent of his Purchase; so
that if we have any just abhorrence of Sin in the true Latitude of the Divine
construction of it, we must govern our Thoughts, as well as observe measures in
our words and actions.

SECT. 3.
BUT I shall farther evince the obligations that lie upon us to order our
Thoughts aright, from such considerations as seem to enhance the guilt of
mental sins above those of the outward Man. For

I. THOUGH it be an argument that sin has acquired an arbitrary power over us,
and that the Law in our members has got the ascendent over the Law of our
minds, when the seeds of evil thoughts shoot forth into criminal words and
actions, and in this respect the offspring is worse than the Parent, that is,
it is worse to speak and do evil than barely to think it, yet consider the
outward acts of sin separately and apart by themselves, abstracted from those
previous cogitations that give them birth, and then the sins of the mind are
infinitely more criminal, for is it not worse to prostitute an immortal Soul to
sin and folly then a mouldering Caroase? the one is in the nature of the
Artificer that models and contrives the sin, the other but as the instrument as
it were in its hand, and who reckons the murdering sword as faulty as he that
dared to sheath it in his brother? the one is as the mother of the spurious
brat, or the womb wherein lust first conceives till the heart grow big and the
reckoning of the sin be out; the other only comes and midwives it into the
world, and brings, forth that which brings forth death, and who ever thought
these two equally criminal? nay, set aside the guilt that derives from the
corruption of the mind, and why should the worst actions of the outward man be
reputed any more sinful than those of the horse and the mule that have no
understanding? for sin is properly in the Soul only; the proper subject both of
it, and of that grace which corrects it.

II. OUR Thoughts are always first in the transgression, and so in respect of
precedence, are more inexcusable than outward actions; they are ringleaders in
the rebellion of sin against God, and persons of that Character are generally
made, as exemplary in their punishment as they are in their crime; these are
the first begotten of their Father the Devil, the eldest Sons of original
corruption, the might and the beginning of the strength of sin in us. Out of
the heart proceed evil thoughts, murders, etc. There the Son of violence first
lays his scene of blood, the Extortioner of oppression, the Adulterer of the
forbidden bed, and so of the rest, for a man first devises mischief, in the
Psalmists language, and then puts himself in a way that is not good, and
abhors not evil: nay they are not only thus the Devils puny Counsel, that
open the Cause and make a Motion in behalf of sin, but they are perpetually
soliciting, abetting and pleading its Cause at the Bar of a debauched fancy and
a bribed understanding, where many times they unhappily carry it; for it is no
wonder that a corrupt Judge should give it on their side. Thus do our Thoughts
cater and make Provision for the Flesh to fulfill the lusts thereof, bring and
recommend the beloved Object to the Heart till it dotes and commits actual
Folly with it; thus they lay in fuel for our Sins, and not only enkindle, but
blow up the fire into open flaming wickedness; and therefore:

III. SINS of Thought are more criminal than outward Transgressions, in as much
as the guilt of the one derives from the other, for all Thoughts are Errors as
it were, of the first concoction, which affect nature in all her subsequent
operations of life. Thoughts are as the Principal, outward acts but as
Accessories. The one is in the nature of the cause, the other of the effect,
for out of the abundance of the heart does both the mouth speak and the hands
act, and out of it, says the wise man, are the issues of life, and I add of
death too And who can blame the streams for their necessary partaking of the
pollutions of their fountain? Thoughts then are the principle of spiritual
life, or spiritual death in us, that great leading wheel within the engine,
which as when it moves regularly, it causes the outward hand of our words and
actions to point right, so when it is out of course, it puts all in the like
disorder with it; for our actions will be of a piece with our thoughts, and no
one acts like a wise man, who thinks like a fool. O generation of vipers, says
our Lord to the Pharisees, how can ye, being evil, think good things? for, who
can bring a clean thing out of an unclean? who can bring good words or deeds
out of foolish, wandering, and unhallowed thoughts? for, how shall a man reap
there where he has not sowed? can he from weeds reap grain, gather grapes of
thorns, or figs of thistles?

IV. IF we govern not our thoughts, they will govern us, or, to speak more
properly, will leave us without any true government of our selves, they are
natural movers that need no winding up, but are incessant in their motion
toward good or evil, and therefore if we take not care to determine them to
proper objects, they will run out upon any that come in their way, will haunt
and dog us to the table, to the bed, to the closet, to the Church, will be
perpetually intruding, interposing, and interrupting us in our duty, will
either intercept all good motions, or distract and confuse us in the
performance of them, and to be sure, will be most busy and impertinent at the
time of our religious services, when we are to compose our Souls to the
severest sobriety and intenseness of Meditation.

V. THE peculiar malignity of evil Thoughts is farther visible in this, that
they render the outward act of sin more or less criminal, according as they
have been more or less active in the contrivance of it: for every previous
reasoning, premeditation, and debate, enhances its guilt and inflames its
punishment, as that which argues a more studied and deliberate contempt of the
supreme Legislator, and therefore it was that the murder of Vriah was more
charged upon David than his adultery with Bathsheba. He took a great deal of
thought about the one, but in the other thoughts took him.

VI. SINS of Thought have this particular aggravation above outward breaches of
the Law, that they are committed upon less temptation than these, and the
weaker the temptation, the more powerful is the strength of sin in us. The two
great leading Passions of the Soul that determine us to, or deter us from,
outward acts, are our hopes, or our fears, which carry many times so fatal and
so strong a byas with them, that they incline us to evil, even contrary to the
checks and reluctancies of our own minds.

ILL times may scare men into those actual complyances, which left to
themselves, they abhor, and the impending danger, which, as it bore a mighty
stroke in the commission of the sin, so, tho it cannot justify it, yet will it
make some abatement of its guilt, but Thoughts are, in this sense, free, free
from all external compulsion, nor prisons can confine them, nor fire nor sword
force them into a compliance; So that if they join in the act, they are perfect
Volunteers in the service; and as our Thoughts are thus above the reach of
fear, so of favor too, above the love of friends, or the reverence of great
men, or the expectation of rewards, for who can pay a man for that which no man
knows, but the Spirit of a man which is in him; how shall outward hopes
influence the inward transactions of ones own breast only? external acts of sin
indeed may have something to say for themselves, because they may chance to
carry their wages, such as it is, along with them, but he who plays the knave,
the adulterer, the murderer, etc. in his own heart, he has nothing in exchange
for his Soul, but sins for pure sinnings sake, as it were without any prospect
of ever being considered for his pains, without any other wages than the old
standing one of death.

VII. AND Lastly, those Sins which have a more immediate relation to the mind
and spirit, as pride envy, ambition, malice, unfaithfulness, uncharitableness,
etc. which are transacted mostly in the inner man, as they are more
incorrigible so consequently more criminal, than others. For as to those Vices
which in a high measure depend upon the tempers and constitutions of our
Bodies, want of fuel will in time dead their flame, when the spirits flag, the
blood chills, and the pulse beats low, and the evil days come on wherein we
have no pleasure in them, the decays of nature, set the Soul then at some
tolerable sort of liberty to reflect upon her own condition; but as to the
other, age generally only serves to confirm and establish us in them. For how
rarely do we see a covetous wretch let go his hold of the earth, though he is
dropping into it? how seldom are envy and malice exchanged for contentment and
good nature? and when see we the proud ambitious man reduced to the same level
of mind with his humble neighbors? Sins of this kind have too much of the
Aethiopian's skin, and the Leopard's spots, easily to admit the laver of
regeneration. Accordingly we find the Angels, who kept not their first station
reserved in everlasting chains under darkness to the Judgment of the great day,
for sins of this incorrigible kind. For suppose their sin pride and ambition,
malice or envy, or what you will, 'twas certainly transacted in the mind,
without the intervention of corporal efficiency, and derived it is peculiar
venom from the spirituality of its nature. Mental sins then were the first and
are still, considered in themselves, the most crying provocations.

SECT. 4. Other Reasons why we should govern our Thoughts.
BESIDES what has been hitherto alleged on this behalf, the consideration of
God's all-seeing eye ought also to influence the conduct of our Thoughts: they
lie not indeed within the walk of humane justice, are without the ken of humane
inspection, no eye can pry into the recesses of the heart, but God sees, and
knows, and reads their subtilest motions and darkest intrigues with greater
perspicacity then we do men's outward words and actions: For lo there is not a
thought, not the motion of the least fiber in our hearts, but he knows it
altogether, knows it afar off, at the distance of Eternity it self, ever we
or our thoughts had any other being than in the Divine Idea. For no thought can
Job. 42. 2.
be witholden from him. Hell and Prove. 15. 11.
destruction are before him, how much more then the hearts of the Children of
Men? And then how strongly are we obliged to keep good order there, since they
are under the eye of so intimate and accurate an Observer of their internal
motions, and subject to the inspection of so true a Judge of good discipline,
and so severe an Avenger of bad? But I shall urge this consideration farther in
it is proper place, as a means to assist us in the ordering of our thoughts
aright. And therefore,

II. IN order to this end, it would be ^onsidered that God bears a special
regard to the obedience of our hearts and affections: For tho bright and
shining Examples of Virtue diffuse a luster round about them, promote the
divine honor, and induce men to glorify the great Father of such burning
Lights which is in Heaven, yet nothing is so unexceptionable a demonstration of
the power of Grace and the sincerity of our hearts, as a conscientious care and
management of those Thoughts that fly up and down in them; for where such an
obedience is yielded to the divine commands as no eye can pry into but that
which is ten thousand times brighter than the Sun in its Zenith, it cannot
possibly admit of the least intermixture, or suspicion of by-respect, but must
be tendered God purely for his own Sake; from a true spiritual principle of
life, and in a spiritual manner; and then what sacrifice can possibly be more
acceptable to our Maker than the immediate issues and emanations of our Souls,
when there is no Stander by, no Witness of what passes betwixt God and our
Souls in private, no secular consideration that can possibly engage us, nor
temporal rewards to induce, nor temporal punishments to force us to the
discharge of so spiritual and hidden a duty?

III. IT IS a main point of Wisdom and Argument of good understanding to be able
to order our Thoughts aright, and the acquisition of that noble Character
should spur us on to this discipline of our minds: All the reasonable World
will allow him to be a penson of a vast compass of understanding, who by
foreseeing and providing against the exigences of State, by knowing how to
compound, temper, and qualify the different interests, passions, and
persuasions of Men, etc. prudently administers a Government; and if so, no less
will he deserve the Character, who governs his Thoughts well for they are a
Great people for number, and as mutinous and disorderly as the most tumultuous
rabble, so that they who rule well, in this sense too, are worthy of double
Honor.

IV. AND Lastly, let the consideration of the noble and dignified Nature of our
Thoughts induce us to an orderly management of them: for they are beams of that
Light which is inaccessible, the immediate fruits and eldest Sons of that
immortal Parent in us which is nearly allied to the Divinity it self, and how
then can we possibly be so insensible of our own high Character, who were
framed after the Image of the Immortal God, and are designed to be made more
ample partakers of his Nature, as to lay out our time and our pains so busily
as we do in the management of a Family, acquireing an Estate, and supporting
and adorning a mouldring Carcass, and yet totally disregard the menage of our
thoughts, which are. the pride and glory of our Nature? For wherein else but in
this thinking, reasoning, Power do we differ from the inhabitants of our stable
or our kennel? And as this in general diserminates our Nature from theirs, so,
I had almost said, does one Man as much differ from, and excel another, by how
much he is the better Master of his thoughts, and can lay them out to more
generous purposes; if therefore we have any just sense of the dignity of our
humane Nature, and would advance and improve that part of us which is properly
the Man, we must manage those thoughts by which we manage all things else.

CHAP. II.
SECT. 1.
HAVING thus endeavored to lay before Men the Obligations they are under to
order their thoughts aright, I shall in the next place point out several of
those Infirmities, Irregularities, and Defects, that are incident thereto,
whereby it will more particularly appear, how Vain, and Frivolous, and Sinful
they are. The Multiplicity of Objects and the great Variety of those motions
whereby the mind entertains her self with them, renders it next to impossible
to take in this argument in such a Latitude as to be able to descend to minute
particulars; I shall therefore content my self to instance in some more general
defects and weaknesses of the thinking Power in us, leaving it to every Man,
who expects a more exact draught of them, to attend to the motions of his own
mind and to follow the jant of his thoughts after those Objects that keep them
most company.

I. ALL Thoughts of our hearts are undoubtedly vain that are employed about
criminal objects, as the gratification of any of our lusts, etc. For the
sinfulness of the object imparts its guilt to the act of the mind that is
conversant about it, no man can think of accomplishing a revenge, a fraud, a
murder, etc. And be innocent.

Namque scelus in se tacitum qui cogitat ullim,
Facti crimen habet
is the voice of both Pagan and Christian Theology. St. Paul. Romans 13. requires
us not to make provision, as we render it, for the slesh, to fulfill the lusts
thereof, (...), Says the original i. e. not to contrive, or project before hand
how to accomplish our wicked intentions, for our thoughts always lay the plot
before it thickens into the last scene of actual execution, but this head is so
plain that I need not longer insist upon it.

II. THOSE Thoughts must needs be very vain and foolish whose subject matter is
vain and trifling: it is not every ones portion, to have their minds fraught
with solid and substantial lading, some carry nothing but ballast, dull heavy
conceptions, others carry too great a sail, are over light and aerie; others
trade only in toys, in news, fancies, fashions, Apes and Peacock feathers;
neither nature nor education has furnished all men, with proper materials, for
their thoughts to work upon; and therefore, since the common activity of their
minds will not suffer them to be wholly idle, what wonder if they take up with
unmanly arguments, and converse in their Thoughts, with their dogs or their
horses, with the passages of the Theater, the imaginary exploits of some Hero
in a Romance, or the like, thinking to no purpose rather than not think at all.

III. As such Thoughts as these are materially vain, because their Objects are
nothing worth, so other Thoughts may be said to be formally so, i. e. When though
the matter of them is good, yet the manner and turn of the heart in thinking of
them is not as it should be. Thus, the same numerical Prayer may be a sweet
smelling savor from one man's mouth, and an abomination from another, where,
tho the matter of the service is one and the same, yet the different turn of
heart and mind makes it, formally considered, a quite different performance.
So, again, a wicked man may think of the same God, with a good one, where though
the matter of his Thoughts be equally good, with the others, yet his thoughts
are vain, because without Spiritual Life, and Vigor in them, whilst, by reason
of such Qualifications, the others are accepted; and it is very possible for a
wicked Man to have a Thousand materially good thoughts: and yet go to Hell in
the midst of them: He may think of God and yet he never have the more service
of him; he may think of Repentance, and yet continue the same impenitent Man he
was; he may think of Death and Judgment, and yet his life be never the better.
It Is hard if in such a vast Lottery of Thoughts, as is played at in our minds,
a very wicked Man have not now and then a good chance; and yet if he is not
renewed in the Spirit of his mind, and both the Principle and Course of his
Actions, bettered by them, they are none of his own Thoughts, but Injections
properly, with which his Soul is haunted; and such thinking of good things will
be so far from abating a Man's Guilt, that they will inhaunce his Punishment.
In fine, as every thought of sin is not sinful (for a Man may think of it with
Abhorrence) so neither does every Thought of Piety and Religion, come under the
Character it pretends to. For where the heart is carnal and vain, it desecrates
every good motion thrown into it, from without, and like a vitiated Stomach,
instead of affording solid nutriment to the Soul, turns all it meets with into
the morbifie matter of Sin.

IV. IT IS a great vanity of our thinking Power, to leave the plain beaten Road
of profitable and substantial Knowledge, for the narrow, crooked Paths of Vice
and useless Speculations. The Word and Works of the Almighty, together with the
Operations of our own minds, the wonders of the greater and lesser World,
afford more solid stuff for our Thoughts to work upon than the widest capacity
was ever able to go through with; and yet such is the natural activity of our
minds, and the fruitless Curiosity of some Men's, that they choose to refine
upon them, commonly beyond usefulness, often beyond Sense, affect Sciences
falsely so called, and spin cobweb Notions out of their own Brains, fit only to
catch flies with. Thus has the insipid Nicety of the Schools mangled, and even
crucified the Word of God, putting on it a crown of Thorns too, the barbarous
Spinosities of their own Inventions; and made the plain intelligible Doctrine
of believing in God, and living well, a torture and rack to the Brains of the
learned, and Consciences of the Ignorant. They have thinn'd the doctrine of
Jesus into the fineness and air of the metaphysics of Aristotle, and made
their Schools as great an Asylum for the Disputers of this World, as their
Churches are for the murderer, or other malefactor. And how should men gather
grapes of such thorns, and figs of such thistles as these: Such brambles of
dispute may tear and rent one's mind in passing through them, but can never
edify it.

V. IT IS another vain thought to imagine we can bring about our projects
without having God in our thoughts, or by contrary means to what he has
appointed; thus the Jews, as God complains by Jeremie in the beginning of his
Prophecy, had forgotten him days without Number, and were always projecting
with themselves, without taking him into the consult, by what means they might
stave off or elude the captivity threatened them; in neglect of that only means
of sincere repentance he prescribed them; upon which account it is, that he
requires Jerusalem, to wash her heart from wickedness, that she might be saved,
and asks how long her Jerem. 4. 14.
vain thoughts shall lodge within her. They not only feigned to themselves that
Jerusalem, the City royal of The Almighty Monarch of the World was Impregnable,
that the Temple of the Lord there was a sufficient Sanctuary to them, against
all their Enemies; and that it was impossible for Abraham's Seed to be in
Bondage, to any Power upon Earth (in all which vain imaginations they were
confirmed by the false Prophets that abounded most when the State was most
corrupt) but that if they were at any time attacked by the Chaldeans, they
would strengthen themselves in the strength of Pharaoh, by entering into a
Confedracy with Egypt; tho God' had denounced several woes long before against
that Project. And how common a thing it is for Men to leave the mighty
Counselor out of the Cabinet, to trust in an arm of flesh, and pursue the Maze
and Labyrinth of their own devices, in accomplishing the designs they have upon
the Anvil: We need no other, and can have have no better argument to convince
us than our own Experience of the wicked projects this day set on foot by the
grand Incendiary of Europe. There is no Subject doubtless, whereon our Thoughts
are more busily employed, than in framing and contriving those designs we have
under the Sun; And yet, which proves the extreme Vanity of 'em, for the most
part to little or no purpose. For, Man's goings are of the Lord, how much
soever he thinks them of himself, and how then, as the wise King asks the
question, can a Man understand his own Ways? We project, devise, propose Ends,
prosecute, apply Means; and yet all the while are managed, acted, and, as often
as the divine Wisdom pleases, overruled and defeated, by an invisible Hand
behind the Curtain; for, I know, O Lord, says the Prophet Jeremy, that the way
of Man is not Jer. 10. 23.
in himself, it is not in Man that walks to direct his own Steps. And in
Isaiah he has particularly declared Is. 30. 1, 2.
Woe to them who take Counsel but not of Him, who ask, but not at his Mouth, the
practice of Statesmen amongst his own People in the case before mentioned, and
for which reason, as he there threatens, he afterward made the strength of
Pharaoh (wherein they trusted) their Shame, and their V. 3.
Trust in the shadow of Egypt their Confusion. For in the excellent Language of
the Apostle upon this 1 Cor. 3. 19, 20.
Argument: The Wisdom of this World is foolishness with God: For, it is
written, he takes the wise in their own Craftiness. And again, the Lord
knows the Thoughts of the wise that they are vain.

VI. THERE is another vanity of Thought, which our Lord himself takes such
express Notice of, and that in his excellent Sermon on the Mount, that it must
not here be disregarded by us; and that is an intemperate Solicitude and
Anxiety of Thought, for the things of this present Life; the vanity whereof he
evinces with a force of Argument, and Strain of words, like himself, truly
Divine, and which will therefore abundantly superecede, any farther
illustration of the matter: For, First, he argues a majori ad minus. Is not
Life more than Meat, Mat. 6. 23.
and the Body than Raiment? i. e. Will not he, think you, who first kindled in
you the vital flame, furnish you with fuel to keep it in? Will not he who gave
you a body; give you a covering to it? Then Secondly, he reasons from instances
of God's Providence to Creatures, of a nature far inferior to Man, from his
feeding the V. 26. V. 28.
Fowls of the Air; and his clothing the Lillies of the Field. Thirdly, he
shows the vanity of this Anxiety of Thought, from its insignificancy and
ineptitude, to the attainment of what we propose to our selves from it, for
which of V. 27.
you, says he, by taking thought can add one Cubit to his Stature, or, as
others expound the place, can with all his anxiety, add the least proportion to
his Age, or extend the period of his Life. And then as he adds, in St. Luke's
relation of the passage, if ye are not able to do that thing which is least,
why take ye Thought for the rest? If ye are not sufficient of your selves to
preserve your Lives till to Morrow, why so infinitely busy to make provision
for them? Fourthly, he tells 'em plainly, that for his followers to lay out
their Thoughts so immoderately about the affairs of this Life, is to be still
upon the same level with a gentil Spirit, for after V. 32.
all these things do the Gentiles seek, besides that your Heavenly Father
knows that you have need of all these Things: And he is not so unnatural a
Parent as to let his Children go destitute of the necessary accommodations of
humane life. Thus has our Lord himself in an ample and extraordinary Manner,
exposed the vanity of^ this misimployment of our Thoughts to our hands, and we
shall have occasion to insist farther on the argument hereafter.

VII. THERE is a certain dullness or stupidity incident to the thinking Power,
when the mind does not go, but, like a clock with the plummets off, stands
still, is heavy and dumpish, and has no distinct conceptions of any objects let
into it, but nodds and and falls asleep, as it were, and runs into another
World, as Men in dreams do. And this, I conceive, is generally occasioned,
where it is not owing to a natural Defect, either by guilt within, or troubles
and dangers from without. First, Guilt within, is always apt to confuse our
Reasonings, choke and break in upon our Apprehensions of things, and strangle
our Thoughts; it always lies Cross and Heavy in our mind and deads that
Cheerfulness and Alacrity of thinking that Innocence naturally gives it. And
then, Secondly, for Dangers and Disasters, they fix the mind upon the
contemplation of the Object that Frights or Disquiets it, render a Man's Spirit
dead, as it were, within him, congeal his Powers, make them stiff and destitute
of motion, so that a man has not for that time the command of his Reason to
look about and provide fit means to escape the danger that threatens him.

VIII. IT IS another miscarriage in the management of our thoughts when we
propose no one good and fixed End of Life, for the supreme Object of our
Pursuit. Some have working imaginations never idle, always stickling, but as
good never a whit as never the better, as the Phrase is. For it is not enough
for a Man to have this or that particular End in his View, as opportunity
presents, and his occasion require: But he must have a further and a fairer
Mark, at which he aims and directs them all: A Man may make this or that
harbor, as occasion serves in his voyage, but sure every motion he makes is in
subserviency to gain some one determinate port of Traffic, for otherwise, as
the one sails uncertainly, and to very little purpose, so the other thinks and
lives but from hand to mouth, as we say; by breaks and by parcels, without any
dependence and coherence in Thought or Action; he pursues no one Road of Life,
but takes into every by-path and his Thoughts like a wanton Spaniel in its
range, run after every accidental Game that comes in their way.

Est aliquid quo tendis, and in quod dirigis arcum?
An passim sequeris corvos testaque lutoque
Securus quo pesferat, atque ex tempore vivis?
IX. ANOTHER sinful weakness of our Thoughts is seen in their being so much at
the command of our passions, as, if you observe it, they generally are, for tho
Thoughts are originally antecedent to our passions, as a Man must first think
before he can be affected with Joy, grief, anger. etc. Yet when these passions
are once up, they command the Thoughts that made them, and employ them wholly
on those objects that raise and affect them: So that look what affections bear
the sway in a Man's heart, that way his thoughts will take their course; as for
instance, tho a man must first think before he can be angry, yet when that
Passion is once upit lays out for that time all the Thoughts of an unsanctified
Heart upon the Injury, Affront or Injustice done one, and the means whereby we
may effectually resent and revenge it. So, again when Love and Desire have
taken possession of us, be the Object what it will, our minds are always musing
on it, Can a Maid forget her Ornaments, or a Bride her Attire, Says Jeremy,
the things they love and delight in? No: Our Thoughts are always present with
their beloved Object, run after it and into it, and represent it to us with far
more advantages than it really carries along with it. And the like might be
said of any other of our affections: They discompose our minds, confuse our
Souls, and like a too powerful Enemy breaking in upon us, put the numerous Army
of our Thoughts into disorder, so that when the heat of the Battle is over, a
Man looks back upon the defeat with Sorrow and Regret; and is at a vast expense
of trouble to rally up his scattered good Thoughts again, and to put them once
more in a posture of defense against those intestine disturbers of his Quiet.
Now, I say, this is a signal weakness in our thoughts, to be thus carried away
by our passions, at their Will and Pleasure; for our thinking Power was given
us, amongst other Ends, to regulate and prescribe to our passions, and not our
passions to them.

BUT since they were given us for good Ends and Purposes, and we are not
required to eradicate but to govern them, therefore the Apostle's rule is the
proper Remedy in this Case, viz. That we set our affections on things above,
not upon things that are upon the earth. For our Thoughts will partake of the
Qualities, and Genius of our Affections; if the one are Heavenly and Divine,
the other will on course be so too. David, speaking of the Blessed Man, tells
us, Psalm. 1. ver. 2. That his delight is in the Law of the Lord, and then adds,
that in his Law does he meditate day and night; and in another place,
professing of himself that he loved the divine Law, he affirms likewise that it
was his meditation continnually. Psalm. 119. 97.
For Men naturally meditate on what they love and delight in: and in Malachy
the Fear of God, and thinking upon his Name are Malach. 3. 16.
joined together.

X. THERE is another sinful Vanity of our Thoughts, in making the concerns of
other Men their Objects, when they make Incursions into their Neighbors
Affairs, break down his Enclosures, and impertinently ramble through all his
concernments: For such is the Curiosity, or Malice, or Envy, or I know not well
what to call it, of some persons, that they can entertain their Thoughts (as
they do their company too upon occasion) much more agreeably with other Men's
matters than their own, and even whilst they keep at Home, incur the guilt of
their Character whom St. Paul styles busy Bodies, Tatlers, wandering (in their
Thoughts) from House to House: The Practice of those generally, who, in their
own phrase, have nothing to do, as wanting Matter, I conceive, in themselves
for their Thoughts to feed and exert upon.

NOW this employment of our Thoughts is not only silly, and impertinent to any
good purpose of Life, but it is criminal too, in as much as every Man, let him
have as much secular business as he will, yet has work enough upon his hands,
the improvement of his mind, the government of his Passions, and the salvation
of his Soul, to take up all his Thoughts, all his time and leisure, and
therefore it must needs be Sin in a Man, in neglect of his own proper business,
to let the precious sand of his Thoughts run out upon other Men's, where they
are not called and have nothing to do.

AND as it is a vanity of our Thoughts to gad so much abroad amongst our
Neighbors affairs where they have no business, so are they no less vain in
this, that when they stay at home and turn their Eyes inward, they are apt to
overlook the failings and imperfections of their Owners. Every Man has his Fort
and his Foible, his strong and his weak part, his seeing and his blind side,
and whilst the eyes of our minds view the one, even the least Mote of
Excellency in us, with infinite Complacency and Satisfaction, they commonly
wink so hard at the other, that they let Beams themselves escape their
Observation. For every one that does evil hates the Light of his own mind,
neither comes to the Light, least his Deeds Mat. 7. 8.
should be reproved: For self Love is ever ready to take care that a Man fall
not out with himself.

Lastly, ANOTHER leading imperfection of our Thoughts, is observable in their
Levity or want of fixation; whereby we become as unstable as water, and shall
not excel: The heart of the foolish is like a Cart Wheel, says the wise Son
of Sirach, and his Thoughts are like a rolling Axle-tree: Glib and voluble in
their Motions, nothing so volatile and aerie as they; they stream and shoot in
an instant from one corner of the Earth to another, sore as high as Heaven, and
dive as deep as Hell, curvet and caper over the whole Creation, and as if that
were too little for them, fly beyond the limits of the Universe, and the
bounds of time, to Eternity and Imaginary Spaces. Like wanton Spaniels they set
out with you, and perhaps wait on you home again, but range every Field, and
and pursue every game that comes in the interim in their way, or like some
restless birds, they no sooner light upon one object than they presently take
wing and fly off to another, by which means there happens many times so quick a
Succession, or rather indeed such a tumultuary Jumble of Ideas in our heads,
that we lose our selves as in a Maze, get into a Labyrinth of our own making,
and can hardly remember the goal from which our thoughts first started, so that
if we looked them over again, and could but trace them in their rambles and
excursions from one Object to another, we should find them many times no more
coherent than our Dreams, or the rovings, and extravagant apprehensions of
Madmen, and perhaps the main difference betwixt the Madman in Bedlam, and the
other musing in his Study lies in this, that the one is so foolish as to utter
his Conceptions as they throng into his head, and the other so wise as to
conceal them.

NOW there may be several causes of this Imperfection; if we will trace it up
to its spring head, we must go as far back as the Fall of Adam for it, when the
mind leaving the pursuit of the chief and supreme Good, about which it
regularly moved as about its proper Center, and proposing to it self the
acquest of infinite other false and fictitious Goods in its stead, it became,
like a wandering Star, planetary and erratic in its Motions.

AGAIN we may find another cause of this in our own Composition; we are all
fearfully and wonderfully made up of two very difficult parts, Soul and Body,
and yet so that the Operations of the Soul do in a great measure depend upon
the temperament of the Body; now the great Instruments in our rational, as well
as animal Operations, are those subtle parts of the blood called Spirits, which
in the very constitution of some Persons, those especially of a sanguine
Complexion, being of a fine and light Contexture, do necessarily cause a like
Levity of the mind in thinking, for we cannot possibly help apprehending after
their Motions and Impressions.

AND as this volatility of mind is natural to some Constitutions, so may
several accidents produce it in others, a blow upon the Head, a distemper in
the Brain, or intemperance may put the blood into such a preternatural
fermentation, and so agitate and confuse the Spirits that there will
necessarily ensue a like Levity and Confusedness of the mind in thinking.

BUT that which carries the most general and principal stroke in this affair is
certainly the wantonness of our imaginations, which is often presenting our
understandings with fine Pictures and Images of things, which inveigle our
minds to run a gadding after them, set the Spirits agog, divert the main stream
of our Thoughts from their primary channel, and let them run out, like water
spilt upon the ground, upon foreign and improper objects. So that even the most
thoughtful men many times are not able to direct one line of Thoughts straight
on, but lose sight of the subject they at first began with. For imagination is
a busy restless sort of power that's seldom or never idle, but most of all
exerts its activity when the Understanding is lazy and out of employment. No
sooner does the tempting object from without, honor, or pleasure, or profit,
make its way through the doors of our senses to our understanding, but this
faculty like a Master of the Ceremonies, ushers it in, harangues upon its
Excellencies, and desires it may have audience; if a Man hankers after honor,
and his temper is ambitious, the imagination presently lifts him up to one of
the highest Pinacles of the Court, shows him all the Kingdoms of greatness,
together with Followers, Dependants, Attendants, Retinue, and the other glories
of them, so that the Man's Thoughts are always mounting, making ladders, as it
were, to himself, and contriving how to climb higher. So, again if an object of
profit has possessed the mind, the fancy presently begins to survey the land,
to set off the value and convenience of Goods laid up for many years, and falls
a telling over the money, as it were, before yours eyes, to engage you in its
pursuit, and makes your Thoughts, in the Prophets language, go after your
covetousness. So, again, if the Idea of a pleasurable object has stolen in at
your eyes, the same faculty presents you with more charms than any one else can
see in it, summons all the senses to bear witness to the several gratifications
it affords them, and recommends the object so long till your deluded Thoughs,
play the adulterer and commit folly with it, and in all these cases, like a
flattering Painter draws the Picture of the object far more beautiful and exact
than ever the original could pretend to and by these means breaks off the
connection of our Thoughts, cuts them short of the object they should pursue and
renders them light and desultory.

NOW this defect, as far as it is purely casual, or as far as it is natural,
owing to our complex'd constitution of Soul and Body, cannot be criminal, but
then comes certainly under that denomination, and is sin to us, where the
natural infirmity is countenanced and indulged, especially in divine worship,
or the defect is voluntarily acquired by intemperance or the like.

AND now that we are upon this Head it may not be improper here to subjoyn
other vanities of our Thoughts that are principally owing to the same cause of
a wanton and ludicrous imagination: for indeed this power carries a mighty
stroke with us, influencing, in a great measure, their determination of the
judgment, the choice of the will, the pursuit of the affections, and in
consequence of all these, the execution of our bodily powers.

SECT. 2.
AND here I shall first take notice of that error of Thought it occasions in
us, when we apply our selves to the consideration of spiritual and immaterial
substances. For being used to think by the intervention of Ideas from our
senses, which are conversant only about material objects; the imagination,
which receives these impressions from our senses, is apt to draw the same gross
Images of immaterial beings, as of Spirits, Angels, and of God himself; and we
being used to view the objects we think of as they are represented in the
looking glass of fancy, are apt foolishly to conclude, that the originals
resemble those Pictures of them, and so make no distinction in our conceptions
betwixt material and immaterial objects; hence it is that we conceive Angels to
be like young Boys, and the great God like a grave old Man; that very vanity of
imagination, as the Apostle terms it, of which the Gentil World stood guilty,
in changing the glory of the incorruptible God Romans 1. 21, 23.
into an Image made like corruptible Man, etc.

II. WE shall consider that vanity which Fancy imparts to our Thoughts in
relation to sensual and voluptuous objects; for hereby Men frame and figure to
themselves those unlawful enjoyments which it is not in their power to put in
execution, courting, and addressing, and complementing, and making fine
speeches in their minds to speculative idols of their own framing; fond Ixions
that embrace the Clouds and vapors of their own lusts, filthy waking dreamers
that defile, not the flesh only, but when that is out of employment, commit
incest with the Daughters of their own imagination; an argument of great
depravity of Soul this, for Men to make procurers of their Thoughts, to
prostitute their very Spirits, and put out Conscience, that Candle of the Lord,
that all may appear like Night about them, whilst they commit their deeds of
darkness, their imaginary rapes, whoredoms and debaucheries. We have the voice
of Scripture for it, that this spiritual wickedness is adultery, without any
farther progress in the fact. But

III. THERE is yet a worse vanity of the Thoughts, if possible, in relation to
the same voluptuous Objects, and that is a repetition of these sinful Pleasures
of the Mind, when they are past and gone, and have been really transacted. When
men are not satisfied with the harvest they have already reaped, but must have
a latter Marth, as it were a second crop of delight in their Thoughts and
imaginations; must renew their filthy scene in their own bosoms, erect a stage
there, and their Fancies act over again the same brutal Comedies again, with
fresh satisfaction. The fault this, generally, of overgrown and disabled
sinners, dry trees that have green leaves, though they are past bearing fruit,
Men whose vices have left them, not through supernatural Grace, but natural
Infirmity, who lamenting not their Sins, but their Impotence, endeavor, by the
strength of an impure Imagination yet living in them, to conjure up the Ghost
of their old departed Lusts, to make the dry bones live, and give their dead
Sins a Resurrection from one grave, whilst they themselves are ready to drop
into another.

SO, again, this mental repetition of sinful acts is seen in several other
Cases, as when a man has overreach'd and defrauded his Brother in any kind, he
is apt inwardly to applaud himself for the villainy, to walk over those steps,
again in his mind, by which he circumvented him, and repeat the dishonesty with
as much satisfaction as he committed it; so Men that are of bitter and
implacable Spirits, will act over their revenge again in their Thoughts, make
the wounds already given their Adversary, bleed afresh, in their own minds, and
stab him once more in Essigie, and so of other Vices.

NOW a Man must be arrived at a very high measure of Impenitency and Impiety,
who thus indulges. One would think it were enough for Men to commit the outward
acts of Sin with greediness; but to repeat them with delight again, is to
approve of them upon mature advice, and boldly to declare against all
Relentings and Repentances, which ever look with horror, not with satisfaction,
upon our by past evil Actions. The great Apostle makes it an argument of a very
wicked disposition, not only to commit Sin, but to take pleasure likewise in
those who do so, and if there be any difference in the case, it is certainly the
worse to be pleased with ones self for so doing. For every such after game of
internal complacency is a fresh commission of the Sin, stains the Soul with a
new guilt, and that so much the deeper, by how much it is the more criminal to
engage, not only the powers of the body to commit Sin, but the faculties of the
Soul likewise to view and contemplate and repeat it.

IV. ANOTHER Vanity of Thoughts, chargeable upon a wild and ungoverned
Imagination, is observeable in Men's framing fine Schemes, and Images, and
suppositions of things, and then pleasing themselves with them, as if they were
Realities, and they actually enjoyed them. For the Fancy has a sort of power of
Creation, and can hold up the Images of Idols of its own making, fictitious
Honors, Riches, etc. till the foolish Heart falls down and worships them. Thus
you shall have Men placeing themselves in some high Posture, or eminent
Station, or plentiful Fortune, and then amusing themselves with ten Thousand
idle Projects, how they would behave themselves in such Circumstances; what
figure they should make, what interest they would drive on, etc. Cutting out as
much work for themselves, as if they were in the actual possession of the Fools
Paradise, they have invented. These and the like imaginations are the frequent
entertainment of melancholy and hypocondraick Persons, and perhaps the best of
Men are apt now and then to fall into these sort of awaking Dreams; our minds
are apt to spread wider than our Conditions, and we will now and then, when our
understandings are not better employed, be figuring as busily to our selves,
what we would do, if invested with such an honor, possessed of such an Estate,
etc. as if we were actually Masters of them. Thus our Fancies project shadows,
and we take them for substance; we first build Castles in the Air, and then our
Thoughts proudly strut through every room of the imaginary Building; we frame
an Idol, and then fall down and worship it, whilst our Idol, in the Apostles
definition of it, is nothing.

NOW this is not only a vanity and a weakness in our Thoughts, but a Sin too.
First because God has provided better Objects for the entertainment of our
Thoughts, than such Chimeras. And,

2. BECAUSE that when our minds thus strowl and stray beyond the Circumstances
the Divine Providence has placed us in, it argues a sort of dissatisfaction in
us, with our present Condition, which is ever criminal.

V. AS it is a great vanity of the mind thus to employ its Thoughts, in
imaginary Suppositions, or in drawing Pictures, as it were, of things, and then
taking them for Realities, and Originals; so is it likewise a Weakness and
Fondness in the thinking Power, owing likewise to a busy Imagination, to dwell
upon, and be ever contemplating a Man's own real Enjoyments, whether of Body,
Mind, or Fortune. We are certainly our own greatest Flatterers, and should
never be imposed upon by others in this kind, did we not first delude and
impose upon our selves. When God has blessed Men with great abilities of Mind,
large Fortunes, or the like, they are always viewing themselves in the
flattering Looking-Glass of their own Fancies, (like those who spend half their
time in dressing) or many times it proves a magnifying Glass, that represents
their Enjoyments or Perfections, in far larger Dimentions than what they have
in Reality. Thus the Men of parts will be ever and anon amusing and pleasing
themselves with their own Notions and Productions whereby, as they are apt to
over rate their own acquisitions and abilities, so are they inclined to
undervalue and depreciate those of other Men. For whilst our Thoughts thus
dwell upon our own Perfections, they are apt at the same time to sit in
Judgment too upon the supposed imperfections of other Men, and thereupon fall
immediately upon making Comparisons, and to be sure bring in the verdict on
their own sides. Thus, again, in the case of large Revenues, Men, like the rich
Fool in the Gospel, are ever and anon taking an imaginary Survey of their
Estates, an Inventory, as it were, of their Goods, telling them over, as
Children do their Counters, or covetous Men their old Gold, when they sing the
soft Requiem to their Souls of Goods laid up for many Years, take thine Ease,
eat, drink, and be merry. Thus, again, in case of Reputation, for Sanctity of
Life, the stiff supercilious Pharisee pleased himself mightily, you may
conceive, with the thoughts of his own imaginary Piety, and the vogue he had
amongst the People upon that account, when his Gravity was pleased to thank God
that he was not as other Men. Now, I don't think, that it is absolutely sinful
in it self, to view one's own enjoyments of Fortune, abilities of Mind, and
other good Qualifications, and to give one's self the Advantage, if it fairly
appear on one's side, upon a just Comparison (though great Care in the mean while
ought to be had, that the mistaken Charity of self-love delude us not, in
covering a multitude of our own Imperfections). for a sober and temperate
Person, For instance, when he compares himself with the Drunkard, or the chaste
Man with the Adulterer, or the knowing educated Man with the Rustic, cannot but
think themselves placed as far above the cheap and sorbid Level of the others,
as the cleanness and sair Prospect of the top of the Hill is above the Mire and
Dirt at the Bottom. It not being indeed in the power of Men's faculties so to
stifle the evidence of their Conceptions, as to baulk all sense of Advantage
which they find upon the Comparison. But here then lies the Vanity and
Sinfulness of this Procedure of our Thoughts, that our hearts are not thereby
raised to a Thankfulness to Almighty God, as the free Donor of such Gifts,
Abilities, and Graces, but we are apt to terminate our Thoughts within our
selves, where they work, and ferment, and leven all our good Qualifications, by
huffing us up with Pride.

VI, ANOTHER Vanity of our Thoughts, owing to the same cause of an ungoverned
Imagination, is seen in their forwardness and impatience of enjoying those
Objects we conceive agreeable to us; like a kind Friend, or eager Lover, that
cannot stay at Home till the Person he longs for arrives, but takes horse to
meet him, and bid him welcome on the Road; for how often do our Thoughts
anticipate the Revenues, as I may say, of our actual Enjoyments, and, Chamelion
like, live upon the airy hopes of Fruition: Whence the reason of that common
Observation, that Expectation generally has the better of it, and Men meet not
with that Satisfaction in the things they expected. For besides the Emptiness
and Nullity that there naturally is in the enjoyments of this World (they never
being designed to fill up the large Capacities of the heart of Man) our Fancies
are always representing to us things more eligible than they are in themselves,
and our Thoughts have gone so often out before hand to meet, and converse with
their beloved Object, that they have enjoyed, and deflowred it already, and so
have forestal'd the satisfaction of Possession.

SECT. 4.
WE will now, in the next place, instance in those desects which are
observeable of our Thoughts in relation to holy Things, and the exercises of
Devotion.

AND the first weakness of our thinking Power that I would take notice of on
this head, is the enthusiasm to which it is subject, when we cannot govern and
command our Thoughts, cannot keep them orderly and within the bounds of
Sobriety, but they grow wild, and fly out into Imaginations of Visions,
Revelations, immediate Conferences with the Deity, extraordinary Gifts, etc.
whilst, generally, perhaps always in the latter Ages of the Church, such
pretensions derive not from that supernatural and divine Principle, to which
they are ascribed, but, to say no worse of them here, from causes purely
Natural, as Constitution, Meditation, Discipline, Education, Distemper, etc.
For, as for Constitution, who has not heard of the undoubted Effects of natural
Melancholy in this kind. What strange imaginary Scenes Men of this dark
Complexion have so strongly figured to themselves, as firmly to believe their
Reality, though as Rediculous and Inexistent as any in their Dreams. And as for
Contemplation, which improves the former temper, what studious Person has not
observed, how wild and ungovernable his Thoughts grow upon Profound meditation,
especially if dwelling upon a noble subject, and exalted by a solitary
Retirement. And then it is obvious to imagine; how a Man, during these confused
Transports of his Soul, may be apt to ascribe the Responses of his own
bewildred Reason, as others do those of their natural Conscience, to some
extraordinary Principle without and above them. This doubtless, together with a
frightful gloomy Discipline (not to mention the advantage the Devil takes of
such Occasions) is the only rational hypothesis whereby to solve those Visions,
and supernatural Conferences with the Divinity, pretended to by the
enthusiastic Messalians of old, the rapturous and extatick Frensies of the
famous Founder of the Jesuits and some of his Disciples, and, in short, all the
legendary trash, treasured up for the advancement of the Romish Superstition.
For there is no doubt to be made but that abundance of Zeal and Bigotry in
Devotion, a contemplative Life, the privacy of a Cloister or a Cell, together
with a meloncholly Temper, which it either finds, or makes, has made their
Prophets Fools (as Hosea speaks) and their spiritual Hos. 9. 7.
Men mad: For too much thinking has made more Madmen than too little. If from
these we descend to preternatural causes of these counterfeit Operations of
God's Spirit, Distempers, Experience will inform us what Raptures and Visions
are incident to hysterical and hypocondraick Persons. No less an Enthusiast
than Mahomet himself is said to have owed all his pretended Divinity to that
sacred Disease, as the Ancients called it, an Epilepsy. Casaubon Of Enthusiasm,
tells us of those who through a hurt in their Brain have fancied themselves
actually in Paradise; and of others, that amidst the Transports of their
Visions and Revelations, have died of that which produced them, a Fever. And
as to a certain extraordinary Gift, pretended to still by some People, I
believe, I could show, that a Treasure of scripture Phrases, a voluble Tongue,
and a warm Temper, gradually heated and inflamed by the impetus of of delivery,
together with a good assurance before Men, and an odd sort of familiarity with
God, has actually done the feat with the greatest Masters of the Talent.

II. WE may observe a natural Aversion in our Thoughts to pious Meditation.
When any object presents it self that carries Pleasure, or Profit, or the
gratification of any of our sensual Appetites along with it, O how greedily do
our thoughts caress, embrace, and bid it ten thousand welcomes! But when God,
or Religion, or Death, or Judgment, or any such grave and serious Subject
prossers it self to our Thoughts, how apt are they to slink away, hang back,
and be shy, and after, it may be, a very short Enterview, and a cold
Entertainment, dismiss those Objects, make them stand by and give way to such
as are more entertaining and diverting? The one's a welcome Guest and old
Acquaintance, the other meets with the formal Reception of a Stranger, or as of
a Visitant that is not agreeable. When we wind up our minds to the highest Pin
of Meditation on these Subjects, our Thoughts, after a very little stay there,
presently fall down again, we are impatient and uneasy under the Stretch, and
care not perhaps how soon Business, or Company, or the like, step in and set us
at Liberty; so averse naturally are our Thoughts, unless God has sanctified our
Hearts, to converse with holy Objects.

III. OUR Thoughts, in regard of holy Duties, are apt to mistime and misplace
themselves, when, though they may be materially lawful and good in themselves,
yet, they intrude impertinently, at a time not proper for them, when they are
not called upon, and have no business in the mind, like an over officious
friend, who, though he means well, yet mars a matter through the unseasonableness
of his interposal. To every thing, says Solomon there is time and season, and
it is the right ordering of things, as to time, as well as place, that renders
them proper, and decent, and agreeable. A Soldier may mean very well, and do
some acceptable Service by leaving his Rank, or quitting the Post assigned him,
and yet, for all his Success, he becomes a transgressor; and may be called to
an account for so doing: And just so it is with our Thoughts, I mean
particularly in our religious Performances; they may be truly good in
themselves, yet if they are foreign to the matter in hand, step in
unseasonably, and break their Ranks, they are Criminals. So that when we are at
our Devotions, it is not enough to bar out all sinful and worldly Conceits from
crowding in upon us, but we must stave off all other thoughts that relate not
to the matter in hand; for though a Thought, for instance, or purpose of doing
some good Work be in it self Divine, yet it is a question whether or no the
Spirit that suggests it at that time be Divine, because it tends then only to
distract us, and mar the performance we are about, as color misplaced in the
face does the beauty: so then, Gods worship, must be performed, not only
externally, but internally too, in decency and order, and we must not offer
that great Majesty who made all things, in weight and measure, a tumultuary
jumble of Thoughts in our homage to him. But as, in the words of the Apostle;
He that is engaged in the Ministry must wait on his Ministering, and he that
teaches on Teaching, and he that Exhorts on Exhortation, etc. So he that is
at his Prayers, must attend to his Prayers, to the particular Petition before
him; he that is giving Thanks to his Thanksgiving; he that is at Confession to
his Confessing, etc. directing all his Thoughts straight upwards toward
Heaven; and he that is at Sermon, ought, for that time, to apply his whole
Thoughts to what is offered, and if any other thoughts, howsoever lawful and
good, pretend to interpose, must bid them come another time, for that he is now
otherwise engaged, and not at leisure.

IV, IT IS another sinful Infirmity in our thinking Power, that tho we are
willing to entertain pious Objects in our Hearts, yet we care not to dwell long
upon them, so that they leave not those prints and impressions behind them that
stick and abide by us, persume not the heart with that due Fragrancy and Savor
they ought to leave behind them, when they are past and gone; for tho we may
not be so bad as those, of whom it may be affirmed, with the Psalmist, that God
is not in all their Thoughts, yet of well disposed minds it may be said that he
is not much at a time there: It Is long ere we can get sight of him through the
optic glass of Contemplation, and when we do, our hands shake, or something
interposes, so that ever and anon we lose sight of him again, and this Levity
of mind, as it is seen in our Contemplations upon any Objects, so more
especially in the performance of holy Duties: We set forth in Prayer, it may be
very well, with a due Composure of mind and an humble Sense of our obligations
to God, and Dependence on Him; but perhaps e're we are got half way on with our
work, our Thoughts, which set out with our Lips, have given them the slip, and
left them to go on by themselves, whilst they in the interim have rambl'd
perhaps from one corner of the Earth to another, and made the grand Tour of the
World: When we should earnestly seek God by Prayer, and our Souls and Spirits
should ascend straight upwards in direct Bays of fervent devotion, behold them
tossed like a dried leaf before the wind, or as an empty cask upon the waves;
for, instead of good, evil is present with us, and we cannot do the things that
we would; but the World and the Devil knock at the Door of our hearts, step in,
and desire to speak with our Thoughts, divert them from their business, and
make a Man's heart go after his covetousness, as the Prophet speaks, after his
pleasures, his sins or his secular employments: any thing that was forgot
before will be sure then to present it self to the mind and sue for Attendance.
Nay many times foreign Thoughts come about us, like Bees, as David speaks of
his enemies, in whole swarms together, and with their humming noise distract
our attention; or, like Abraham's Fowls, in flocks, to peck at and deform our
Sacrifice. And thus, again, it is in that other Branch of Religious duty,
hearing of the word, for no doubt but any Man, upon a just recollection of his
Thoughts, will find they were out of Church several times whilst his Person was
there; at home, in the Shop, or the Cosser, or indeed any where, but where they
should have been; in fine either out of Doors, or at play perhaps within, as
much as the Children generally are without. But then take any other sort of
objects, pleasurable, or profitable, or honorable, and your Thoughts shall
dwell, and hover, and brood over them, all the day, said I, nay, in the Night
too, disturb your repose, and awake you; for the abundance of the rich, to use
the wise Man's instance, will not suffer him to sleep. And so it is of any
other worldly project, gratifying Men's Lusts, compassing a revenge, or the
like: of the latter of which the same wise Man speaks; they sleep not except
they have done mischief, and their sleep is taken away unless they cause some
to fall. So intent are Men's Thoughts, so closely do they fasten upon these
earthly sensual, and many times Devilish concernments, whilst they are
presently weary, and frisk off from any thing that is sacred, and sober, and
serious.

NOW this wandering in Prayer and other holy duties is resolvable into several
causes. As

I. INTO our complex'd constitution of Soul and Body. Whilst our Souls are
lodged in these pitiful tenements of Clay, they cannot help being affected with
the inconveniences of their Habitation. They are confined to the use of Bodily
Spirits in their most abstracted operations, and every considerable disorder in
the blood and Spirits does therefore of necessity produce a proportionable
disorder in the Soul in thinking, and being surrounded with such variety of
objects and business, whilst we live in this material World, which through the
intervention of our senses, leave their Ideas in the Head behind them, the eye
of the mind can no more help looking upon them, when they are jogged and thrown
in its way, than the eyes of our bodies can help seeing when they are open, or
our ears hearing the sounds that strike them. All this is natural and
necessary, as the unavoidable result of the dependence of the Soul in its most
spiritual operations upon the frame and contexture of our Bodies during their
conjunction: and we may as well think of ceasing to be what we are, and of
casting the Man in a new mould as of a total prevention of this infirmity of
our Constitution. And this being so, we must expect to meet with it in our
Prayers, as well as in other business of our Lives; it is in Heaven alone, where
the faculties of both Soul and Body shall be enlarged and refined, and we shall
have but one Object of our Thoughts, God, who shall be all in all, that our
Souls shall cleave inseparably to him without the least avocation. All which
may serve to qualify, by the by, the seruples and vexations incident to some
tender minds, who are apt perhaps to entertain too hard thoughts of themselves,
because they cannot so manage their Thoughts that they shall regularly attend
upon Gods Service, without breaks and chasms in them, without falling off now
and then, and straying from their present business: For it is impossible, in the
very nature of things, our Composition, totally to prevent the first
beginnings, or sallies of the Mind toward wandering, for the Spirits, by whose
intervention we perform these mental Operations, will not bear so rigid a
fixation; all we can do in the case, and that we must do, is to keep a strict
eye upon our Thoughts, to drive away the Fowls that light upon our Sacrifice,
to endeavor continually to check and control and stop them in their career to
other objects, and when at any time they have given us the slip, to call them
upon the first discovery home again to their business, and regret our weakness;
and if we thus both bewail, and labor to remedy those exursions of our
Thoughts which we cannot totally hinder, they are not our sin, but infirmity,
which will never affect our main state.

II. DISTRACTING Thoughts in Prayer are very much owing to that natural
aversion we observed in us to things spiritual and Divine, for such employment
of our Thoughts being therefore a sort of preternatural force upon them, the
spring that bends them Heavenward will be apt to relax, and give way to the
contrary tendency of our minds downwards, so that leaving those unwelcome
objects they presently fall back again into the company of the old familiars of
their thoughts.

III. OUR distractions proceed, in a great measure, from an overactive and
ungoverned imagination: it is the quicksilver part in our metal, that runs
glibly up and down, and shoots, as it were, in our minds, like Meteors in the
Air, traversing our devotions with ten thousand frivolous and foolish conceits,
presenting us with those fine Schemes and Images of things, riches, honor, or
the like, till the distracted wandering Man, instead of his Maker, worships all
the while perhaps the Idol of his own and the Devils making. But we have
discoursed the extravagancies of this Faculty before.

IV. DISTRACTIONS in Prayer proceed frequently from an intemperate love of the
World and the cares that attend its enjoyments; which so often ingross our
hearts, that we no sooner set about holy duties than they justle the one thing
needful out of our minds, and make Mary's good part stand by, and Luke 10. 42
give way to Martha's concern for the World and the family. It Is certainly one
of the most ridiculous, and yet most general frailties incident to our corrupt
nature, to use this World as if neither we, nor the fashion of it were to pass
away; which is just as if a Traveller, with business of infinite importance on
his Hand, should loyter and take up with his Inn on the Road, without ever
farther pursuing the end of his journey. And possibly most of the sins that are
committed in the World are fairly resolvable into a too passionate fondness for
it. Ye cannot serve God and Mammon, is a saying that carries a greater force of
truth in it, than possibly most Men are aware of. For their principles of
action are opposite, their interests are opposite, and they require a quite
different frame of mind in their respective Votaries: and we know who has told
us no less truly than roundly, that if any Man love the World the love of God
is not in him; for it ties down our apprehensions to things mean, and trivial,
and base; and stifles and chokes our desires of such as are spiritual and
Divine; it extinguishes all holy fervor of Spirit, estranges from God, and
puts out that sacred flame of love for him, which is the very life and Soul of
our devotions to him; it crowds into the Church and Closet with us, and like
the Sons of Zerviah, is too hard for David; so that many times, with Demas, we
forsake the Lord in our Thoughts, even whilst we pretend to do him homage,
having loved this present World, whose thorns (i. e. its cares and riches)
choke the seeds, in our Saviors Luke 8. 7. 14.
estimate, of all the good that is sown amongst them; and therefore it is, that
when God required the male Children of the Jews thrice a year to attend upon
his service at Jerusalem, he promised that no Man should desire their Land when
they Ex. 34. 24.
should go up to appear before the Lord their God, thrice in the year; for the
fears and jealousies that might otherwise have seized them, would have divided
their hearts betwixt God and their families at home, and so have blasted the
fruits of so laborious and universal a journey: and upon the same account it
is, that the Apostle advises single persons, that were able to receive it, to
continue rather in that state, in times of difficulty and distress, that they
might attend upon the Lord without those distractions of mind, that are almost
unavoidably incident to persons deeply entangled in secular concernments.

V. ANY reigning and prevailing Lust will both obstruct and distract our
Devotions; for where our treasure is there will our hearts be also, and
especially, at the time of our religious Services, will be apt to run out of
the Closet and the Church to meet and chat with their best Beloved: We may
indeed at such junctures be proof against the Courtship of other inferior
temptations, and therefore the Devil takes especial Care then to set the Sin of
our bosom on work, to employ the favorite Lust for our Diversion. And this is
so usual a stratagem to decoy our hearts from our Services, that we may hereby
certainly discover our 2 Cor. 10. 5.
darling topping Lust, the (...) of our depraved Hearts, that which all the
others pay obedience to, and do it homage, for that to be sure is it which
pretends the greatest interest in us, and thereupon disturbs us most in holy
Duties.

VI. OUR distractions in Prayer frequently proceed from those Objects that
strike our senses during the Service. For it is not in the compass of our powers
to give any distinct and tolerable attendance to several and perhaps contrary
Objects at the same time, so that the Ideas of those we let in at such
junctures, at the doors of our Senses, turn the mind out of its way, and divert
it from the prosecution of its proper business. An open and erect ear to every
sound will make discord in the brain, and vagrant eyes will cause a wandering
heart: if Dinah like they gad abroad to see the Daughters of the Land, it is odds
but they meet with objects in their jant that will commit a rape upon them. And
therefore, we should, either, with Job, make a covenant with our senses when we
engage in holy duties, let our eyes look right on, as Solomon speaks, and our
eye lids look straight before us, or, shut up their Doors as much as possible,
to exclude the foreign disturbers of our attention, for nothing possibly
promotes fixation of Thought more than the closing of our eyes; experience
tells us the darkness is an undoubted help to intense meditation, and the
Arabian Proverb imports, that when the five Windows those of the sense are shut
up, the House of the mind is then fullest of light: I might assign here several
other negative causes, as I may style them, of this defect, as the want of a
true love of God, want of a devout habit of mind, want of preparation of the
heart, before we enter upon religious duties, etc. But these will fall better
under the last general Head of discourse, the regiment or government of our
Thoughts upon these and other occasions; and therefore,

VII. AND lastly, There is no doubt to be made but that the distractions and
wanderings of our Thoughts in Prayer, are, in a great measure, owing to the
machinations and experiments of the Devil upon us; for though in these ordinary
cases we at present speak of, it is a difficult, and perhaps unnecessary task to
discover, whether the Devil or our own Thoughts are first in the transgression
(for they are both ready enough to join in the confederacy against us) and
doubtless Men are apt many times to charge the inbred corruptions of their own
depraved nature to the account of that infernal Spirit, and so paint him
blacker, if possible, than he is; And it were besides an overnice and fruitless
enquiry, to search into those artifices and methods whereby he may rationably
be supposed to withdraw our attention from our Prayers; for we cannot well
determine how far he may be concerned in the use of any of those means of
distraction we have hitherto mentioned, as the love of the World, the wandering
of the senses, the painted scenes of the imagination, and the importunities of
any reigning and prevailing lust. Nor can we with any certainty define what
feats he is able to perform upon such occasions, by outward disturbances and
inward injections; for we can guess but darkly at the operations of Spirits,
how far or by what way they can insinuate and communicate their motions to our
minds; yet who so considers how instrumental he is in other sins, as in David's
numbering the people: Judas's 1 Chronicles. 21. 1. Joh. 13. 27. Acts. 5. 3.
betraying his Master: Ananias's lying to the Holy Ghost, etc. more
particularly, how much we are many times pestered with foreign and improper
Thoughts during our approaches to the Throne of grace, whilst we find a great
ease and freedom in our minds when they are engaged in worldly Business, or in
any other philosophical or indifferent Contemplation: And who so reflects
farther how much it is his interest to spoil and break off our Commerce with
Heaven, and blast the Fruit of all our Prayers, since this visibly advances the
interests of his Kingdom, must grant, in the general, that he is doubtless
particularly concerned in the wandering of our Thoughts during divine Service.
Accordingly we find that where St. James requires us to draw nigh to God, he
bids us at Jam. 4. 7, 8.
the same time, resist the Devil, which is a plain evidence, that when we come
to stand before the Lord, Satan stands at our right hand, in the Prophet
Zachary's Language, Zac. 3. 1.
ready to resist us; And our Savior himself in the parable of the Sower and
the Seed, tells us plainly, that the Devil, or, in St. Mathews Luke 8. Matthew.
13.
Language, the wicked One, takes away the Word out of some Men's Hearts lest
they should believe and be Saved. They are the hearers by the Way side, our
Lord there speaks of, such as in Chrisostom's exposition advert not, nor attend
to what is delivered, your careless supine Auditors, who while the Preacher
toils, Christ speaks by him, and the Holy Ghost is ready to cooperate, are
amusing themselves with ten thousand incoherent and foreign imaginations: and
what the Devil is so ready to do at Sermons, he will think it much more his
interest to do at Prayers, and therefore, methinks, it should be a powerful
inducement to engage men to a serious attention on both those occasions, to
consider that whilst they are led aside with those vain imaginations, that
interrupt their attending to what they themselves say to God, or others speak
to them in his Name, the Devil all the while, if we will believe our Lord himself,
is busy with them, lays close siege to their Hearts, and makes them more
effectually serve him, than the Lord that bought them. Not that I look upon
every such assault and even Success of the Tempter upon us, as an argument of
an irreligious temper and reprobate Mind: For the Devil, who is all Spirit, can
hold out the fiege against us, longer than we, who dwell in houses of Clay, can
sustain his Incursions, the very Infirmity of our Composition, where tho the
Spirit may be willing yet the flesh is weak, will necessarily make our minds
nod, take them off their guard now and then, and consequently give the Tempter
an anavoidable advantage over us, yet if these wanderings of our Spirits are
grievous to our Minds upon recollection, if we hence learn what unprofitable
Servants we are, even in our best Performances, and humble our selves hereupon
in the sight of God, begging him to whip those Thieves, that steal away our
Thoughts, out of the Temples of our Souls, we shall not stand chargeable with
the Robberies they commit upon us, but as the motions of the good Spirit, when
rejected, do so much the more inhaunce Men's guilt, so will the injections of
the evil One, when guarded against, as far as may be, and resisted, be
sanctified, through the divine Mercy, to our greater advantage. In fine, this
wandering of the mind in holy Duties, tho in its best Construction it is a great
Unhappiness, yet will be only so far imputed for Sin to us, as it is voluntary
in its Cause, and in our own power to remedy, and is, in its Progress, whence
soever it derives, indulged and complied with.

SECT. 5.
WE proceed now to another more terrible sort of Thoughts, wherewith the Minds
of Men are many times unhappily infested. For it is not unusual, for some
tempers especially, to be assaulted with abundance of odd, extravagant, and
horrid Thoughts breaking in upon them, in spite of all Guard and Opposition.
Thus you shall have some, those particularly of musing heads and melancholy
Dispositions, pressed upon now and then with Atheistical and Blasphemous
C^gitations, tempted either, with David, to deny God, Ps. 73. 2.
from a consideration of the unequal Dispensation of his Providence in the
World, or some other such illogical Topic; or else, through the pressure of
their Afflictions, or the like, to think hardly of him, to deny him in his
Attributes, to charge him foolishly, and to curse him and die. Others you shall
have possessed with dismal (...) of th^^r having sinned the ^in against the
holy Ghost, of their being Reprobates, cast off of God, without the verge of
his Mercy, and sealed up for destruction. Others, Lastly, there are hurried on
in their minds to the commission of some great and crying Sins, even against
the bent of their own Propensions; and that, sometimes as far as self Murder it
self, etc.

NOW these Thoughts being all of 'em a kin, and of the self same Family, I
shall not go about to treat of them severally and apart, but together and in
the following Method.

I. I shall endeavor to show that there is some difficulty in stateing their
proper Rise and Origin. But that,

II. IT IS of great use to know it, and therefore

III. IN order thereunto, I shall assign some Marks and Characteristies,
whereby it may be known when they are of their Father the Devil.

IV. I shall show, that howsoever troublesome and afflicting they are, they do
not affect nor endanger our main State.

V. and Lastly, I shall endeavor to prescribe the regulation of them.

I. IT must be owned there is some difficulty in the enquiry into the rise and
origin of these horrid Thoughts, and it is hard to know many times whether they
are the genuine Issue of our own corrupt Nature, or spurious Brats falsely
fathered on us by the Devil. For he can inject as much and more than our
Corruptions can suggest, and yet possihly, on the other hand, they are able of
themselves, to carry us on to those excesses that look diabolical, and when
they join hand in hand, it is hard to know whether of the two first made the
Motions or proves the abler Solicitor of their common cause of Sin: Out of the
Heart, says our Savior, proceed evil Thoughts, Murders, Adulteries, etc. there
they are conceived, whosoever begets them. And St. Paul, in his Epistle to the
Romans, resolves Romans 1. 24.
some of those black Crimes, for which he brands the heathen World, into the
Lusts of their own Hearts, and yet at the same time (...) to understand, that
the Prince of the power of the Air wrought in all such Children of Disobedience
And indeed as the Doctrine Ephesians. 2. 2.
of divine and humane Concurrence in the progress of true Piety is very plain,
and legible, in the Scriptures, so as that we are said, for instance, to be
washed and sanctified by the Spirit of God, and 1 Cor. 6. 11.
yet are required to cleanse our selves from all filthiness of the Flesh and
Spirit: So are the same sins in 2 Cor. 7. 1.
different places charged upon the Devil, and our own Hearts too. As, David's
numbering the people 1 Chronicles. 21. 1. v. 8.
is ascribed to Satan, and yet the King takes it to himself: Just as it is said
of Ananias lying to the holy Ghost, that Satan put him on it, and yet that he
conceived it in his Acts. 5. 3, 4.
Heart.

NOW tho it be somewhat difficult, as we have seen, to know the true Parent of
these hideous Thoughts we speak of. yet,

II. IT is of no small use and concernment to meet with some satisfaction in
the Matter; for the sad Experience, I believe, of many, especially
hypocondraick Persons, tells us, (the darkness of whose humor is best fitted to
receive such black Impressions,) how apt the grand Enemy of our peace is to
throw these fiery Darts into our Hearts, and then to accuse us of their burning
within us, to commit a rape upon our Spirits and then lay the Child at our
Doors, whereby he many times creates such infinite Disquiet of Thought, Horror
of Conscience, and Astonishment of all the Powers and Faculties of tendor
Minds, that they are apt to look upon themselves as rejected of God, delivered
up to Satan, and in such a desperate and forlorn Condition, that the violent
hand perhaps is sometimes thought of to put a Period to the comfortless and
wretched Life; and therefore, I say, it may be of excellent Use, on this
Argument, for the Support and Encouragement of these unhappy Persons, to point
out such criterious and characteristies, whereby the buffetings of Satan, as we
render it, 2 Cor. 12 7.
may be in some measure distinguished from the genuine productions of our own
Minds, and those generally assigned by Divines are such as follow.

I. THEY are the Devil's Thoughts, not ours, when the matter of them surpasses
the suggestions of our natural Corruption: for Nature her self, unless turned
perfectly Diabolical, shrinks, and gives back at those outragiously wicked
Motions, that pass now and then in some Men's Minds, and there to be sure they
are the assaults of the Devil upon them, to Vex, Disquiet, and Confuse their
Spirits, tho he chance to prove unable to prevail with them. An evil Heart,
it is true, may through its own inherent Wickedness, conjure up those frightful
Specter of Thoughts, that would scare and amaze other Persons, but that it
should be able, of it self, to terrify it self, to fill the mind with Horror,
to startle its own Corruptions, and go directly contrary to its own Affections,
Inclinations, and Reluctancies, borders too much upon a contradiction to be
admitted. No Man, for instance, of himself, can be studious of Life, and yet at
the same time entertain Thoughts of turning felo de se. The Suggestions of this
kind that derive purely from our own Hearts, are always more or less agreeable
to Nature, pleasing to our Affections, and fall in with our own Inclinations.

II. THE injections of the Devil are discernable from the productions of our
own Hearts, by the Manner of their assailing us. Corrupt Nature proceeds
orderly and deliberately with us, tampers and argues with our Thoughts, and
through the deceitfulness of Sin, gradually gets ground upon us, till by steps
and successive advances it compleats its intended Victory: For our own Lusts do
not force, but draw us away, wheedle us on, and entice us. But it is Jam. 14.
otherwise with Satanical Injections of this horrid Kind, they are a sort of
motus in instanti, dart and break in upon our Thoughts, howsoever otherwise
employed and taken up, without any previous intimation of their approaches, the
Devil in these cases sends no harbingers before him to prepare his way, but
forces his passage on a sudden, shoots like that Lightning, to which our
Savior compares his Fall, into our Minds, and Luke 10. 18.
Hell takes our Heaven by Violence.

AND as Thoughrs of this kind are thus sudden in their first attacques upon
us, so are they observed generally to be very pertinacious and obstinate in the
continuance of them, which is a

III. INDICATION that they proceed from (...) for it is highly agreeable to the
innate malice of his temper, incessantly to alarm the Fort of our Souls with
perplexities and anxieties of mind about his injections, even then when he sees
he is unable to carry it. The

IV. AND last sign of his being the Author of these Thoughts within us, is from
the effects that generally attend them. Our own Thoughts being the natural
issue of our own hearts do not scare nor affright us, nor are followed with any
extraordinary perturbation of Mind and Spirit, and therefore when Men meet with
such Thoughts, as are accompanied with an horror and dread upon their Spirits,
with confusion of mind, astonishment of its powers, and perhaps with equal
agonies and convulsions of Body, there to be sure the Devil is the sole
operator. Agreeable whereunto is that observation of antiquity, that they were
false Prophets, and of Diabolical inspiration, who were acted in a confused,
perplexed, and distracted manner; the principal Test this whereby the Catholic
Christians were wont to distinguish an Enthusiastic Montanist from a Divinely
inspired Prophet, as may be seen in Eusebius, where we find Miltiades, an
Ecclesiastic Author writing a Eusebius. lib. 5 chapter 16. 17.
whole tract upon this subject, and Asterius Vrbanus challenging them all to
produce him one single instance of a Prophet, under either Old or New
Testament, acted after their dark and impetuous manner. For the Devil dealt
violently with his Enthusiasts, confused and oppressed their understandings,
distorted and convulsed their bodily Organs, and in short, put them, like the
unhappy Persons we at present speak of, into most terrible agonies of Soul and
Body. Pythia her self never mounted the Tripos but with horror, where she
fomed, raved, and tore her hair, like a drunken or a frantic person, whilst the
Prophetic fit lasted on her: and this I was the more willing, by the by, to
take notice of, because the darkness of Mind, and violent agitations of Body,
observable among'st a company of poor besotted, if not sometimes possessed
Sectaries amongst our selves, agree so exactly with the descriptions antiquity
has left us of those Children of disobedience the Devil wrought in then, that
one may very well be tempted to conclude he repeats the experiment now and then
upon these Men too.

COME we now in the Fourth place to consider how far these horrid and amazing
Thoughts affect our main state, and touch our Salvation; an argument so much
the more necessary by how much it is an undoubted stratagem of the Devil to urge
the incursion of such Thoughts upon these unhappy Person, as cause of despair
and evident argument of their reprobation; and here is to be observed.

1. THAT it is not altogether in our power to govern our Thoughts, they are not
absolutely subject to our dominion, for the Heart of Man is as it were an high
Road, through which Passengers both good and bad will take their way without
asking leave of us; or, if you will take it under the notion of a public
House, which is open to all Comers, not only to the sober, but to lewd and
debauched company, whose wild roarings, curses, and huzzas will strike our Ears
and we cannot help it. For we can no more prevent our simple apprehensions of
things, than a sound and open eye can prevent its seeing, and the one is no
more polluted by a vicious object than the other, and therefore to be sure God
will never condemn us for what we cannot help nor hinder, For

2. IT can never be Sin to us, because unavoidable to be subject to the inroads
of these black blasphemous Thoughts upon our minds, no more than it is sin in us
to be liable to the assaults of any other Temptation. What worse is a sober
Person for being tempted only to excess of drinking, or a chaste Virgin to
incontinence? Our Lord himself was tempted to commit the most gross and
abominable Idolatry, and yet notwithstanding that, was as free from sin in his
Thoughts, as from guile in his Mouth, because he resisted the Temptation, and
baffled the Tempter: We sin only then when we basely give way and comply with
him. The Law of Moses excused a Virgin that was forced in the Field (far from
hearing) for as when a Man rises Deuteronomy. 22. 26.
against his Neighbor and slays him, even so is this Matter. So when the
Devil commits a Rape upon our Souls by Atheistical, Blasphemous, or any other
Horrid Injections, if we cry out for help, abhor the base Suggestions in our
Judgment, our Will, and Affections, great is our Victory, and greater shall be
our Crown and Glory; guilt is our Portion only then when we embrace the bold
Ravisher of our Hearts, and kiss and hug the production of so monstrous a
Coaction. He were highly criminal who in a besieged Town should wilfully set
his own house on fire, but a Man certainly is not responsible for the fire
balls and bombs that are thrown in by the Enemy, all he can and consequently,
is bound to do, is to use his best Diligence to extinguish the fire enkindled
by them; and thus it is with these Thoughts we speak of, if we make them out of
the ammunition of our own hearts we are accountable for them; but if the Devil,
who lays siege to us, throw them in, we are no farther concerned, then to take
the best care we can to put them out, to suppress and hinder their spreading:
For, that which is from within only defiles a Man, not that which is thrown in
from without; if we are purely passive in the matter and join not with the
Devil's Suggestions, so long they are his Thoughts, let him look to them, they
are none of ours, we have nothing to do with them.

III. IT would be considered that these frightful Thoughts derive many times
more from an ill habit of Body than of Mind, more from poor Blood and a bad
Spleen than from indisposition of Soul and falsness of Heart. Melancholy,
whether Natural, or acquired by Sickness, Losses, Afflictions, etc. (and such
Persons are most infested with these horrid Thoughts) is of it self apt to fill
Men's heads with infinite Crotchets, the blackest Conceits, and saddest
Surmises, it creates the Images of Apparitions, Mormoes, and Specter, and then
inclines the poor deluded Man to take them for Realities. Whilst; alas! his
malady is generally better cured by good Air, wholesome Diet, and Chalybeats,
then by all the recipes of Divinity: And then what reason has a Man to be
troubled in Mind, or dejected in Spirit, more for this than any other
Distemper, why is poor Blood and a melancholy Disposition a surer mark of the
divine Displeasure, than the burnings of a Fever, or the shiverings of an Ague?

IV. IT may be added for the support and encouragement of these dejected
Spirits, that their malady is rarely incident, but to religious Dispositions,
and pious Minds, that live under tender Sense of their Duty, and an awful dread
of the divine Displeasure. Were they in those bonds of Iniquity, and that state
of Reprobation they figure to themselves they would never be so happy as to
experiment any of these spiritual conflicts in their bosoms. Non timeo hos
pingues, said Caesar of Dolobella, and his roaring Crew, but sober Brutus and
Cassius stuck in his Stomach; the Devil like him, never troubles his head with
your supine unwary Sinners, who are amusing their heads with a thousand wicked
projects that advance the interests of his Kingdom, for he might chance to jog
them out of their sleep of sin, and awaken them to repentance, and so out-wit
himself, should he fright them by these terrible injections: and therefore if
Ephraim is joined to Idols, if Hos. 4. 17.
Men are deeply engaged in notorious sins, he too says, like God, let him
alone. For why should the Prince of darkness be thought so weak a Statesman as
to make war upon those who have already submitted to his government, and sworn
homage to him? But then he uses all the black art of his infernal Suggestions
to stop, and vex, or disquiet the Religious Man in his holy course. 'Twas
righteous Job that he would fain have prevailed with to curse God to his face;
and 'twas the Holy Jesus that was Job. 1. 11. and 2. 5.
tempted by him to that horrid blasphemy of renouncing the worship of the great
God, and substituting him in his stead. So that, upon the whole, Temptations of
this nature being rather an argument of a pious than irreligious temper, ought,
in just construction to be so far from Ministering sorrow, that they may afford
even matter of comfort and rejoicing to those that are exercised therein.

V. AND Lastly, Tho it must be confessed that these black injections, may be
sometimes, like other judgments, the Chastisement of our sins, as of our carnal
security for instance, of neglect of our Thoughts, grieving the holy Spirit,
etc. yet they are even then only the evil of punishment, as any other
infliction may be, not of sin to us, unless we like, comply with, and approve
them; and when they have once gained the design, for which our heavenly Father
sent them on his Children, as suppose the awakening them to a more through
Repentance than they have yet arrived at, taking off their inclinations to the
enjoyments of this present Life, teaching them a more perfect Recumbency upon
God, abating their Pride, least they should be, with St. Paul, above measure
exalted, 2 Cor. 12. 7.
etc. then he takes off his afflicting hand, restrains the Tempter, quiets the
mind, and speaks Peace to his People.

CHAP. III.
SECT. 1.
THUS much of the second part of our Subject, the Defects, Failures, and
Infirmities incident to our Thoughts. We are now arrived at the third and last,
which is to prescribe some rules for the Government and Manage of them. And
thus I will endeavor to do.

I. WITH Relation particularly to these horrid Thoughts we have just now
treated of.

II. WITH Relation to the sinful infirmities of our Thoughts in religious
Duties.

III. AND Lastly, I shall lay down such Rules as concern the government of our
Thoughts in general.

First, I shall endeavor to show, how we are to behave our selves with
particular relation to these horrid Thoughts we have just now treated of. And,

1. THERE is no doubt to be made, but that Prayer, which is so proper a means
to the attainment of every good and perfect Gift, and so powerful an Amulet
against all the Evils we labor under, will be of special Use in the case
before us, Is any among you afflicted, says St. James, let him pray, and what
greater affliction, and consequently, more pressing occasion to Prayer than
those Perplexities of Mind we speak of; for when can it be more opportune to
call in the Aid of Heaven, than when we are thus immediately assaulted by Hell?
What fitter to quench these fiery Darts of the Wicked than the Shield of Faith
in God expressed Ephesians. 6. 16.
by our importunate Applications to him for Relief? For then must it be more
especially acceptable to God, to testify an entire Dependence on, and
Confidence in him, when he seems most of all to hide his Face from us in
Displeasure. For if we thus pour out our Supplications before him, hungring and
thirsting after the Assistances of his Spirit, and the Testimony of our
Consciences, to support us in these spiritual Conflicts, he has promised, and
therefore no doubt but in his own good time, he will shine upon us with the
Light of his Countenance, and yield us Refreshment: Will put his hook into the
Nose, and his bridle into the Lips of the Tempter, turn him back, by the way by
which he came, and give Ease to those who have suffered so much in themselves,
for fear only of having offended him.

II. ANOTHER proper remedy in this case, is to avoid idleness and solitary
retirements; it must indeed be owned, in my opinion, that Solitude is a mighty
help to elevation of Mind, application of Thought, recollection of Spirit, and
consequently to true private Devotion; which might be the Reason, I presume,
why our Lord himself, on this occasion, added sometimes even the darkness of the
Night, to the retirement of the Mountains. But yet, in this case, when the
mind, left to it self is apt continually to dwell upon one's own supposed
desperate Condition, and be perpetually haunted with the Ghosts it has conjured
up, it is far more advisable to repair to the City than to the Desert, and to
choose Company before a Retreat: The one will help to lay the evil Spirit, the
other as certainly improves its Terrors. If one fall in Society, another may
lift him up again, but in Privacy, a Man must stand upon his own bottom; and be
in some measure self sufficient to encounter with the Tempter, and that in
circumstances most advantageous to his Design upon us; for the temptations of
Solitude are, I verily believe, more dangerous than those to be met with upon
the stage of Action, because it lays us more especially open to the assaults of
the Tempter, for which reason it is rationally presumed he made choice of the
Wilderness, when he encountered with our Lord and Savior; and both Reason, and
the experience of several, of Ignatius particularly, that famous Founder of the
Jesuit's Order, and eminent Instance of the Truth, assures us, that they who
give themselves much up to Solitude, are infinitely obnoxious to Satanical
Illusions: If therefore we would divert and break the force of these frightful
Thoughts and Suggestions, we would do well to keep our Minds employed, either
in innocent and agreeable Conversation, or when out of that, in our own and
proper Employments; for idleness is a sort of Solitude of the Mind, even in
places of the greatest Concourse, and gives the Devil as great an Advantage
against us, as the other Solitude of the Desert or the Cloister.

III. IT IS advised by Divines in these cases, rather to slight than to struggle
and contest with the Temptor; not to argue the case or enter into parley with
him about one's Condition, (for the conflict will gall and chafe our Minds the
more) but, as far as we are able, to let his Hellish Injections go as they
come, and be no more concerned for his blaspheming within us, than for the
Curses and Imprications of any other lewd Company that we cannot get rid of.
For Opposition does but perpetuate the Fray, and make the Battle the hotter: A
wild Beast, if you violently stop its Passage, may chance to run over you; let
it alone, it will go the gentlier by you: The way then in this case is, not to
resist the Devil, otherwise than by Prayer, but to let him spend his Fury, and
bear his Shocks with a severe Contempt of them, with a resolved firmness of
Mind, and sedateness of Temper, till his force dissipates and wastes away of it
self.

IV. AND Lastly, a constant prosecution of one's Duty, howsoever irksom and
uncomfortable it may appear, will certainly in time give the Mind Ease, and set
it at Liberty from these Hellish Thoughts: The Clouds that darken the Mind now
will by perseverance in Duty be succeeded by a perfect Day, a Day of Glory and
eternal Brightness. For God will judge no Man for what he cannot help nor
hinder, but will certainly reward him who does him the best Service he is able,
and is grieved only he can do him no better. For it is true in this case too,
that if there be a willing Mind it is accepted according to what a Man has, and
not according to what he has not.

SECT. 2.
PROCEED we now to such Considerations as may be proper to govern, and fix our
Thoughts during our attendance upon religious Duties.

AND here we cannot more profitably commence this important Work, than by the
same measure we at first prescribed on the last part of this Subject; that is,
by addresssing to God for his Aid and Assiance in the Matter, that not only
the Words of our Mouth, but the Meditations if our Heart (especially in our
immediate approaches to Him) may be always acceptable in the sight of the Lord
our God and our Redeemer. For Prayer it self will facilitate that application
of Mind which is necessary to a due performance of it, in as much as it
purifies the Heart, sublimates the Spirit, and exalts it above its natural
Pitch and Level: For by often returning to God, and carefully renewing our
commerce with Heaven, we shake off our criminal Dispositions; and what was at
first irksom and wearisomness to the flesh becomes at length an easy and a
pleasurable Exercise. He will never be able to arrive to any tolerable degree
of Perfection in any Attainment, whose desires do not first carry him on
toward it with some Eagerness and Impatience; and Prayer is nothing but
putting our desires into Suit. He is certainly a very temerarious Person, who
commences any Undertakeing, without invokeing first the divine Favor and
Assistance: The only proper Foundation Stone whereon to build our hopes of
Success in any of our Enterprises, and judged as such even by the Heathen World
it self, who generally commenced their Works with apprecation of good Success
from the great Author of it. Caesar, being to enter the Senate, sacrificed
first, and Prayer among them was a constant Attendance upon that Performance,
and Appian particularly speaks of that Act, not as of an extraordinary, but as
of a customary thing. And if this piece of homage be so highly our Duty in
enterprising things that do not, I may say, so nearly regard him, how much more
will it be so in our endeavors to attain that grace which flows directly from
him, immediately concerns his Honor and is terminated in him, as its final and
only proper Object?

II. ANOTHER proper remedy for the government of our Thoughts in religious
Duties, is to qualify and prepare our Hearts before hand for the performance:
To discharge all Thoughts of the World for that time from their attendance, to
require them to stand by, to carry here or there, whilst we go and Pray yonder.
It Is true indeed that the Loins of a Mind, thoroughly principled with the Love
and Fear of the divine Majesty, are always ready girt about for the Sacrifice,
such Persons liveing under a constant sense and practice of it, but we address
not here to the whole, who have no need of a spiritual Physician, but to those
who are sick of their Duty; who come to it with ten thousand foreign and
improper Ideas; with the Images of an Estate, a Purchase, a Family, a Trade, a
Ball, a Consort of Music, or perhaps last nights Debauch about them: To these
one would prescribe some preparatory Physic, some sequestring of the Mind from
these ingageing Objects before they enter upon conversing with God, and
corresponding with Heaven, least the Thoughts that possessed them this hour or
this day, keep their haunt the next, and mar the performance. We are not wont
to rush into the presence of a Prince without premeditation, and some previous
care of our Mien and Deportment, and how comes it then to pass that we dare
presume to address the Living God so familiarly, and so rudely. Before thou
Prayest, says the wise Son of Syrach, prepare thy self and be not as one that
tempts the Lord. i. e. I conceive, Ecclesiasticus. 18. 23.
to be angry with thee, and to curse rather then to bless thee, It Was one of the
good things found in Jehoshaphat, that he had prepared his Heart to seek God:
And no Man 2 Chronicles. 19. 3.
pretends to good Music, before he has put his Instrument in tune; when our
Hearts are fixed, O God, when our Hearts are fixed, then shall we best sing and
give Praise. Now by preparation here I do not mean those succinct Applications
we are wont to make to God upon our entering on his Service in houses set a
part to that propose, but the revolving in our Minds such previous reflections
as these. are,

1. THE Weight and Importance of the duty we are about, which is the only
proper Conveyancer of the divine Blessings, and that by divine Appointment, and
is of no less consequence to us than the Supply of our wants both Spiritual and
Temporal, the promises of this Life, and of that which is to come; it is, in a
word, a transaction whereon depends the concern of Life and Death, and what is
more, of Eternal Life, and Eternal Death; and will a Man slubber over such a
Business as this, will he plead his Cause so supinely as if he were bribed
against himself, when so vast an Estate as the everlasting Inheritance, depends
upon the Issue of the Trial? Moses exhorts the Jews to hearken unto the Words
of the Law, because, Deuteronomy. 32 40.
says he, it is your Life. Prayers and Praises are the spiritual Life of a
Christian, and therefore when any foreign Thoughts assail it, either by force
or fraud, we must take up Nehemiahs answer to his Enemies, I am doing a great
Work so that Nebem: 6. 3.
I cannot come down, why should the work cease whilst I leave it and come down
to you. A

2. PREPARATORY will be best placed upon the dread Majesty of him we address
to, and his more immediate Presence in places set apart for his Service; for
God himself alleges the greatness Malac. 1. 14.
of his Majesty to caution Men against offering him any mean and contemptible
Sacrifices: Cursed be the Deceiver, says he, which has in his flock a Male,
and voweth and sacrifices unto the Lord a corrupt thing: For I am a Great
King, says the Lord of Hosts, and my Name is dreadful among the Heathen; and
the wise Man urges the distance betwixt the great Creator and his Creatures,
as an argument of that Sobriety and exactness of Utterance and Affection that
becomes his Presence: Be not rash with thy mouth, says he, and let not thine
heart be hasty to utter any thing before God: for God is in Heaven, and thou
upon earth.

AY, it is certainly the want of a due consideration of the terrible name of the
great and living God, who is infinitely exalted above our most elevated
Conceptions of him, that makes us so often present him with the Sacrifice of
Fools, that Excors Sacrificium, which the Heathen World looked upon as so
prodigious a thing. It requires indeed a genious, wide, and Philosophical, the
portion of but a few, to take in a full draught of Contemplation of the Great
and Invisible Being; and tho it must be owned, that the most refined Capacity
cannot now behold him as he is, shining in his full Orb of Glory (for the
Contemplation of his Essence is an Abyss, which immediately devours and
swallows up a dark and broken Understanding, it being a sort of endeavor to
look God in the Face, which no Man can do and Live) yet he has not lest us
without witnesses of his Majesty, in the convulsion of the Mountain, and the
Agony of Nature at the promulgation of the Law, in the losty, but yet
infinitely inadequate Descriptions that the Prophets give of him: In his works,
of spreading out the Heavens, and treading upon the waves of the Sea, etc. In
those frightful and amazing Accounts the Scripture give us, of the transactions
of the last Day, etc. And certainly did we but endeavor to possess our Souls
with tolerable Conceptions, of this great and dreadful Being, from these
imperfect Notices we have of him; we could not but be induced to take some
tolerable care, how and what we say, when we are speaking unto God, for the
Angels themselves, the ten thousand times ten thousand that stand before him,
do not more truly minister in his Presence, than we do in our addresses to Him.
And Oh! that we had but a glimps of him that is Invisible, that the God of
Heaven would but irradiate our dark capacity, with some beam of his Majesty,
with what Reverence, what Fear and Trembling, should we come before him? And
this more especially, in places consecrate and set apart for the payment of our
homage to him, where he vouchsafes his more immediate and more special
Presence. Not indeed after any gross and local manner, as the Gentiles
conceived of their fictitious Deities in their Temples, in which sense it is
said of the most High that he dwells not in Temples Acts. 7.
made with hands; but by the retinue of his Angels, which give their more
immediate Attendance there, as in their Masters house, by his Word and
Sacraments, and by his peculiar readiness to hear, and bless those that
devoutly call Exodus 20 24.
upon his Name there; for which reason, as one well observes, the Tabernacle of
the Lord was called (...) the Tabernacle of meeting; not of Men's meeting
together, as is commonly supposed, when we translate it, Tabernacle of the
Congregation; but of God's meeting there with Men, his poor humble Supplican^s?
For so he N^mb. 17 4.
himself gives the reason of the Name: And thou shall lay them up says God to
Moses, speaking of the Rods of the Tribes, in the Tabernacle of the Ezod. 25.
22.
Congregation, before the Testimony; where I will meet with you. And there I
will meet with thee and commune with thee. And what else can be the true and
unstrained meaning of that Passage of our Savior's in the Gospel, where he
promises, that where two or three are gathered together in his Name, he is
there in the midst of them? For, whatever may be particularly affirmed of the
Temple, a greater than Isal. 85. 35.
Solomon is here, even God wonderful in his holy Places; sure these are no
other than the Houses of God, these are the Gates of Heaven.

AND therefore we would do well to take care how we make Iniquity, even the
solemn Meeting; by affronting God with our lip Services, and that so
immediately to his Face; For can any any Man in his wits but think, that the
great God, to whom the profoundest homage of the Soul is due, is much more
affronted than he is honored, by the dull spiritless muttering a few Pater
nosters, or any other Prayers, by the bare telling over, as the manner of some
is, and stringing up their Petitions? We durst not thus mock our Prince to his
Face, we would hardly do it to our Equals, and whence then is it, but through
want of preparing our Hearts with due Conceptions of his Awful and Majestic
Presence in his own House, that we make thus bold with our Maker?

3. IT might be a proper preparatory reflection to consider the Fruits and
Consequences of approaching God in so careless and so incogitant a Manner. I
shall not go about to show at large, how severe God has formerly been upon all
disorders and irregularities committed about holy Things and Duties, as in the
Case of Aarons Sons, of Vzzah; of Lev. 10. 2. 2 Samuel 6. 6.
the Bethshemites; and of the Church 1 Samuel 6. 19. 1 C^r. 11. 30.
of Corinth; nor how he threatened that for this very thing; because his People
drew near to him with their Lips, but had removed their Heart far from him, he
would therefore Isa. 29. 13, 14.
proceed to do a mavelous Work among them, even a mavelous Work and a
Wonder: Which was no less than to confound the wisdom of the wise, and the
understanding of the prudent Men amongst them; I shall not, I say, insist on
these Considerations now, because it has seemed good to the infinite Wisdom, to
alter the nature of his Inflictions, and for neglects of this kind especially
to change them from temporal into spiritual, which, tho they do not so
immediately affect the Body as the others did; yet endanger the Soul and take
away the spiritual Life of a Christian. For tho, he does not now smite Men with
Death, for their unsanctified Approaches to him, yet he smites them with
Deadness, with Coldness and Indifferency in the cause of Religion, suffers them
to grow listless, reasty, and awkard at their Devotions, and ten to one to
lapse at long run into open Atheism and Profaneness. For we certainly lose
ground by every spiritless Prayer we advance, grow from bad to worse, from
worse to stark naught, and past feeling. For every such formal performance
grieves the Spirit, cloggs the Conscience, hardens the Heart, and gives the
Devil an occasion to draw us off from our Neutrality, and to make us at last
declare for his Party; whence it is not improbable, that, when we have once
contracted such a vicious habit and crasis of Soul in Devotion, he himself many
times sends us to our Prayers, adding that he may add to our Disease, and turn
the best Antidote we have against him into so much stronger Poison to our
selves. And therefore we would do well to season and prepare our Hearts
beforehand, with these, and the like Considerations, that by a just Reslection
upon the Importance of the Duty, the Supreme Majesty to whom we pay it, and the
fatal Consequences of a perfunctory Performance of it, we may attend upon the
Lord without Distraction.

III. ANOTHER proper means, to fix our Thoughts in the Service of God, is to
Love him with all our Hearts, with all the Powers, and Capacities of our Souls;
did we Delight to have our Conversation with Him, our Hearts would keep our
Minds close to their Work, and not suffer them to loiter or to ramble; for our
Affections have an immediate Influence upon our Thoughts, and our Hearts
generally sets our Mind the Theme of its Contemplations; Love particularly is a
commanding and imperial Passion, that bids us go, and and we go; come, and we
come; do this, and we do it, a passion that ingrosses all our Powers, binds us
fast to, and runs our Thoughts so deep into its Object, that we have neither
Leisure, nor Patience, hardly Power, to attend to any others. O how I love thy
Law! says holy David, and then it follows, both in him, and in the nature of
the things, it is my Meditation all the Ps. 119. 97.
Day; and the first part of his Character of a good Man is, that his Delight is
in the Law of the Lord; and the second is the natural Result of the first, that
in his Law does he meditate Day and Night. Ps. 1. 2.
For a Man cannot but pore and muse on the thing he delights in; and therefore
were our Hearts ravished with the Love of God, from just and retired
Reflections upon the benefits of Creation, Preservation, Redemption, and the
Glory that hereafter shall be Revealed, did we but kindle this holy Flame in us
by frequent Considerations of his patience, forgiveness, forbearance, the Abyss
of his Love, and the great depths of his infinite beneficence: things that must
needs render the Deity amiable and lovely to us in our Conceptions of him: all
our motions would tend Heaven wards, when once invigorated with impressions
from that celestial Fire, we should not be at leisure to admit any Rival of God
in our Thoughts, and to attend to those little idle Toys and Fancies, that have
the impudence to step into our Closets, and distract us.

IV. MEDITATION is another proper Remedy of the wandering of our Thoughts in
Prayer. The Hill of Meditation is indeed of difficult, but yet of noble Ascent,
that lifts us up so far above our natural Level, that we look down upon the
World, and all its Enjoyments, which so frequently interrupt our Devotions, as
a very little Thing. It Is an heroic and abstracted Operation of the Soul, that
lets us into the very secrets of the Objects we Contemplate; that makes every
day fresh Discoveries, and gives us both deep and diffused Prospects of things
otherwise invisible: the Telescope of the Mind, whereby we descry new Worlds, a
new Heaven, and a new Earth, the Terra incognita of Nature and Grace; and see
things at an immense distance from us: It opens to us the Scene of Paradise it
self, makes a sort of indistance betwixt God and our own Souls, takes us out,
or, at least, makes us forget that we are Flesh, fills our head with those
elevated Conceptions, and warms our Heart with those Ravishments of Joy, that
we can feel indeed but cannot utter or express them. And he who has never yet
been experimentally sensible of this Truth, never yet rightly enjoyed either
God, or himself, has the most exquisite Pleasure of this Life yet to come, and
wants the preparatory Foretaste of the enjoyments of the other. Meditation in a
word, I mean where God is the Object, both quickens and fixes our Devotion,
which embraces not its Object but in proportion as Meditation gives it Entrance.

V. AND Lastly Solitude gives a mighty fixation of Thought, in private, and
Religious Assemblies in public Devotion; for a Retreat naturally tends to
Recollection of the Spirit and Communion with God, it helps to center all the
Emanations of our Souls upon him, and gives us more pure and perfect Prospects;
and therefore, when thou prayest, says he, who taught us to pray, enter into
thy Closet, not only to avoid that vain Pomp and Parade, which the Pharisaic
Votaries so much affected, but no doubt to better the Performance, by
withdrawing, as much as may be, from those Impressions of worldly Objects, that
are wont so fatally to persecute and distract us. Any thing that requires
application of Mind carries the necessity of Retirement along with it: How much
more that Performance, to the full discharge whereof the utmost Stretch of our
humane Capacities is inadequate: All which is by no means to be understood in
prejudice to the Public Prayers of Religious Assemblies; where the regular
Gravity and Decorum of the Worship, the united Zeal and Devotion of the
Worshippers, the Sacredness of the Word that is read, the Importance of the
Duty, the Dreadfulness of the Place, etc. all conspire to wing the Devout Soul
with divine Elevations, to fix it upon God, and give it a Solitude in the great
Congregation.

AND thus much for those remedies that may be proper to cure the Distraction
and Flatness of our Thoughts in Gods Service.

SECT. 3.
WE are now arrived at the last division of our Subject, which is to direct to
such means, as may be proper for the government of our Thoughts in general. i.
e. on whatsoever Subject they are exercised.

AND here not to insist upon that Catholicon of Prayer we have already
mentioned, that which being a Sovereign and Universal Remedy against all the
Evils we labor under, must consequently be of excellent Use against the
exorbitancies of our Thoughts; I would advise, in the

I. PLACE, to open the Scene of the Day with good and savory Thoughts in the
Morning: To make the strength and first born of our Conceptions every day holy
to the Lord; when I awake, says holy David, I am present with thee; God ever
took place in his thoughts, and was the earliest Theme of his Meditations. For,
in the Morning, says he, in another place, I will direct my Prayer unto thee,
and will look up; we must, like him, if we would with him, learn to hate vain
thoughts, consecrate our most sprightly and sparkling Meditations to him, who
gives his beloved sleep, and yet himself neither slumbrs nor sleeps. For there
is no doubt to be made, but that a Mind well seasoned and tinctured with good
Thoughts in the Morning, will, with ordinary care, retain its Smack and
Fragrancy all the day; but if we let the World or the Devil in first, it is
great odds but they keep possession all the day, come home too, and go to bed
with us in the Evening.

II. SINCE so much of the vanity of our Thoughts is owing to the Imagination,
as we have seen before at large, it will be highly proper to restrain that
extravagant Power within its due bounds, to confine it home, and not suffer it
to run out, ramble, and gad so far abroad amongst variety of Objects, that we
cannot at our pleasure call it back again; to take care however that it make
not false Reports of things, and impose upon our Reason with fictitious and
Romantic exaggerations of them, to draw out our Thoughts in the dance after it,
but that we learn judiciously to distinguish betwixt the intrinsic value of
things, and the extravagant Representations of a lying Imagination.

III. SINCE our Minds receive the Ideas and Images of most things originally
from our Senses; since it is by these avenues that outward objects make their
way to our Hearts, our Ears being, as it were, the gates by which the objects
from without desire to speak with our Thoughts, and our Eyes as windows to our
Minds, through which they gaze upon them: It concerns us to set Waiters at
these Cinque Ports of our Senses, to seize upon all contraband Goods, and
scarch all Comers, as the Governor of a Fortress will take care to guard its
Avenues, and examine Passengers, especially strange Faces, least it be
insensibly betrayed, or surprised into the hands of an Enemy, under the
appearance and vizor of a Friend: not that the senses are of themselves any way
criminal, for they discharge but their respective Offices, according to the
Laws of their Creation: Nor that all, or most of the Images of things, they let
in, are noxious and sinful, (for what harm had the wedge of Gold or Babylonish
Garment in them, when Achan looked upon them, coveted, and took them; and is
not the fair Face drawn, and melodious Voice tuned by the finger of God, who
can do no Evil?) But they become an occasion of Sin by the doteing of the Heart
upon them; and therefore it is we must guard our Senses, to deprive that of the
matter of its Crimes, and let its foolish Fire go out for want of fuel fit to
keep it in. And yet how contrary to this is the practice of the World, where
our Eyes are every day exposed to the infection of wanton Pictures, light
Dresses, natural and artificial Beauties, to the redness of the Wine when it
gives its color in the glass, and to a thousand criminal Examples, and our
Ears stand all the day open to amorous Romantic Stories, obscene Jests,
Back-bitings, and Revilings, and most times to flat and insipid Discourses,
that neither minister Morality, nor Grace, nor Reason to the Hearers, so that
our Souls return home at night infected with the vain Air of the courses of the
day, and full charged with toys and ten thousand Amusemnets, which leave such
sensible Impressions behind them, that we are still hankering after those
Objects, that gave us so agreeable a Diversion, our Minds become unwilling
Inhabitants of their tenements of Clay, and little better perhaps than Captives
taken by Satan at his Will. The Tree was pleasant to the Eye, and then the poor
Woman inveigled by her Sense, could not forbear to take and eat of the Fruit:
So that we had need go and learn what that means, touch not, taste not, handle
not; had need not gaze on a Maid, in the advice of the wise Son of Syrach,
least we fall by those things that are precious in her, and our Eyes be full of
Adultery; had need, in this Sense too, take heed how we hear, and turn (in
Solomon's advice) from the presence of a foolish Man, when we perceive not in
him the Prove. 14. 7.
lips of Knowledge, or wise and profitable Discourse. Had, the Royal David,
with Job, made a covenant with his Eyes, both he and Bathsheba had preserved
their Innocence, and Vriah his Life; but Alas! the King kept no Lifeguard
there (as I may properly call it) where it seems it was most needful, and so
the Man after God's Heart, suffered his own to walk, in Jobs Expression, after
his Eyes, his steps turned out of the Way, and he was deceived by a Woman. And
therefore if we would take one primary Step toward the government and good
discipline of our Thoughts, we must, as far as we are able amidst that variety
of objects that perpetuelly surround us, turn away our Eyes from beholding
Vanity, and our Ears from hearkening unto Folly, must shut the gates against
the Enemies of our Peace, and not enter into parley with them, least they beck
and smile upon our Thoughts, give them good Words, call them out, and they, and
our affections, that are consequent upon them, tempt us to yield and surrender
our Innocence.

IV. THEREFORE, in consequence of this, it will be necessary to make a right
choice of the company we keep; which has many times, so unreasonable an Awe
over the modesty of humane Nature in its propensions toward Good* that like
St. Paul's Person, in the 7th. to the Romans, by reason of it, the good that we
would, we do not. For it is a hardy well resolved Piety, that ventures to exert
in bad Conversation, but the evil which we would not, that we do: For the byas
of our own propensions naturally inclines us to follow criminal before good
Examples. And therefore if we would effectually preserve our Innocence, we must
not only let no profane or lewd Conversation proceed out of our own Mouths, but
must be deaf to all that is vented by others. For, believe me, there is a strange
malignity in bad converse to poison and infect even the best Dispositions: A
sort of effluvia, as a learned Person of our own speaks, from the Spirits of
Men as well as from their Bodies; with the Clean thou shall be Clean, and with
the Froward thou shall learn Frowardness, for Lewdness has but a short and
easy Passage from the Ear to the Heart. And therefore what King Solomon
advises in relation to the angry and furious Man, that we make no friendship
with him, least we Prove. 22. 23 24.
learn his ways, and get a snare to our Soul, is equally applicable to any
other instance of bad Acquaintance; for he that touches pitch shall be defiled
therewith, says the Son of Syrach; and can a Man, says the wise King, take fire
in his Bosom, and his clothes not be burnt, can he go upon hot Coals, and his
feet not be burnt? Will evil Communication let your Manners go as good as it
found them? Or, is it not rather verified by the experience of every ordinary
observer of himself, that when we meet with an agreeable, howsoever dangerous
or destructive Conversation, we carry it home along with us, suck it in, and
our Thoughts chew the cud so long upon it, many times in our most private
Retirements, that we assimilate the vicious nutriment into a part, as it were,
of our very Composition. And therefore the best way to secure our Thoughts from
Infection, is, to practice with the Adder, to shut our Ears against the voice
of such Charmers, charm they never so agreeably to our own corrupt
Inclinations. To accept no Person against our own Soul, and not let the
Reverence of any Man cause us to fall, but to exchange Eccl. 4. 22.
the Communion of Devils for that of Saints; whose Examples and salutarie
Discourses may season our Minds, and, as Iron sharpens Iron, rub off the rust
we have contracted, and give an edge to our Spirits.

V. AND as Men should be thus choice in their company in order to the
preservation of their Thoughts, so likewise the same care would be had of those
Books, upon which they now and then employ their vacant hours. It will not be a
vanity to affirm that no Nation in the World exceeds our own for variety of
good Books, published in our own Language, and adapted to all Capacities; and
yet, so far of late Years have we sucked in the French Air, that, as some have
labored the Introduction of their Government amongst us, tho the most uneasy
and tyrannical in Christendom, so others have as greedily imitated them in
their Vices, and made their Vanities classical and authentic: I mean
particularly their Plays, Operas, Farces, Romances, and other such like curious
Cobweb Work of idle Brains; in so much that a Man may say on this Occasion,
with King Solomon; the Heart of him that has Understanding seeks Knowledge,
but the mouth of Fools feeds on Foolishness. Such Fools amuse and please
themselves with the remembrance of idle and fictitious Stories, with the amors
of one Romantic Hero, and the brave imaginary Exploits of another: And thus the
head is filled with Froth instead of Brains, and the Thoughts, Camelion-like,
live on the Air, on that indeed which is not, as having no other Being but what
a fruitful Invention, and a roving Fancy gives it. I say then, that for the
better ordering Men's Thoughts, it will be requisite that they lay out their
vacant hours to better purpose, particularly on those infallible Records of
eternal Wisdom that are able to make them wise unto Salvation, and endeavor to
freight their heads with Piety, and Sense, instead of Fumes and Feathers. For
what Men read, if it fall in with their own foolish and corrupt Inclinations,
leaves lasting Impressions behind it, and, generally, the worst thing that
passes in Conversation, either with the Living or the Dead, sticks the longest
by us, and affords most food for the Thoughts to feed upon, and it is well,
after all, if such Persons proceed yet no farther, and turn not the well told
legendarie Tales that they Read, into true and real History by their Practice.

VI. THEN since the Vanity of Thoughts is so much owing to the ill Supplies
they meet with, partly from idle Books, partly from as idle Conversation, it
will be further requisite to furnish the mind with good materials, for it to
exert and descant on. Since the crudities of the Soul like those of the Stomach
proceed so much from those ill Juices which have vitiated its tone and
digestion; we must provide it better food and more wholesome diet, to recover
its taste, its due crassis, and constitution; for the Soul as well as the Body
is apt to participate of the Nature of that which affords it its usual
Nourishment. And, here we have as large a Table spread for our mental Repast,
as the wonders contained in God, in Nature, and in Grace can furnish. View the
first of these in his Almighty Power, whereby, as he spoke the World out of
Nothing, so he can, not only think, but return it into Nothing again: In his
Immensity, whereby he fills all Places, and is contained of None: In the Unity
and Simplicity of his Nature, a whole without parts: In his Understanding to
which the Truth of all things before they had a Being, was as broad noon day to
him, or rather he to them, their Essences being all displayed in, and derived
from his own: In his Will, the immediate Efflux or first Born of his
Understanding, and yet co-evous with its Parent: View him in the Justice of his
Judgments, in the Wisdom of his Providence, and in his Goodness toward the
Children of Men. Whosoever is wise will consider these Ps. 107. 13.
things, and they shall understand the loving kindness of the Lord: Or look
over, in the next place, the Book of Nature, the Heaven's the work of his
Fingers, the Moon and the Stars which he has ordained: Those Immense fire
Works, whose motion is as regular Ps. 8. 3.
as rapid, and are but as the twilight of the everlasting Day, and of that
Light which is inaccessible: Read him further yet in the amazing Instance of
his Grace, when he reconciled the World to himself in Christ, let the Mystery
of Godliness be ever present to thy Mind; God manifest in 1 Timothy 3. 16.
the Flesh, justified in the Spirit, seen of Angels, preached unto the
Gentiles, believed on in the World, received up into Glory. But it cannot be
imagined that I should enter into the detail of those innumerous Objects that
afford proper Matter for the Contemplation and Improvement of our Thoughts; and
therefore the succinct Advice of the Apostle will appositely take place here:
Whatsoever things are true, whatsoever are honest, whatsoever things are just,
whatsoever things are pure, whatsoever things are lovely, whatsoever things are
of good report,: If there be any Virtue or if there be any Praise think on
these Things. For, the Truth and Reason of all is, the Spirit of a Man is an
active restless Principle of internal Motion, that will not be wholly idle, but
will be doing, tho it be nothing to the purpose, rather than do just nothing at
all. And therefore unless you furnish it with good stuff to work upon, it will
take up with that which is next at hand at all adventures; so that if we would
bring forth good things, in our Saviors Language, we must, with his good Man,
have a good treasure in our Hearts: (How precious are thy Thoughts to me, O
God, says holy David, how great is the sum of them) not Ps. 139. 17.
a small inconsiderable Stock of Piety and Knowledge, but a Treasure, a good
Fond, or Bank, for our Thoughts to trade with, and then we shall increase with
the increase of God. King Solomon requiring us to bind the divine Law
continually upon our Hearts, adds, that when we go it shall lead us: When we
sleep Prove. 6. 22.
it shall keep us, and when we awake it shall talk with us. i. e. It will
entertain our Thoughts, and bear them Company, when we are alone, or, as it is
said upon the same Occasion, when we walk by the way, Deuteronomy. 6. 7.
when we lie down, and when we rise up: Times generally of the greatest
Retirement. But now without this good Society at Home, our Thoughts will
certainly seek out for new Acquaintance; gad abroad for fellowship with some
other Objects; and ten to one in their jant fall into bad Company: Associate
with the Lusts of the Flesh, the Lust of the Eye, or the Pride of Life; and get
those ill haunts that our Minds perhaps may never after have the power to
abandon,

BUT because neither Nature nor Education has furnished all Men with equal
matter for their Thoughts, and there are different sizes in Understanding as
well as in Stature, therefore

VII. ONE would advise to a more comprehensive Expedient for the government of
Thoughts which every one is capable of using, and that is for Men to be
diligent and industrious in that Calling or Station wherein Providence has
placed them; to do, as the wise King advises, with all their might what their
hands find to do. For this confines the stream of our Thoughts to their proper
Channel, and hinders them from overflowing their Bank; this hedges in the
ramblers, and keeps them to their own Enclosure, who, if left unconfined,
would, like Jeremy's wild Ass snuff up the Wind, and observe no measures. God
who is the Father of the Spirits of all Flesh, knew that he had made them
active restless things, and therefore to employ and find them work, to keep
them doing as they ought, when they are not immediately engaged in his Service,
he designed Men their respective Callings and Professions, and six parts of
time in seven for them to take up their Thoughts and employ them, and if they
are not thus engaged about their own Business, it is odds, but that like St.
Paul's busy Bodies, they wander from House to House, mind other Men's, and
meddle with many Matters; which may in time cause as great Combustions without,
as they do disorder the Head within. Let our Thoughts then keep within their
own lines, and make no encroachments hitherto, within the circle of our own
proper business and Station, let their proud waves go, and no farther. Let his
Thoughts who is appointed to the Ministry wait on his Ministering, his, who is
to teach, on teaching, etc.

VIII. IT were advisable for Men's better ordering their Thoughts, to make
choice, as far as they can, of such employments and course of life, as is most
suitable to their genius, and abilities of Mind, for that always sits the
easiest on them, and their Thoughts more Naturally fall in with their business
and abide by it; Whereas if Men's imploys lie cross the grain of their
inclinations, their Thoughts will be perpetually running after something else,
at which they are not so awkard, or if they aspire at things to which their
strength bears no proportion; matters too high for them, and above the sphere
of their activity; the weight of the burden will render them painful and
uneasy; make them stagger too and fro like a drunken Man, and bring them to
their wits end, besides the damage they may occasion to the public; as Phaeton
endeavoring to mount his Fathers Chariot, the management whereof he did not
understand, was thereby thrown out of Heaven, and had like to have set the
World on fire.

IX. NEXT to this it may be proper to subjoyn the advice of endeavoring to
contract rather then enlarge our secular affairs, instead of spreading them
wider, to reduce them to as tight and narrow a compass as we can, that we may
the better attend to the improvement of our own Minds; an acquisition
infinitely beyond the most pompous temporal attainment. For what are honors,
riches, pleasures, all the World, to a brave refined and accomplished Mind? Now
multiplicity of business is a mighty obstruction to this mental improvement. He
that thinks of many things thinks of nothing, as he that would go several ways
stands still; it distracts and divides our Thoughts, like water mixed with wine,
debilitates and dilutes them; that River will neither be so deep, nor so
serviceable for Trade, that is divided into a great many little channels, as
that which flows altogether in its own natural bed. Thus it is with our
Thoughts, if we let them out at every little chink, which the concerns of the
World, make in them, they will be but shallow Thoughts, and mar the improvement of
our Minds. A Ray collected into a point is far more intense than one variously
refracted. As God does not love idle, so neither over busy people: Martha's
fault was not that she was employed in ill but in many things, which justled
for that time the good part out of her Mind. Cares entangle and perplex the
Thoughts, and too much Worldly business limes and clings the wings of our Mind
so fast that it cannot take its due and natural slight. Variety of objects ever
weakens and distracts the force of our faculties, which are so stinted in their
operation, that they cannot with any tolerable vigor direct to more than one
mark at once, and therefore if we would bear a due regard to the truest
improvement of our Minds, and management of our Thoughts, we must narrow our
secular affairs as much as we can; lest the multitude of business, which
Solomon says, occasions dreams in sleep, make our Thoughts to be little better
in the day time. And therefore in order to take off our Minds from a too greedy
pursuit of secular concernments, that we may be thereby the better enabled to
attend upon God and our own Souls without distraction, let us

X. IN the next place, frequently set before us the vanity of the World, and
the emptiness of all its enjoyments. Remembering that that was the result of
Solomon's vast experience in this kind. Vanity was the Motto he inscribed on
all things under the Sun: for even when he gave his heart to know wisdom and to
know madness and folly, to seek and to search out by wisdom concerning all
things that are done under Heaven, even this also, this noble employment of his
vast capacities, he pronounces no better than vexation of Spirit: for in much
wisdom, says he, is much grief, and he that increases knowledge (it self) does
but increase his sorrow. And if this great Master of experience and skillful
observer of things met with so very little satisfaction, even in the pursuit of
knowledge, and resolves the conclusion of the whole matter. as he speaks, into
the fearing of God and keeping his commandments, we may safely conclude, that
there is nothing here below adequate to the large Soul of Man, worthy to engage
his affections, and ingross his powers, and if we can but thus wean our
Thoughts from the World and its allurements, we shall then be at liberty to lay
them out elsewhere to better purpose, and to our own greater and more lasting
satisfaction.

NOT that what I have said on these two last heads, is to be understood, as if
I would have all Men devote themselves to Contemplation, to quit the World and
their ordinary Employments, and meddle with no business; for I prescribe it.

XI. IN the next place, as an excellent remedy against evil Thoughts to avoid
Idleness, which in common experience ever gives the Devil an advantage against
us; when David coming from lolling on his Bed walked idly, it should seem, on
the Roof of his House, he immediately 2 Samuel 11.
presented Bathsheba to his Thoughts and soon prevailed with him to accept of
the Proffer. For when we are the idlest he is the busiest; when we do the least
he does the most with us: If our Minds sleep, he will sow his Tares the faster,
and if we let them lie fallow, Weeds will be the natural Product of the
neglected Soil. Standing Minds, like standing Waters, puddle and corrupt, and
become the proper Element of Vermin.

XII. AGAIN, it will be our Wisdom, for the better management of our Thoughts,
now and then to review them, to call them together to the Muster, and examine
the state and plight of our Minds, to encourage good Motions, and
discountenance Bad, and to let them know we have set a spy upon them, and that
they come not there without our Observation. And because every Man has his
blind Side, and the Sin of his Bosom, and consequently our Thoughts run further
into some sort of Objects than others, we must take particular care, and after
such review shall be better enabled, to guard there most, where our Thoughts
ply the most, where their haunts are, and the company they most delight in; as
he who commands in chief in a Siege will place the strongest Guard there, where
the Walls or other Fortifications of the Town are the weakest. So, if you find
that lust, for instance, has stolen in at the Windows of your eyes, and got
the greatest ascendant over you, watch your Thoughts on that side, for there
they will be sure to hanker; So, again, if you observe your self the weakest on
the side of provocations, and Anger be your infirmity, take care to have your
Reason within call, and take off your Thoughts betimes from resentments, and
meditating revenge, for that is the subject they will be sure most of all to dwell
on, etc. And thus by reveiwing our Thoughts we shall both acquire power, and
learn how to manage them, and be able to countermine the Devil, who knowing our
strong and feeble part, better many times than we do our selves, always lays
his train there where it is most likely to take fire, and to blow up our Hearts,
the strong Fort of our innocence.

XIII. SINCE, as has been before observed, our Thoughts are generally too much
at the command of our passions, so that look what sort of affections bear the
sway in a Man's heart, that way his Thoughts will take their course, therefore
is it highly advisable, again, to ride this brutal part of us with a strait
rein, to raise and spiritualize our affections by setting them on things above,
and not letting them run so madly as they do on things that are upon the earth.
For tho Thoughts give the first being to affections, as no Man can love or hate
a thing before he thinks on it, yet when they are once placed upon their objects
they make our Thoughts dance after them at their pleasure. As if fear has
seized us, it calls in all our Thoughts to view the frightful object, disorders
our powers, and makes the mind paint the bugbear with unjust dimensions,
perhaps, and unnatural colors; so if desire carry us abroad amongst variety of
objects, our Thoughts must keep it company and lie under that infinite
perplexity and distraction that naturally attends its extravagance, and
therefore if we would command our Thoughts, we must first learn to command our
passions.

XIV. HE that would have the company of good Thoughts must entertain them
kindly, and give them a friendly reception when they come and visit him. If you
receive them coldly, and with an Air of indifferency, they will be as shie to you
in time, as you can be to them; for the Divine Spirit, the great Author of
them, will not always strive with Men, but will take wing, fly away, and desert
you, for they are nimble movers, and are sent upon an errand that is your own
truest interest, and therefore if you have not yet learnt to be wise to your
selves, by closing with their proposals, cooperating with them, and working
out your own Salvation, they have no Commission to force or drive you on to
happiness, like an horse or mule that have no understanding, but will leave you
not only where, but worse than they found you.

XV. SINCE few Men are of that strong and athletick temper of Soul, as to be
able to bear the shocks of adversity, but that it generally ruffles and
discomposes their Thoughts, and, like the desperate pushes of an enemy, breaks
their ranks, and puts them in disorder, it would be therefore of excellent and
common use for the management of our Thoughts in those exigences, to be verst
in the Theory of the Divine dispensations, to bring our selves to a recumbency
upon God, and commit our cares to him who cares for us, that we may thereby
maintain an evenness of temper amidst the roughest emergencies; and enjoy a
calm of mind within, amidst the loudest storms without.

XVI. AGAIN, since, notwithstanding the immaterial and spiritual nature of the
Soul, it is capable of being wrought upon, and affected by the body during
their union; for when once linked and wedded together, there arises a mutual
sympathy betwixt the unequal couple, and that thence doubtless proceed many
foolish, wandering, and impure cogitations, it would be advisable to tame the
one by the macerations of the other, to mortify the flesh, to keep our bodies
under, and not cram and indulge them, till the Beast rides the Man, till they
grow too hard for our reason, throw off its government, and draw even it in
too, to second the motions and solicitations of the flesh. For the flames of
lust quench the spirit, as the scorching Sun beams put out the gentler heat of
the fire. Foul weather in the lower Region sends up naught but filthy Streams
and vapors. The pure in Heart only shall see God here, as well as hereafter;
and thence be furnished with just and elevated conceptions: for he will not
accept polluted Bread upon his Altar: Nor will Mal. 1. 7.
admit an unclean sacrifice. If therefore we would be Masters of our own
Thoughts, we must first be Masters of our Appetites, and not pamper and indulge
our Carcasses, but wisely avoiding all excesses of this kind, must endeavor by
a Substraction of unnecessary fuel from the Body to let the fire thereby
kindled in our Thoughts go out.

XVII. LASTLY, it will highly conduce to the ordering of our Thoughts aright,
to live, as much as possibly we can, under this Apprehension, that Almighty God
is present with them, see's, knows, reads, and scans their subtlest Motions and
darkest Intrigues, better than the Eyes and Ears of Men hear or see them in
their fruits of Words and Actions. For lo there is not a Thought in our Heart,
but he knows it altogether, and afar off, for I know their Imagination, says
God, concerning his People, which they go about Deuteronomy. 31. 21.
even now, before I have brought them into the land which I swear; For He, even
He only, knows all the Hearts of 1 Kings 8. 39.
the Children of Men; and, as Job says, Job. 4^. 2.
no Thought can be witholden from him: Hell and Destruction are before him,
Prove. 15. 11.
how much more then the Hearts of the Children of Men? For shall not the
Almighty Artificer, who made the Heart, know all the wheels, the springs and
movements that are in it? Go then, and ascend up into Heaven, in the Psalmist's
Rethorick on this occasion, make thy bed in Hell, take the wings of the morning
and dwell in the uttermost parts of the Sea, go whither, do what thou will,
there is an Ear to over-hear thee, an Eye to overlook thee, and an invisible
hand to transcribe and register the closest transactions of thy Mind: We find
the Royal David had such a continual lively Sense of this matter on Ps. 139.
him, that he tells us, when he awaked God was ever present with him, occurred
immediately to his Mind; as those objects generally do at our wakening, which
most of all engross our Thoughts. And could we but learn to live under the same
quick Apprehension, would we walk less by Sense and more by Faith, and look
through at those things that lie within the Vail, it would be a mighty use to
us in the management of this hidden and unseen part of us. For since our Sins
in embrio at their first conception in the Soul, are as loathsome in Gods Eyes,
as they are in their Birth and Production shameful in the eyes of Men: Since
the remarks of those who are of like Infirmities with our selves are powerful
enough to persuade us, to the regulation of our outward Behavior, and we
should really be in confusion, to have any grave sober Friend, whose esteem we
value, and whose judgment we revere, privy to all the foolish and unhallowed
Thoughts of our Souls; how much rather should the consideration of Gods
all-seeing Eye lay a restraint upon our internal Follies? For what absurdity is
this to be ashamed of what passes in our Thoughts, could Men pry into those
recesses, and yet to let God look on without the least Emotion? What
inadvertancy, or Atheism rather is it, to be ashamed or afraid of an overt act
of wickedness, least Men should find us out, and yet at the same time riot in
our Hearts, and debauch in our Thoughts, when God all the while stands by a
Spectator, and if he pleased himself, a just Avenger of all such impious
Transactions? Since then God certainly knows all that passes in our Hearts,
sees and observes who comes in, and who goes out, is intimate to every unclean,
or otherwise sinful Thought, to every unlawful Desire, to every malicious and
revengeful Wish; to whatsoever, in a word, is transacted in that Cabinet
Council; let us endeavor after such an habituated Thought of God, as may mix
him, not in our actions only, but in all the movements of our Minds: Let the
consideration of his Presence engage us to keep strict Discipline there, to
Order, and Govern, and Manage our Thoughts aright; as what are all open and
naked in his Sight, for surely the Lord is with them, tho perhaps we are not
aware of it.

I shall shut up the whole with the excellent Collect of our Church relating to
this Purpose.

ALMIGHTY GOD, unto whom all Hearts be open, all Desires known, and from whom
no Secrets are hid; cleanse the Thoughts of our Hearts by the Inspiration of
thy Holy Spirit; that we may perfectly love thee, and worthily magnify thy
Holy Name, through Christ our Lord. Amen.

FINIS.

