Imprimatur.

Carolous Palmer. Rmo. in Christo Pa. ac Dno. D^^ Thomae Archiepisc. Ebor. a
Sacris.


A SERMON, Preached October, the 19, 1690. Before the Right Worshipful the
Mayor, Aldermen, and Sheriff, etc. OF THE Town and County of New Castle upon
Tyne:

BEING THE Day appointed for a General Thanks Giving for His Majesty's safe
Return, and Happy Success in Ireland.

By Geo: Tullie, Sub-Dean of York, and Preacher at New Castle upon Tyne.

YORK, Printed by J. White, Their Majesty's Printer for the City of York* and
the Five Northern-Counties: And are to be Sold by Joseph Hall, Bookseller on
Tyne Bridge, New Castle upon Tyne, 1691.

To the Right Worshipful THE MAYOR, ALDERMEN and SHERIFF, etc. of New Castle
upon Tyne.
Gentlemen,
WHEN, upon the Solicitations of some of my Friends, I resolved to Publish this
Sermon I was soon determined to Dedicate it to You who were my Principal
Auditory; and did me at first the Civility of an Invitation down amongst You;
which I think my self bound to acknowledge to the World upon all fair
Occasions: Just, and elaborate Discourses are not to be expected from Us who
bear the un-interrupted heat and burden of the Day; but such as it is I
present you with it. And that GOD would prosper You, and your Opulent Town, and
my poor Labors amongst You, is the hearty Prayers of

Gentlemen, Your Obedient Faithful, Servant. GEO: TULLIE.

Proverbs, 29, 2. When the Righteous are in Authority, the People rejoice: but
when the wicked bear Rule, the People mourn.
IN which words the wise King and Politician has briefly represented to us the
happiness of a People under good and virtuous Princes, and their unhappiness,
on the other side, under those that are bad; Under the Government of the one,
The People shall rejoice, (and here they will not rejoice for nothing) (...) say
the Septuagint; shall be merry or Cheerful; Serenity shall possess their
Souls and sit upon their Countenances; but under the conduct of the other,
(...) Men groan,) and surely they groan not for nothing neither (and sigh, as
is said of the Israelites in Egypt, by reason of their boudage; there being
this, amongst other differences, betwixt Divine Inflictions, and the Injuries
done us by Great Men in Authority, that we have liberty to pour out our
Complaints, and to remonstrate to the one, under the Sense of his hand bearing
hard upon us, whilst a Profound silence, and a Private sigh is many times both
our Prudence, and our Refuge under the Pressures of the other.

My business shall be at this time, to illustrate, and confirm the two Opposite
Assertions of the Text, by showing what just Occasion and Matter of Rejoyceing
this People will have, When the Righteous are in Authority, and what Reasons
they will have, on the contrary, to mourn, when the wicked bear Rule; which
done, we shall bring the former of the two Propositions to the Occasion of the
day; inverting only the order of the Text, and giving the wicked Man, for once,
the precedence of the Righteous, because it falls in more naturaly with our
Purpose.

First, Then of the unhappy Occasions of mourning to a People, when the wicked
bear Rule.

Where, before we proceed, it will be necessary to premise that Aphorisms of
this kind concerning Moral and Civil Affairs are not to be taken in a Strickt
and rigorous Sense, as if they never failed in any one single instance; there
truth is sufficiently attested, if for the most part, and generally speaking,
we may rely upon them.

Thus, to instance in the case before us, according to the common course of
things, and the ordinary Methods of God's Providence, it is highly probable that
a people will be miserable, under the Conduct of wicked, and ungodly Princes,
and yet, without any just detraction from the truth of King Solomon's Aphorism,
it may so fall out, whether by the great Abilities of a wicked Man for
Government, notwithstanding the Corruption of his Morals, as in the case of the
late Grand Usurper, and our neighboring Prince, or through some secret designs
that Providence has on foot, that a people may have some just matter of
rejoyceing, as by being great, and formidable to the Nations round about them,
etc. under a flagitious, and ungodly Tyrant.

And thus, again, on the other hand, tho, in all humane probability, the Land
will have just Occasion to rejoice, when a Brave, and Pious Prince sitts at the
Helm, and it may justly be presumed, that He will render both Himself, and
People happy, yet it may so fall out, through the disposal of the Al-wise
Providence, and many times doubtless by reason of the Sins of the people, not
the Prince, that both He, and the Land may mourn, notwithstanding the
righteousness of His own Life, as in the Case doubtless of that Unfortunate
Prince, King Charles the Martyr.

And having premised thus much, I go on to illustrate, and confirm the truth
of the Assertion laid down.

First, then when the wicked bear rule, the Land, in all probability, will have
too just reason to mourn for those many, and extreme calamities which an ill
Man, armed with Power, will be apt to bring upon the State. It Is one of the
bitterest curles of all that long, and black Catologue which David in the 109,
Psalm lays upon his Adversaries, as it is supposed under the Person of Judas:
That God would set an Ungodly Man to be ruler over him, and let Satan stand at
hisright hand. For what Miseries and Hardships may not one expect from Him, who
has mischief in his heart, and Power in his hand and the Devil President of his
Councels? And whatsoever the Character of the most Flagitious Princes, like
that of all other Supreme Magistrates in other forms of Government, is so far
forth Divine, as the Original Justitution of Rule, in the General, is such; yet
we have little reason to expect that such an one will do the work of him that
sent him: But of his Father the Devil; and what good will He bears to Mankind,
especially to the better part of it, when He has got a Powerfvl Instrument in
his hands to his purpose, we need not look so far back as the Reigns of Nero,
Domitian, Dioclesian, Maximian, or the like, we need not ask our Fathers, that
they may tell us; the scenes of blood, and inhumanity not long since opened in
our Neighbor Nation will inform us.

It were a tedious, and but a melancholy province to sum up all these several,
and heavy Calamities which are but the too usual attendants of a wicked, and
ungodly Reign. Samuel in his first Book and eighth Chapter has given us a
competent Catalogue of them in acquainting the Israelites with the manner of
the King which they so earnestly desired to Reign over them: Not that Kingly
Government, as some Enthusiasts, and several Jewish Rabbis imagine, was
displeasing to God, which is for Kind so near a Resemblance of his own, but
because they asked amiss, in a grumbling and a mutinous manner; dissatisfied
both with God's Government, and Samuel's: They have not rejected Thee but Me;
i. e. not Thee, in effect, so much as Me: Not that the mischiefs He recounts
neither are the inseparable concomitants of, and for so a just exception to,
all Monarchy; but of that absolute, Arbitrary, and despotic Monarchy of the
Nations round about them, which they particularly specified in their request:
And hence it is that He tells them of his taking their Sons, and appointing
them for Himself, for his Chariots, and his Horsemen: Of his taking their
Daughters for Confectioners, Cooks, and Bakers: Of giving the best of their
Fields, and their Vine yards to his Officers, Servants, etc. And who but a dull
stupid Jew could expect better Treatment, from such a Lawless Form of
Government as that?

If then the Arbitrary Lashes of a Rehoboam's Scorpions, if the violent
perverting of Justice, and Judgment in a Nation, if the breach of Faith, and
the breach of Laws, if the Insults, and Insolences of the bad, and cries of
the Innocent under their Oppressions, if the turning of all true Religion out
of doors, the discountenanceing of Piety, and Virtue, and the triumphs of
Atheism, Irreligion, and all manner of Impieties etc. be just cause of the most
sensible grief to the best part of a Nation, to all those who have any concern
left them, for the Honor of God, there Religion, and there Country, then, in
all humane appearance, will that Land, mourn, where the wicked bear rule; and
that mourning fall with so much the more weight, and load upon the Land, by how
much it is, generally, as to its causes, remediless and incurable. For tho I
shall not here stay to determine whether it be lawful or no to check, and
oppose such Illegal Violences by force, yet this much must be granted, that,
generally speaking, that kind of remedy equals the disease in the dangerousness
of its consequences, and so the Land, under the Conduct of ill Men, is
inevitably doomed to Misery, and mourning, either through Oppression on the one
hand, or Anarchie, and Confusion on the other, without the especial
Intervention of such an Extraordinary Providence, as our eyes have seen to come
into its rescue.

Secondly. when the wicked bear rule, their ill Example rules also; and by its
unhappy Influence, on too many men's previous Dispositions that way, will give
the Land just Occasion of mourning: And, of the truth of this, we our selves
have been no less notorious, than deplorable Instance. Flexibiles in quamcunque
partein ducimur a Principe! Says Pliny, atque ut it a dicam sequaces sumus etc.
We are flexible, and ductile as it were, whatsoever way our Prince leads us:
For we naturally desire Says He his approbation, and favor, which which we
cannot hope for, whilst our Manners are unlike his: And therefore, as the wise
Son of Sirachs observes to the same purpose: As the Judge of the people is
Himself, so are his Officers; and what manner of Man the Ruler of the City is,
such are all they that dwell therein. So that if he set up his Standard for the
Devil, and in his Life proclaim war against him whom he represents, He shall
not want Volunteers enough to come into his Service. The mere want of good
sense in some, the want of Moral Probity in others, a Profane and Irreligious
Disposition in a third sort, and the hopes of favors, and Rewards in all,
shall make not only Proselytes to, but loud Applauders of, His Vices. His sins
shall in a competent time, extend their Dominion equal with his; and coming
Authorized, as it were, with the Royal stamp upon them, will pass current
amongst his Subjects, and it shall come in time, to be looked upon as a
distinguishing Character of true Loyalty, to be Vicious. And then tell me if
that Land will not have just Occasion to mourn; first, for the sake of the
Dishonor done to God by such authentic, as I may say, Violations of his Laws,
which must doubtless be matter of very sensible regret to all those who have
any generous Remains of Piety, (...) Religion left about them; and then
secondly, ^^rough the fear of the Divine Vengeance upon a Land for such
impudent Provocations of him. For, if He has inflicted Severe Judgments upon a
people for the sins of their Governors only, as we shall see a non; how much
stronger reason have we to expect, that they shall be consumed, if they do
wickedly, both they and their King?

Thirdly then, When the wicked bear Rule the Land, in all probability will have
just reason to mourn, because God often times avenges the Iniquitys of a Prince
upon his People, as the Members frequently suffers through the disorders of the
Head: For if we remark strictly upon the History of the Jewish Kings* we shall
find that the Prince and the People have been mutually punished or rewarded,
for the Sins, or the Virtues of each other. For as it is not unusual with
Providence to punish Princes, by infatuateing their Councels, and turning them
into Folly, by blasting their Endeavors, overthrowing them in Battle, etc. For
the Sins of their People: So, on the other hand, does the Old Testament-History
afford us several Instances of severe Inflictions upon the People, for the Sins
of their Rulers.

Thus Readiness cruelty to the Gibeonites was revenged upon his People, with three
Years Famine in the Land; and you all remember, I presume, the Instance of
David's Sin in numbering the People, to this purpose: Now, tho it is said that
Satan stood up against Israel to provoke David to do this thing, and that He
himself acquits the People of the guilt, in that compassionate Expostalation of
His with the Almighty: Is it not I that commanded the people to be Numbered?
Even I it is that have sinned, but for these Sheep, what have they done: Yet,
notwithstanding all this, I say, the Lord sent a Pestilence upon the People, so
that there fell of Israel Seventy Thousand men. (1. Chron. 21.) Thus again, the
Pride, and Ingratitude which that good King, Hezekiah, chanced to stain his
Memory with, upon his deliverance from Senacherib's Arms, was avenged, not on
himself singuly, but on his Subjects likewise; For, because* Hezekiah rendr'd
not again according to the benefis done unto him, but his heart was lifted up,
therefore says the Text, there was Wrath upon him, and not upon him only, but
upon Judah also, and Jerusalem, (2. Chron. 32. 25.) And it is peculiarly
observable of the Sins of Manasseh, that* they left such an indelible stain of
Guilt upon his Country, that notwithstanding all Josiah did to wash it off, and
propitiate an Incensed Deity by purging out that Idolatry which heso much
hated, yet it is said, for all that, the Lord turned not from the Fierceness of
his great wrath, wherewith his Anger was kindled against Judah, (the whole
People) because of all the provocations that (not only they, but) Manasseh
(their King) prcvoked him with all. (2 Kings 23. 26.) Such a Curse and a Plague
may on evil Prince entail upon a Land for Generations after Him: So sad, and
lasting an Occasion may it have to mourn for the wickedness of them that bear
Rule in it. Much more might be added upon this argument, and much more upon the
recent Experience of some later Years, but I draw the Veil: And hasten from
this dark to the bright side of the Cloud, to the reverse of this Melancholy
part of the Text; The Rejoyceing of the People, when the Righteous are in
Authority. Which was the second thing to be considered. And indeed the present
Solemnity, is an ample comment upon this part of the Text: But, more
particularly.

First, it cannot but be matter of rejoyceing to all good Men (and it matters
not for the rest) to see the very Honor done to Virtue, by placeing Her on the
Throne, and putting the Crown, as it were upon Her head; For tho she really
reflects more true Honor upon Princes who profess Her, than they can possibly
reflect back again upon Her, and she looks well wheresoever she dwells, yet it
cannot but be a prospect more than ordinarily agreeable to those who have any
just Sense of Her worth, to see Her cohabit with Crowned heads, and go hand in
hand with Majesty; For then, the moves in a Sphere worthy of Her, and suitable
to Her high Quality, for she is near allied to Heaven, and so ought, above all
things else, to be respected, and preferred at Court. And as any Man is
naturally apt to rejoice upon the promotion of his Friend, So needs must a good
Man be exceedingly transported, to see his good Old-friend, and Antiquated
Acquaintan^e* that true Piety and Virtue in whose Society, He has all along
delighted, advanced at Court, and brought back again into favor and fashion.

Secondly, when Righteousness and Authority dwell together, the people, in all
probability, will have just Occasion to rejoice, by reason of those many
Blessing which are like to descend upon the state, from so happy a Conjunction;
and this both from the natural Tendencies of the thing it self to render a
Nation happy; and from the Divine favor prospering, and going along with a
Government so much after his own heart.

First, From the Natural Tendency of the thing it self to render a Nation
happy. For, righteousness, or the Exercise of true Religion casts a very
favorable Aspect upon the Temporal Happiness of a people, in as much as it
most effectually recommends, and promotes the practice of those virtues, which
of themselves, carry a mighty stroke in the preservation of a people, such as
Humility, Contentedness of mind, Obedience to Superiors, mutual Concord, and
Amity, true fortitude, and Resolution of mind, Industry etc. and as powerfully
discourages those contrary Vices, which naturally tend to the disolution of
that Society where they reign, such are Pride, Dissatisfactions,
Refractoriness, Hatreds, Variance, Voluptuousness, Cowardice, Idleness etc. and
indeed, all vice in the General carries Confusion along with it, were there no
Justice above to look on, and punish it.

Secondly, from the Divine favor shineing upon a Government so much after his
own heart. For Rightousness in Authority will engage the Blessings, and
Protection of Him who loves righteousness on its behalf. For if He is many
times propitious to particular persons here upon the observance of his Laws
though many times indeed He deferrs the payment till the General Audit of all the
Earth, when every work shall receive its full recompense of reward; how will He
not be much more so to a Nation fearing God, and working Righteousness?
especially since a Nation, as such, cannot, as particular persons may, be
Recompensed in the other world, where all Political Relations are dissol'd and
a done way. And what sure ground of rejoyceing must this be to a people, to
have just reason to believe that they have obleig'd him, who is the great, and
sole Arbiter of all Success, upon whose pleasure alone, when Men have done what
they can, all Events depend, and whose sole Fiat, all the United world is not
able to reverse? For, Who has resisted his will? Or, who has hardened Himself
against Him, and has prosper'd?

And now, if the Public weal, upon both these Accounts, have so close a
dependence upon the practice of true Piety and Virtue; how highly does that
Prince contribute thereunto, and consequently, to the rejoyceing of his People,
who enjoins Virtue by his Laws, recommends it by his Practice, and spreads it
ore the Nation, by the powerful argument of an Illustrous Example? Vita
Principis censura est, says Pliny, the Prince's Life is a taxing of other
Men's. Ad hanc dirigimur, ad hanc convertimur, nec tam imperio nobis opus est
quan exemplo. It Is this by which we Steer our course of Life, nor do we so much
need His Command, as His Example; for He being the Fountain of Honors, and
Rewards, Disgrace, and Punishments, His Example cannot well fail, for that very
reason, of a serious Imitation from His Subjects. So that insuch an Auspicious
Reign as this that we figure to our selves, and which we are not without hopes
but we may yet see beyond Idea, how shall true Piety erects her depressed head?
And be be no more dashed out of Countenance by those lewd Buffoons, who think
they Confute all they rail, or laugh at! And how, upon her Score, (for She
never goes alone) shall all other Temporal Blessings flow in upon a People!
Sense, and Reason shall be no longcr muzzeal'd by Prejudice, and Folly, (And
it is no small comfort to a* Man to dare to assert the truth) Violence and
Oppression shall give way to Justice, and Propriety be secured to every Man
under his own Vine, and his own Fig Tree The Interest of the Prince and People
shall be no more Disjoynt'd, but flow in one common Channel. Their Arms shall
prosper whithersoever they carry them, there shall be no leading into
Captivity, and one would think, there should be no complaining in their
Streets: Righteousness and peace shall kiss each othor, (for when a Man's ways
please the Lord, He makes even his Enemies to be at peace with him.) God shall
give such a People his blessing, and their Land shall yield her increase: Happy
shall the People be that are in such a case, that live in such a Reign; for,
such Righteousness as this will establish the Throne; mauger all the little
driveling Artifices of Domestic, and the more powerful Forces of Foreign
Enemies, to subvert it.

Thirdly, when the Righteousness of the Text, i. e. true Piety, and Virtue is in
Conjunction with Authority, the People shall rejoice, because the Divine Wisdom
and Goodness will, in all probability direct the Counsels, and prosper the
endeavors of the Prince for his own, and the Public welfare. Their Employ is
arduous, their Province highly difficult. Their Deliberations are conversant
about things noless intricate in themselves, than uncertain in their
consequences, and events; (For the Race is not always to the swift* nor the
Battle to the Strong.) The grand Vessel of the Publick-weal, which these
Pilotes steer, is subject to be split upon ten thousand Rocks; and liable to
many a tempestous Storm, and those too raised both within, and from without the
Vessel; For so it is that the very Passengers many times that are in Her, tho
their safety too depends upon Her preservation, are yet but too forward, some
of them through a narrow, but mistaken Spirit, to endeavor only the saving of
their own cabin, others through envy, Malice etc. to make leeks in her, and and
sink her, if they can; so that a man, all considered, has just reason to cry
out with Sr. Paul upon another Occasion, Who of Himself is sufficient for these
things? None but he who rules the rageing of the Sea, and the madness of the
People. And therefore they, of all Men liveing, have need of an understanding
heart; of the Spirit of Council, and of the Spirit of Judgment; of that (...),
that Heroicke Princely Spirit, as the Septuagint render it, ( Psalm. 51. v. 12.)
which enables Men for Great, and Generous undertakeings: And if these Divine
Assistances of Wisdom, Conduct, and Courage are so entirely requisite to the
right management of the nice, and difficult province of a Ruler, it will not, I
presume, be denied me, that the Righteous in Authority stand fairer for them
than the wicked: And then whatsoever Happyness, by this means, befalls such a
Prince, is necessarily derived down to the meanest of his People* His
Reputation, is theirs: His Glory theirs: His Successes, theirs: His Gains,
theirs in as much as their Interests are now upon the same common bottom, and
it cannot be supposed, but that, next under God, who directed him, and his own
Personal Conduct, their Aid, and Assistances contributed to all His
Acquisitions: So that what St. Paul says in relation to the members of the
body, and of the Church, holds equally strong in case of a Righteous man,
become the head Politic of a Nation: If that be honored, all the members
rejoice with it. I have only to add in the 4th. and last place, That you need
but at your leisure peruse your Bibles, and so supersede me the Labor here, to
furnish you with pregnant instances of such Princes, as through their excellent
virtues have derived down happiness to their people, I shall only, more
particularly remark, that the Divine Goodness has been pleased to express that
Special regard to the Righteousness of some Princes, as perticularly to that of
King David's, that He allowed it the privilege to entail a blessing upon the
Land for Generations after him. Howbeit says he, upon Occasion of Solomon's
provocations of him, I will not rend away all the Kingdom; but will give one
tribe to thy son, for David my Servant's sake. (1 Kings. 11. 13.) And when long
after in the days of Hezekiah, when Sennacherib laid siege to the City which He
had chosen to put his name there, He saved it says Isaiah, for his own sake,
and for his Servant David's sake* (Isa. 37. v. 35.) Such a durable blessing did
the Piety of one single Prince bequeath to the people.

And now, lest I should be thought hitherto to have slurr'd over the Occasion
of the Day, (tho I have not neither) and so to have affronted both God, and the
King; God, the great, and supreme Author of our happyness; and the King, His
Instrument; who, with good Jehoshaphat returning from battle, commands us this
Day to repair unto the House of the Lord, because He has made us to rejoice
over our Enemies: I shall therefore add a few words concerning the Present
Occasion of our rejoyceing, and show that it becomes well all the Just Honest
Men in the Nation this Day, to be thank*full. Thankful for such a King;
thankful for such a Delivernce.

For, First, If we respect Him whom God has set over us, what is there wanting
in Him, to render Him a most complete Prince, and the Nation as completely
happy under him.

What is there wanting in Him, to recommend Him even to some of our own Nation?
For his Virtues and Exploits have done it long ago to all the World beside: The
one has made Him the terror of his Enemies; The other the Darling of his
Friends: And both together have purchased him a Renown, like the Jewels of His
Crown, both bright and Solid too.

Look we upon the Justice of His Reign; What Violence is there done in it,
unless indeed, it be that which He Offers, (might I so speak) to Justice Her
self, through the extraordinary Clemency of his Nat^re?

Look we upon His Wisdom in Deliberation, It Is like some great River, the
silence, and stilness of whose Course is owing to the deepness of its Channel.

Look we upon His Vigor in Action; The Lightning of his own Canon's scarce
more quick, nor an hungry Lion more fearless than He* that Insomuch we have
just reason to say unto the King, what the Men of David swear to Him, after his
Victory over the Philistines: Thou shall go no more out with us to Battle, that
thou quench not the light of Israel* (2. Sam. 21. 17.) And when it had pleased
the great Lord of Hosts to bless such personal Prowess and Conduct with
success; see with what Gentleness and Moderation He used the Victory God had
given Him, how the Christian presently overcame the man, and the Natural Lenity
of his Temper conquered the Conqueror. He pursued His scatte'd Enemies indeed,
but with the mildness of Declarations, not the edge of the Sword, Lastly,

Look we upon Him in his Devotions; And His Behavior looks as if His Kingdom
were no longer of this World, but He were expecting every hour to be translated
to a better. His Religion is our own, (and when could we truly say so of a
Prince before?) that of our Excellent, and Establis'd Church; and tho his
Enemies were pleased to fling out some surmises to the contrary, foolishly
endeavoring to blacken the Sun, yet they considered not that the Prejudices of
Education, which stick so close by, and clap so Fatal a by ass upon other men,
could not prevail over a Judgment so pierceing to discern the truth, and a Mind
so invincibly resolved to defend it. And how then are we obliged, upon all
these Accounts, to accost the King in Tertullies his Rhetoric to Felix Seeing
that by Thee we ensoy great quietness; and that very worthy deeds are done unto
this Nation, by thy providence: We accept it always, and in all places most
Noble Prince, with all Thankfullness. Remembering always that God expects
returns of gratitude, not only to Himself, but to the glorious Instruments
likewise which he is pleased to make use off in accomplishing the Deliverance
of a People; As it is reprochfully said of Isarel, not only that they
remembered not the Lord their God, who had delivered them out of the Hands of
all their Enemies on every side; but that they showed no kindness to the House
of Jerubbaal, namely Gideon, (who had been his Instrument in it.) According to
a^ the goodness which He had showed unto Israel. Jud. 8. 34, 35.

I said, Secondly, It would well become us to rejoice and be thankful upon the
Score of the great Deliverance, which the King, under God, has wrought for Us.
Imagine but that you see the Sword going through the Land, wearied, and blunted
by destruction; and Dragoons usurping the Office of Apostles with the cruelty
of their Persecutors: Imagine your holy Religion ravished from you* and turned
out of doors, and this Excellent Church made a Prey, and a Scorn to the dullest
Impudence, and the vilest Superstition; and in a word, all Europe Enslaved to
the merciless Tyrany of one great Leviathan, who takes his Pastime therein, in
Scenes of Blood, and Desolation: Go ask in France, and Piedmont in Ireland;
Inquire of the Inquisition, and then give me an aestimate of our Deliverance.
But I Will dwell no longer upon this Argument. He who is not at this day sensible
of the inseparable attendants upon those twins of Popery and Arbritrary-Power
doubtless one of those who would fain represent the little Finger of a Tax
raised to keep them out, heavier than both their Loins, is proof against all
reason and experience, and boldly out-faces all mankind; and pity it is but
He were taught them, as Gideon taught the men of Succoth with Briers and
Thorns. Judges, 8. 16.

We may likewise Farther, to excite our thankfulness upon this joyful
Occasion, recollect the several appearanc^s of God's finger through many of the
Periods of this great Affair; as, that a Design of such Importance, and which
we since find was communicated to so many, should yet be carried on with such
Secrecy, and Reserv'dness, that far the greatest part of the Nation was
surpised into Safety: That the counsels of our enemies Achitophels was turned
into such gross folly, as to help on the Advancement of that, which they so
zealously sought to destroy: That the Nation, as debaucht as it was, by their
means and Artifices, could not yet be corrupted, or putrified (I may say) into
Popery: That a great, and formidable Army should scatter and disperse it self,
almost without Opposition: That the breath of the Winds, were lately, so
suddenly stopped, and their Mouth's turned quite another way, to save our Fleet,
and us from destruction: That another Numero^^ Army should be seized with a
sort of panick fear* before any just cause of fear overtook them. These, I say,
together with the preservation of the King's Person, in such Eminent, hazards,
and several other particulars, that need not to be enumerated, are such plain
Signatures, and Characters of an Immediate Interposal from above, that a man
may verily say, This is the Day which the Lord has made, we will rejoice, and
be glad in it. And long may the happy Occasion of this Day, not only endure,
like the day of Josuah, when the Sun stood still in Gibeon, and the Moon in the
Valley of Ajalon, but like the Sun its ordinary course, arise, in due time, to
its Zenith, make a perfect day, and bless all the Confederate Regions with Its
warmth, and influence. May the glorious Occasion of it be joined with the days
of Heaven, and be measured together with Eternity. Blessed, then, be God, who
has not cast out our Prayer, nor turned his Mercy from us, but has turned our
fasting into feasting, and our heaviness into joy; who has put off our
sackcloth, and girded us with gladness.

Blessed be God who has not delivered us up as a prey unto our Enemies teeth,
nor has made those that hate us Lords over us; but has turned the Captivity
of our Sion, preserved our Religion, and continued the Establishment of our
Church.

Blessed, lastly, be God, (and let all the people say Amen) who has delivered
the King, and Servant. From the peril of the Sword, and has given Him Victory
in the battle. Even so. Amen.

FINIS.
ERRATA.
EPist. Dedicat. line 4. r. Auditors. l. the last, r. Prayer. page 1. l. 8. for
here r. sure. p. 2* l. 11. for this r. the. p. 4. l. the last but two, for
whatsoever r. howsoever. p. 5. l. 14. for these r. those. p. 6. l. 4. blot out
for, and read so far. p. 10. l. 12. blot out now, and read where. p. 11. l. 15.
blot out only. and l. 17. for on r. an. p. 14. r. done away. p. 16. l. 4. r.
muzzel'd, l. 10. r. disjoynted. p. 21. l. 7. blot out that, and read insomuch
that. p. 22. l. 9. r. Tertullus, l. 10. r. enjoy. p. 23. l. 20. r. is one. p.
26. l. 2. for and r. his.


