Engraving of oval portrait of Sir James Turner, with Turner blazon or coat of
arms: Quarterly; first and fourth, sa. a Catharine wheel ar.; second and third,
ar three guttees-de-sang. Vera Effigies Jacobi Turner Equitis Aurati



Printed for R. Chiswell at the Rose and Crown in S.t Paul's Church Yard.

PALLAS ARMATA. Military Essays Of the ANCIENT GRECIAN, ROMAN, AND MODERN ART
of WAR. Written in the Years 1670 and 1671. By Sir JAMES TURNER, Knight.

LONDON, Printed by M. W. for Richard Chiswell at the Rose and Crown in S.
Paul's Churchyard. MDCLXXXIII.

TO HIS Royal Highness JAMES Duke of ALBANY and YORK, His MAJESTY'S only
Brother.
May it please your Royal Highness,
THE Dedication of Books has been so old, and still is so universal a custom,
that to disallow it, would be perhaps looked upon as affecting Singularity a
little too much; yet I could never learn any convincing reason for that
Practice. The greatest Monarch that ever lived could not protect Books from
Censure: and, I think, it were against reason they should* for except in
matters of Faith and State* (and not in them neither, where the Almighty and
his Vicegerents have set no limits,) no restraint should be laid on Men, to
hinder their embracing and enjoying their own Opinions, and arguing against
those of others. Wherefore I shall not be guilty of so high a presumption, as
to beg from your Royal Highness the Patrociny of this Work of mine; in which, I
have not the Vanity to doubt but that there may be many more Errors than I can
well help. Nor shall I carry my Presumption to so extravagant a pitch, as to
desire your Royal Highness to cast your Princely Eye on any thing contained in
this Treatise; You have given the World too public demonstrations, how great a
Master you are in the Art of War, to go to those Schools again, especially to
learn from such as I am: And now in this happy calm under his Majesty's most
merciful Government, You are giving signal proofs of your great desire of
Peace, notwithstanding your abilities and skill in War. I could enlarge my self
much on this Head, without coming within the suspicion of Flattery, a sordid
Vice in all Men, more especially in those who profess Arms. But my only design
in this Humble Address is, with most submissive thankfulness, to acknowledge
the Princely favors, you have so Nobly, but I am afraid undeservedly, bestowed
upon me; and to declare how ready I am to venture what remains of a Life, now
almost worn out, in making all those dutiful returns that become,

May it please your Royal Highness, Your most Humble, most Faithful, and most
Obedient Servant, JAMES TURNER.

TO THE Generous Reader.
IF the Subjects of Great Britain and Ireland live in so profound a repose,
that they scarce hear the woeful cries of their Neighbo^rs, harassed and oppressed
by that dreadful Monster War, that great Boar of the Forest, which makes
desolate Cities and Provinces, so that their Sleep is not broke by the
unseasonable sound of Trumpets, and the rattling of Drums, nor are they
frighted out of their Houses (I had almost said, out of their Wits) by the
sudden Infalls and Attacks of a fierce Enemy; they have good reason to bless
and praise the God of Peace for so great a happiness, and with a thankful
acknowledgement, pray for his Vicegerent, the King, underr whose auspicious
reign they enjoy these Halcyon days, and under whose Government, if they cannot
sit under their own Fig Trees and Vines, at least they may eat the Fruit of the
one, and drink the Juice of the other in Peace and Quiet. Yet let them
remember, that War follows Peace, as naturally as Night does follow Day; and
that after a sweet calm, a dreadful storm is to be looked for, against which
the wary Pilot carefully provides. If you think I do hereby invite all Gallant
Spirits in time of Peace, to provide themselves for War, you are not at all
deceived* I do indeed desire, that when War comes unexpectedly (as often it
does) it may not find brave men surpised, and to need instruction in those
necessary Military things, which they might have learned before at full leisure.

If you be one of those, who either already knows, or imagines you do know all
the rules of the Ancient and Modern Art of War; Or if you be one of those who
desire to know neither of them, I shall advise you, to save your self the Money
to buy, and the trouble to read this trifle of mine. It is with none of you
that it seeks acquaintance, it walks in another Stage. It is to you, Young
Lords and Gentlemen, it makes its humble address; It is to you, Generous Souls,
that it offers its service: And it is from you (whose birth entitles you to
Martial Exercises) that it expects a fair welcome and entertainment. Most, or
many of you will not learn these Peaceable Arts and Sciences, without which no
Principality or Republic can well or long subsist; and all of you cannot be
admitted to the Stern of Government, or permitted to sit at the Kings
Council Board: It will be therefore for you to consider, how you can serve your
Prince and Country but by Arms. The ancientest of you all derive your Pedigree
from those who bore Arms, It is by Arms you had your Honor, and it is by Arms
you are bound now to maintain it. I shall not bid you look to those of your own
rank and quality in France, who glory to learn the Military Art from them, and
yet their example deserves imitation; but I shall entreat you to follow the
footsteps of your Martial Ancestors, and account it more honor for you by
Warlike Exploits to show you are their Worthy Successors, than to pretend to it
only by a vain muster of their old Charters, Patents, and Commissions. If this
prevail not with you, then set before your eyes, but at a very great distance,
the Most Illustrious Prince James, Duke of Albany and York; no mortal can boast
of a higher Birth and Extraction, yet that did not hinder him in his younger
years to learn the true Art to fight Battles both at Sea and Land, which has
made him now so famous all the World over. Nor do I desire you to rest
satisfied when you know indifferently well to exercise Companies, Troops or
Regiments of Horse and Foot, though that be both good and necessary; let there
be a plus ultra with you, and endeavor to know all that belongs to a complete
Soldier; for you are indeed the stock out of which our Sovereign should choose
his Military Commanders, and then there will be the less need of such persons
as I am, whom the World nicknames Soldiers of Fortune. Remember it is not
your Native Courage and Valor (though that be an essential part) though every
one of you were as stout as ever Hector was said to be, that will serve your
turn; it is knowledge in Martial affairs that you are to learn; and though the
Art of War be a Practical one, yet the Theory is so needful, that without it
you may be Common Soldiers good enough, but not good Commanders; you are to
know more than you daily see; for it is a sign of a very mean Officer, when he
tells you he likes not such a thing, because he never saw it before. I wish
with all my heart, that this following Treatise may afford you some help to so
noble a Study: In it I give you few, or rather no rules of my own, I am not so
vain; but I go very far back to search for them in all the remains of
Antiquity: And let it not offend you, that I illustrate Rules and Customs of
War by several Instances; I do it purposely because the Nature of Man is rather
led by Example, than driven by Precept: This seems to impose, that only to
invite to a Noble Emulation: Besides, the right or wrong doing of an action,
with all its circumstances, is better cleared by the first, than by the last.
And if I seem to clash with the old Masters, or new Tacticks of the Ancient or
Modern Art of War, I give my Reasons for it, which you may either approve or
disapprove as you please, without doing me the least injury. When I tell my own
opinion of Military Customs, looking back as far as I could find any
glimmering light of History to direct me; I give also my Reasons, which you may
likewise reject if you please, for by so doing I shall neither be condemned for
Heresy nor Schism.

If any Gentleman's curiosity leads him to enquire, Why I Print this Book? I
shall Answer him first, I can sincerely assure him, Vanity to make my self
known in the World pushed me not to it, else I had not let it lie unprinted by
me ten whole Years after first I wrote it. Next, very few could importune me to
publish it, since very few did know I had writ it. Nor did I, indeed, make it
public to disabuse some gay men, by letting them see they knew no more than
their Neighbors; and yet the doing so had been Charity, if my offer had been
received as kindly as I intended it. The consideration that induced me to it
was in short this, When I had ended all I had resolved to say of the Grecian
and Roman Art of War, and durst not hazard on the vast Ocean of the Modern
Art, I was encouraged to proceed to that, and to bring all I intended, to as
great perfection as I could, by a great Master, and good Judge in those
affairs: And when I had done so, that Noble Person, after my concealment of it
some years, desired to peruse it; and as he had persuaded me to finish, so he
prevailed with me to publish these Essays: But be pleased to know, he was such
a one as his Majesty had made choice of in the year 1666. to command his
Scottish Army, toward the end whereof he routed the Rebels at Pentland: The
very same Person was again entrusted by his Majesty, with the conduct of his
Forces, in the year 1679. and continues still in that Command, and is well
enough known by the Name of General Dalyell. But I am afraid you may ask me,
What moved me to begin to write these Discourses? But for that, if I were put
to the Rack till I give you my Reason, I could give no other than this, That
being out of employment, and not accustomed to an idle life, I knew not how to
pass away my solitary and retired hours with a more harmless divertisement.

THE CONTENTS OF THE BOOK.
BOOK I. Military Essays of the Ancient and GRECIAN ART of WAR.
CHAP. I. OF the Ancient Militia in General. Page 1 CHAP. II. Of the Armies,
and order of War of the Ancients. 4 CHAP. III. Of the Election, Levy, and Arms,
Offensive and Defensive, of the Grecians. 7 CHAP. IV. Of the Great Englines and
Machines, of the Training, and Exercising of the Grecians. 9 CHAP. V. Of the
Grecian Infantry. 12 CHAP. VI. Aelian's Marshalling the Grecian Infantry
examined. 14 CHAP. VII. Of the Grecian Cavalry, and some observations of it. 19
CHAP. VIII. Of the Great Macedonian Phalanx, of its number, and how marshalled;
with some observations of both. 23 CHAP. IX. Of the Grecian March, Baggage,
Encamping, Guards, and of their Paean. 26 CHAP. X. One of our Modern Armies
compared with the Great Macedonian Phalanx* 28

BOOK II. Military Essays of the Ancient ROMAN ART of WAR.
CHAP. I. OF the Ancient Roman Government, and Militia in General. p. 33 CHAP.
II. Of the Military Election and Levy of the Roman Soldiers. 40 CHAP. III. Of
their Arms, Offensive and Defensive, and of their Military Oath. 42 CHAP. IV.
Of Sieges, and Defense of Towns and Forts, of the Great Engines and Machines
used in them, by the Romans, and other Ancients. 49 CHAP. V. Of the Military
Exercises, Duties, Burdens, Marches, and Works of the Roman Soldiers. 57
CHAP. VI. Of the Roman Infantry, of all its several Bodies, and their-Officers.
61 CHAP. VII. Of the Roman Cavalry, and all its Officers. 74 CHAP. VIII. Of
their Trumpeters, Hornwinders, and of the Classicum. 79 CHAP. IX. Of the Roman
Pay, Proviant, and of their Donatives. 81 CHAP. X. Of a Roman Legion,
marshalled according to Titus Livius, with Lipsius his amendments. 84 CHAP. XI.
Of a Roman Legion, marshalled according to Flavius Vegetius. 87 CHAP. XII.
Vegetius his Legion reviewed and examined. 89 CHAP. XIII. Of a Roman Legion,
marshalled according to Polybius. 95 CHAP. XIV. Of the Distances and Intervals
between the several Bodies and Batallions of the Roman Horse and Foot. 96 CHAP.
XV. Of the Roman Allies and Auxiliaries, and of the mistakes of some Authors
concerning them. 102 CHAP. XVI. Of a Roman Consular Army, and of some mistakes
concerning it. 105 CHAP. XVII. Of a Consular Army, marshalled in the Field; and
of some General Officers belonging to it. 108 CHAP. XVIII. Of several figures
of Armies, used by the Ancients in their Battles. 112 CHAP. XIX. Of some
Customs used by the Romans, and other ancient Nations, before, in the time of,
and after their Battles. 115 CHAP. XX. Of the March of a Consular Army. 118
CHAP. XXI. Of the Quartering, Encamping, and Castrametation of a Consular Army.
121 CHAP. XXII. Of the Roman Guards, Watches, Watchword, and Rounds. 133 CHAP.
XXIII. Of Prisoners of War, Treaties, Parleys, and Articles among the Ancients.
136 CHAP. XXIV. Of the Military Punishments and Rewards of the Romans, and
other Ancient Nations. 145 CHAP. XXV. Polybius his comparison of the Macedonian
Phalanx, and the Roman Legion reviewed. 150

BOOK III. Military Essays of the MODERN ART of WAR.
CHAP. I. OF the Modern Militia in General. p. 157 CHAP. II. Of Levies, the
manner of several Nations in making them, of the Duties of Soldiers when they
are levied, of their Age, and how long they are bound to serve. 163 CHAP. III.
Of Armor, or Defensive Arms, used by several Nations, both for their Cavalry
and Infantry. 168 CHAP. IV. Of Offensive Arms, or Weapons, used by the Infantry
of several Nations. 171 CHAP. V. Of Offenffve Arms, or Weapons, used by the
Cavalry of several Nations. 173 CHAP. VI. Master Lupton's Book against the use
of the Pike, Dedicated to the Earl of Essex, examined. 178 CHAP. VII. Of
Gunpowder, Artillery, its General, and Train. 187 CHAP. VIII. Of Musters, and
Muster-masters, of Pay, Proviant, and Service, of Treasurers, Commissaries, and
Proviant-masters, and of the Military Oath. 197 CHAP. IX. Of Military Laws and
Articles* of Courts of War, of the Judge Marshal, and of the Provost Marshal
General. 203 CHAP. X. Of Exercising, Drilling, and Training the several Bodies
of the Cavalry and Infantry. 209 CHAP. XI. Of Companies, Regiments, and
Brigades of Foot, what they have been, what they are, how they are marshalled;
of all their Officers, their duties, and qualifications. 213 CHAP. XII. Of
Troops, and Regiments of Horse, of their Officers, and of Dragoons. 231 An
Appendix to this twelfth Chapter. 239 CHAP. XIII. Of Felt-marshals, Lieutenant
Felt-marshals, Lieutenant Generals, Generals of the Cavalry and Infantry; Major
Generals, and Adjutant Generals. 247 CHAP. XIV. Of a Captain General, or
Generalissimo. 251 CHAP. XV. Of Intelligence, Spys, and of a General
Scout-master. 260 CHAP. XVI. Embattelling by the square root examined, and
rejected. 266 CHAP. XVII. Of the modern way of embattelling and marshalling
Armies. 269 CHAP. XVIII. Of the Women and Baggage belonging to an Army, of the
General Waggon-master, and his Duties. 274 CHAP. XIX. Of the March of an Army.
278 CHAP. XX. Of Quartering, Encamping, and Modern Castrametation. Of the
Quartermaster General, and of the Quartermaster of the General Staff. 284
CHAP. XXI. Of Guards, Watches, Sentinels, Parades, Rounds, and Patrovils. 295
CHAP. XXII. Of things previous to a Battle, of a Battle it self, and things
after a Battle. 303 CHAP. XXIII. Of Retreats. 308 CHAP. XXIV. Of several ways
to take fortified places, particularly of Sieges, Trenches, Approaches,
Redouts* Batteries, Zaps, Galleries, Mines, Storms, and Assaults. 313 CHAP.
XXV. Of the Defense of fortified places against all manner of Expugnation; of
all things necessary for Forts, of Governors, of his duties, and
qualifications. 323 CHAP. XXVI. Of Prisoners, Parleys, Treaties, and Articles,
in our Modern Wars. 335 CHAP. XXVII. Of our Modern Military Punishments, and
Rewards. 347 CHAP. XXVIII. The Comparison made by Justus Lipsius of the
Ancient, and Modern Militia, examined. 353 CHAP. XXIX. Whether the profession
of Soldiery be lawful. 362

ERRATA.
Page 27. l. 24. and in other places, r. Goujats: p. 56. l. 17. r. Absueid: p.
77. l. 5. r. fight: p. 85. l. ult. r. Maniples: p. 103. l. 27. r. cense: p.
104. l. 19. r. who trusts not: p. 110. l. 29. ^r. Officers: p. 124. l. 53. r.
1000 foot broad: ib. l. 60 r. 100 foot: p. 125 l. 11. r. 1000 in breadth: p.
162. l. ult. r. De la Gaya: p. 173. l. 26. r. patroun: ib. l. 34. r. Dunder: p.
192. l. 21. for charge r. pierce: p. 194. l. 59. r. Felizeug-meister: p. 196.
l. 43. for times r. hours: p. 197. l. 29. r. T^n pasvolants: p. 199. l. 50. r.
Royelets: p. 206. l. 46. r. l^se Majeste.

PALLAS ARMATA. Military Essays ON THE ANCIENT AND GRECIAN ART of WAR.
CHAP. I. Of the Ancient Militia in General.
PEACE is the choicest of all Earthly Blessings: One Peace is better than
innumerable Triumphs: It is that Blessing ^^ich carries all other external one^
in its Bosom* without it no man can say he either enjoy^ himself, or any thing
he might call his own. The terrible Ware which our Passions raise within our
Breasts against our Reason, make us cry to Heaven for that inward Peace,
whereof neither Man nor Devil can bereave us. Even so, those people, among whom
Peace a choice Blessing.
the seat of War is, send up their frequent Petitions to the God of Peace, to
remove that dreadful Scourge from them; but the pity is, when their Prayers are
heard, and that they have obtained (the so much desired and longed for Peace,
few or none of them study to preserve so inestimable a Jewel. Many Nations
have, and do this day enjoy a quiet Peace, but seldom or never had the whole
habitable World a general Cessation of Arms, but when Augustus shut the Temple
of Janus: And it was fit that it should be so then, when the Prince of Peace
was to descend from the Mansions of Peace, to enter the Womb of the Immaculate
Virgin. But it is not my Work to descant of Peace, the Elogies whereof have
been loudly enough proclaimed many Ages ago.

If Peace be so great* a Blessing, it will follow, that War must be a very
heavy Curse, and so, no doubt, it is. It carries all evils, and all plagues in
the Belly of it; it extirpates Families, destroys Nations, and drains Provinces
of both Men and Money; it breaks up and dissolves Humane Societies, and War a
horrible Curse.
it tramples on all Laws, both Divine and Humane, except that of the longest
Sword; or it makes them run all after it like Lacqueys. I believe, if the
Prophet Gad had spoke nothing of Pestilence, but given David his choice of War
or Famine, the Psalmist had undoubtedly chosen the last, as the less Plague.
For, though all the three be from God; (for there is no evil in the City which
is not from the Lord) yet War is but mediately from God, and immediately from
Man: And the King of Israel chose rather to fall into Gods hands than Man's.
Besides, both Pestilence and Famine have been, and undoubtedly will be, in the
World without War; but it is almost impossible, that War can be of any
continuance in a Land, but it will draw after it both Pestilence and Famine, as
its inseparable concomitants. Yet Companions of War.
this dreadful and devouring Plague of War is not only permitted, but commanded
by the Almighty, to dwell among the Sons of Men. Gods own chosen people were by
his own appointment afflicted by it, and did also by that same authority
afflict others with it.

Enmity and feud had its beginning in the World soon after its Creation, not
only between the seed of the Woman and the Serpent, but between Man and Man,
yea, Brother and Brother, Cain and Abel; neither does it Private War.
matter much, with what Weapon the one killed the other, since experience
teaches us, that man can be sent to his Grave a thousand ways without the help
of a Sword. This was a Private War, which still continues, and will l^st till
time be no more, between Man and Man, and sometimes, Family and Family. A
Public War is twofold, a Foreign and a Civil War. Public War
The Foreign is of one or more Nations against one or more Nations; if
undertaken to increase Dominion, conquer or enslave others, or yet to hinder
the growth of a neighbor Potentate, it is unjust. Of the justifying causes of
a Foreign War, Authors are to be consulted, that write purposely on Foreign War
that subject, particularly Hugo Grotius, De jure Belli and Pacis: let it be
enough to say in this place with Augustine, that there can be no cause of a just
War, When just.
but an injury done, whether it be to Princes, Subjects or Ambassadors, and
that no satisfaction, after it is required, can be got. And indeed this War
should be formally denounced, otherwise it derogates from the Justice of the
cause. This to me seems clear from the definition the Civilians give of an
Enemy, Hosts (say they) sunt qui nobis, aut quibus nos bellum decernimus;
caeteri Indictio Belli.
latrones, aut praedones sunt: Those are enemies, who either have denounced the
War against us, or we against them; others are Thieves or Robbers. And Cicero
in his Offices, Nullum Bellum est justum, nisi quod a^t rebus repetitis
geratur, aut denunciatum ante sit, and indictum; No War is just, but what is
made for restitution, or denounced or indicted before. Neither will the War
that Joshua made against the seven Nations of the Canaanites, impugn what I
have said of the just cause of a War; for though these Nations had, perhaps,
done no wrong to the Israelites, yet Joshua had a particular Warrant from God
for what he Joshua his Wars.
did, which few or none but he can pretend to. It is true, neither he nor Moses
were commanded to fight with the Amalekites, yet the Lord approved of it
afterward.

The Grecians denounced their War by a Caduc^us: The Romans by their Feciales,
whose custom was to stand on the Roman Territory, and throw a Spear or Javelin
against the Land of those whom they declared Enemies. In these later times,
besides the denunciation of the War, a Declaration (ordinarily, called a
Manifesto) is emitted by the Aggressor, whereby he either does make the Justice
of his War appear to the world, or at least endeavors it. And though the
persons of Ambassadors were wronged and violated against the Law of Nations,
yet the War should be denounced by a Letter, or some such way, says Grotius;
yet we read not that David used any such previous civility to Hanun King of
Ammon, after he had affronted his Ambassadors.

A Civil War may be likewise twofold, the one sort is of the great men of
Civil War twofold.
a Free State, one against another, as that of Sylla against Marius, Father and
Son, and Caesar against Pompey, Father and Son among the Romans; or in a
Monarchy of those who are competitors for the Crown, as the War was between the
Houses of York and Lancaster. The other is of Subjects against their
Sovereigns, which can never be lawful, let the pretext be never so specious, I
mean on the Subjects part; for I make no doubt, but a Sovereign, whether Prince
or State, not only may, but ought by the power of the Sword to reduce their
Rebellious Subjects to their Duty, when by no other means they can prevail with
them. Both these kinds of Intestin^ Wars are called Civil, because they are
inter Cives unius Reipublic^; Among the Citizens of one Commonwealth. It is
the worst of all Wars, and that wherein there is not so much as the least
shadow of Civility. This War arms Brother against Brother, for which we need
not search History for Examples: In this War the Son thinks he does a
meritorious work if he betrays his own Father; and the Father conceives he
super-erogates, if he sheaths his Sword in his Sons Bowels, because, says he,
he did not rise to fight the Lords Battles, even It is the worst of Wars.
perhaps against the Lords anointed; for this War extinguisheth all natural
affection among the nearest in Blood. This sort of War sends Cobblers and other
Mechanics to the Pulpits, to torture their Audience with Nonsense. This
converts Soldiers into Preachers, who by virtue of their double callings,
belch out Blasphemies against the great God of Heaven, and rebellious and
opprobrious Speeches against his Vicegerents on Earth. And on the other hand,
this War metamorphoseth Preachers into Soldiers, and tells them, that a
Corslet becomes them better than a Canonical Coat, and a broad Sword better
than a long Gown: It whispers them in the ear, that Christ would not have bid
those of his Disciples who had two Coats, sell one of them, and buy a Sword, if
he had not intended to leave War as a Legacy to his followers, as well as
Peace. It tells them, they ought in their Sermons to summon Subjects under the
pain of eternal damnation, to rise in Arms against the Sovereign Power, because
they are bidden Curse Meroz, who would not come out to help the Lord against
the Mighty: Yet very few of them can tell you, whether Meroz was a Prince, a
City, or a Country. But I dwell too long here.

Not long after the Flood we find numerous Armies raised by Nimrod and his
ambitious Successors, to subject others of Noah's race to their lawless
dominion: And indeed, if the Stories of these very ancient times be true (as
they are very much to be doubted) we read not of so great Armies (except some
in Holy Writ) as those, which Ninus, and the famous Semiramis, and the Kings of
India, whom she invaded, brought together. It is pity we should not know how
they were armed, and in what order they fought: I suppose there were Wars in
the World, before there was any to record them. The Egyptians wrote in
Hieroglyphics, and therefore, I believe, next to Moses, we are obliged to the
Grecians, for giving us a glimpse of Antiquity. And truly, even they wrote the
occasions, the causes, the beginnings, the progress, and issues of Wars so
confusedly, and fabulously, that we can Ancient Histories fabulous.
build but little on their relations, till themselves became renowned by the
stout resistance they made against the Persian Monarchy; and yet even then,
they give us but little light, how other Nations, besides themselves, managed
the War, what Art or Order they used in their Battles, or how their Combatants
were Armed.

The Sacred Story mentions no Battle fought after the Flood, or before it, till
that of Chaderlaomer, and other three Kings, against the five Kings of the
Plain. But we may presume, there were many bloody bickerings before that, when
Nimrod, Belus, Ninus and Semiramis (if Ninus was not Amraphel one of the four
Kings, whereof I much doubt) imposed the yoke of Slavery on so many Nations. In
this Battle fought in the plain of Sodom and Gomorrha, the five Kings were
beaten, but how either they or their Adversaries fought, with The Battle of
Sodom.
what Arms, or in what Order, the History tells us nothing. The Conquerours
carry away a great booty, and many Prisoners, and among them Lot, and the
endeavoring his rescue, made the War just on his Uncle Abraham's side: He
follows, and overthrows the four Kings, and brings back all the Goods and
Prisoners. Abraham had no particular Warrant for this War, but it was approved,
for thereafter Melchizedec, the Priest of the most High God, blessed him; nor
was it needful for the Father of the Faithful to denounce the War, because he
looked upon himself there, as an Ally, if not a Subject of some of the five
Kings, particularly him of Sodom. The Text makes this action of Abraham a
surprizal; for it is said, he smote them in the night. We find he Armed three
hundred and eighteen of his own Servants, but with what kind of Arms, either
for Offense or Defense, we know not; and yet it would seem, his Servants had
learned to handle their Arms, for some of our Translations have it, He armed
his trained Servants. By this place of Scripture, it appears that these Kings
had fought together before, because it is said, the five Kings rebelled against
Chaderlaomer, whom they had served twelve years; now it is more than probable,
they had fought at least once with him, before they offered to do homage to
him, but Moses mentions not that, as not being to his purpose, his design there
being only to give us the Story of Abraham.

Pharaoh followed the Israelites with six hundred chosen Chariots, says Moses;
and with two hundred thousand Foot, and fifty thousand Horse, says Josephus:
but how these Chariots, these Horse, and these Foot were armed, what order they
kept in their pursuit, or what discipline they had, neither the one nor the
other tells us. But we may suppose well enough that the Egyptians good
Warriors.
Egyptians were well armed, and knew the Art of War; and that Joshua and other
Captains of the people of Israel, might have learned from them the
contemplative part of their Military skill, which afterward they practiced on
those Nations they were ordained to root out. And if the Kings of Egypt had War
with the Ethiopians while the Israelites were under them, I make no doubt, but
many of them served in these Wars. Xenophon commends very much both the valor
and the skill of those Egyptians who were with Croesus, at that Battle which he
fought with Cyrus: And it is very like that the Grecians themselves got the
rudiments of their Art of War in Egypt, as well as of other liberal Sciences;
and it is like, Lycurgus taught the Rules of the So were the Spartans.
Military Art to his Spartans, which he had learned from the Egyptians, as well
as he did other civil constitutions. From the Lacedaemonians did the Thebans
learn their discipline of War. The Theban Epaminondas and Pelopidas taught it
to Philip of Macedon, and he to his Son, the Great Alexander, whose glorious
acts obscured all the famous exploits of the rest of the Grecians. We need not
doubt each of these added something of their own to what they had Facil^ est
inv^nti^ add^re.
learned, for by such means all Arts come to perfection.

CHAP. II. Of the Arms, and Order of War of the Ancients.
TO find out the Arms, or Art of War of these Ancient Nations, whether Jews or
Gentiles, till the Grecians wrote their own actions, we have very little light.
To begin with the Israelites. In the foregoing Chapter I observed, that their
great Patriarch Abraham, fought with four Kings and routed them; he was, no
doubt, the first, but not the last of the race of Heber, who fought a Battle. I
told you also, it is not known how he armed his servants and followers. That
all or some of them had Swords, is no more but a probable Sword^.
conjecture, for we do not read of that Weapon in Scripture or any other Book,
till Simeon and Levi (who were Abraham's great Grandchildren) covering their
cruel revenge with the cloak of Religion, (of so old a date is that mischievous
practice) destroyed the Sechemites with Swords; for it is said, Each man took
his Sword.

That the Israelites had Arms, wherewith they fought against Sihon and Og, and
other people, is not at all to be doubted: In the Wilderness they could not get
them; and therefore, I think, that they brought them out of Egypt with them,
should be no question; but how they came by them, to me is a very great
question. For I think it not at all probable, that those Kings or those
Pharaohs, who so grievously oppressed them, would suffer so many hundred
thousands of them to be armed, no more, than afterward the Philistines, when
they had the upper hand, would suffer a Smith to dwell in Israel. For my part,
I believe, at their coming out of Egypt, they borrowed all manner of Arms from
the Egyptians, as well as they did better movables, for they had alike right to
all.

But what kind of Arms they used, when they fought with those Nations whom they
extirpated, what Art or Order they used in their Marches and Battles, both
before and after they came to the Land of Promise, we are yet to learn: yet we
find mentioned, for the Offensive, Swords, Javelins, and Arms of the Israelites.
Spears; and for the Defensive, Targets and Shields (I suppose Head pieces
could not be wanting) are recorded to have been in the Magazines of their
several Kings; nor did they want their great Artillery of Balists, and
Catapults, as shall be declared in its proper place. Yet, if all the
Philistines, according to their several Statures, were proportionably armed as
their Champion Goliath was, and all the Israelites as well armed as their
Neighbors the Philistines, we may safely conclude, they were as well armed
every jot, as the Grecia^s or Macedonians were afterward. We find likewise
they had Chariots; but how many, or how armed or ordered, we know not. We may
also probably conjecture, their Files were ten deep, when they marshalled their
Batallions, for I find they had Companies and Regiments much Their Order.
about the number of those of our latest modern Wars: for we read of Captains
of thousands, who were such as our Colonels; Captains of hundreds, who were
Centurions, and like our private Captains; Captains of fifties, such as our
Lieutenants. It is pity, Josephus (who was a great Captain himself) did not
transmit the Military Art of his Contrymen to posterity, it had been worth
his labor.

As little, or indeed less light does any Author afford us to know the Arms,
Order, and Discipline of the Assyrians, to whom the first Monarchy is given,
Assyrians.
by the universal consent of History. But we find, that not only they, but the
Persians, Indians, and other Nations used Elephants and Chariots.

The Elephant of India is said to be a far more courageous Beast than that of
Africa: They are yet made use of in the Wars of that Country. Of old they
carried wooden Towers on their backs, wherein were lodged armed men, who threw
Darts and Javelins among the bands of the enemies, through which these dreadful
Creatures were furiously driven, who of themselves were sufficiently able to
break the strongest and best composed Squadrons of armed men: But when they
were galled and wounded, and turned head, then The Elephants.
they did that mischief to their Masters, that was intended for the Enemy. The
Romans, before their Wars in Greece, made no use of them; and though at first
Pyrrhus terrified them with the sight of these, indeed, terrible Beasts; yet
thereafter they found means to wound them, or by making lanes and streets for
them, to render their fury so useless, that they got but little hurt by them.
But for all this, I cannot have faith enough to believe what Livy reports, that
an armed Soldier entered into combat with an Elephant, and that the Beast
grapled him with his Trunk about the middle, and cast him up in the air, but
that the Soldier falling with little or no hurt, wounded the Beast with his
Sword. I should be of opinion, that such a hug as that might have crushed both
the Soldiers Corsset and his Bones, till the Marrow came out; for in his Trunk
(which the Latins call Proboscis) there is such strength, that therewith, as
some write, he is able to fell Trees; or I think, the Elephant might have
tossed his Duellist so high in the air, that the very fall should have dashed
him in pieces. But Livy did no more see this Romantic combat, than he saw
showers of Blood and Stones, which he writes rained frequently among the
Territories of the Romans and their Allies.

Chariots in ancient times had sometimes Scythes on both sides of them,
sometimes none. Xenophon writes that before Cyrus time, the Trojans and
Assyrians, and thereafter the Cyrenians used Chariots drawn with four Horses,
in every one whereof was only one Combatant, and a Driver or Coachman. Chariots.
This fashion seemed to Cyrus, of no greater advantage than to skirmish a
little, but did not at all help to beat an Enemy ranged in Battle: Therefore he
abolished it, and ordered his Chariots to be made with strong and broad
Axle-trees, to both sides of which were fastened Brass or Iron Scythes; next he
put armed men within the Chariots, who in the charge discharged lustily their
missile Weapons, wherewith he took care that they should be well stored* and
with these he did not only sometimes skirmish, but for most part charged
furiously the Enemies strongest and closest Bodies and Batallions.

The Egyptians Arms for the Offensive, were great and massy Spears, says
Egyptian Arms.
Xenophon, but how long they were, he does not tell; and for the Defensive,
they had Shields of Brass, of such a largeness, that therewith they covered
both their Bodies and their Legs. They marshalled their men one hundred in
File, and when this was told to Cyrus, he made himself merry with it, and said,
he wished all his Enemies would draw up a thousand deep, for so they should be
the more easily surrounded, their flanks sooner attacked, and consequently,
said he, I should have the cheaper market of them. By what that same Author
says, it would seem, the Egyptians drew up constantly an hundred deep; for
when Croesus desired them to change, they answered, They Their Order.
would not alter their Country fashion. Yet I conjecture, the Egyptian custom
has been to marshal their Batallions by the squa^^ root, for here I find their
Body consisted of ten thousand men, and they perhaps being desirous to make a
square of men, (which is to have as many in File as Rank) have embattell'd
them, a hundred in each; for a hundred times a hundred produces ten thousand.
Of the Square Root I shall speak hereafter.

The Persians that served on Foot in Cyrus's time carried for the Defensive,
Arms of the ancient Persians.
a Headpiece, Corslet, and a little Target; and for the Offensive, a Sword and
a Curtle-axe, besides their Darts and Stones. His Cuirassiers and Lighthorse
were armed as the Grecians were, whereof I shall speak in the next Chapter. In
his time, the Sacans and Cardusians, a people dwelling near Persia, were
excellent Bow-men on Horseback, whose offspring, in all probability, were
those Parthians, who by their valor and skill in that manner of fight, routed
the Army of the Roman Consul Crassus, and killed himself; and put Mark Anthony
to so shameful a retreat, and so near a danger of evident ruin, that oftener
than once he offered to rid himself of that impending disgrace by Self-murder,
as Plutarch in his Life relates. Cyrus, who was the first Persian Monarch, did
not adhere to one constant number of Ranks; for sometimes he drew up his
Batallions ten in File; and it is like, he observed Their Order.
that most, for he had Myriarchs, who had the command of ten thousand;
Chiliarchs, who were Colonels of thousands; and Centeniers, who were Captains
of hundreds; all which may infer ten deep. Yet in Xenophons second Book, we
find Cyrus his Persians to be twelve in File; and his Batallions, when he
fought with Croesus, were four and twenty deep; and indeed that was deep
enough: Perhaps in the marshalling his several Bodies, he has sometimes made
use of the Square Root: But the King of Lydia, in that Lydians.
same Battle which he fought with Cyrus, made both his Horse and Foot thirty
deep, except the Egyptians I spoke of, who were an hundred in File, as I told
you formerly. What more I have to say of any point of War used by any other
ancient Nation, either before, or in the time of either the Grecian or the
Roman greatness, shall be interwoven in the discourses of the Militia of these
two famous Nations.

CHAP. III. Of the Election, Levy, and Arms Offensive and Defensive, of the
Grecians.
SInce we have found out but little of the true Militia of other Ancient
Nations, let us take a survey of the Grecian Art of War, which has been in
many ages, and still is so much spoken of. And herein we must borrow all our
help from Aelian, who, you will find, has given it us very sparingly. For
though we have the works of Homer, and that he is accounted the first Heathen
Author, who wrote any thing of formed Battles; yet we are not to expect much
light from so blind a Lanthorn. Polybius, though a Grecian, and a Captain,
contributes nothing to our assistance, but what we are glad to glean from the
scattered drops of his Pen. The rest of the Grecian Tacticks named Grecian
Tacticks lost.
by Aelian in his Treatise, are lost, except some pieces of Aeneas, translated
into Latin seventy years ago by Casaubon, which Sir Thomas Kellie thought were
likewise perished. But truly we need not much regret that loss, if that And no
matter.
which Aelian (who perused them all) tells us, be true, that they wrote not, as
if they intended to instruct those who were ignorant and desirous to learn; but
as to those who were already Proficients, who understood the words and terms of
Art, and who knew the practice of the Grecian War, as well as the Authors
themselves.

All Armies and Forces were raised by a Levy called ordinarily in ancient
times, and still very properly, an Election. And truly, I am sorry I should so
Aelians omission.
soon have occasion to expostulate with Aelian, who has forgot to tell us
that, of which he should have given us a particular information, and in the
first place too; that is, how the levies of the Grecian Soldiers, either of
Horse or Foot, were made, at what age they were enrolled in the Militia, and
how long they were obliged to serve. Of these particulars I shall tell my
Reader, that Lipsius out of Demosthemes, says, that none were elected till
they were eighteen years old (this was a year later than the Romans chose
theirs) and that they were bound to serve till the five and fortieth year of
their age. But Vlpian says, that the Athenians did indeed elect and enrol
their Soldiers Grecian levy.
when they were eighteen years old, but made them only do Military duties
within their own territories (which was, upon the matter, to train them) till
they were twenty. After that, they were bound to serve in foreign expeditions
till they were forty, and then they were dismissed. I think it strange, they
would dismiss men in the very strength of their age; I should rather think,
they then only left it to the Soldiers choice, to serve longer or not, as they
pleased, but did not by any public act or ordinance disable or incapacitate
them to serve longer in the War. I find also in Authors, that the Greeks had an
especial care (as all Nations should) to choose persons, who as members apt for
several functions, were fit to compose the great Body of their Phalanx: For
many can serve on Foot, who would make but bad Horsemen; and many are able
enough to carry a piece of light Armor, and Offensive Weapons, who cannot bear
the burden of Headpiece, Corslet, Greeves, Taslets, and Targets. And this is
shortly all I can say of the Grecians Election of their Soldiers.

The Ancient Greeks composed their Armies of Horsemen, Footmen, Chariots, and
Elephants. Of the two last I have spoken. We are now to see how the other two
were armed.

The Footmen were divided into those who carried heavy Arms, and those who
were light armed; and so were the Horse; and both the heavy armed Foot and
Horse were called Cataphracti, and the light armed Foot had the denomination of
Velites. The heavy armed Foot had for the Defensive, a Defensive Arms for the
heavy armed Foot.
Headpiece, a Corslet, Greeves, and a Target; this last was round and hollow
in the middle, more than two Foot and a half in diameter; this the Soldier
carried on his Back all the time of his march; but when he was to sight, by a
wry of his Body he made it fall on his left shoulder, and presenting his Pike
with his left foot foremost, his whole Body, till below the knee, was covered
with his Target: All these Arms were of Brass, and so were their Boots, which
defended their Legs; for Homer tells us often of his been ocreati Archivi. I
cannot tell whether both their Legs were Booted, it may be only the left,
because most subject to danger. Instead of Brass Targets, the Great Alexander
gave Silver ones to those Veteran Phalangites, who had helped him well to
obtain so many glorious Victories; and those who carried them were called
Argyraspides, or Silver Shields. Every man who carried a Shield had some Device
on it, according to his own fancy; and I have read that one caused to be
painted on his Shield a Fly, of as little a proportion as a living Fly is, and
so scarce distinguishable on so great a Shield, for which his fellows and
companions mocked him, and said, He had done so, that his Device not being
discernable, he might not be pursued by an Enemy: but he answered, That his
intention was to advance so near an Enemy, that any of them might see and
perceive it was the picture of a Fly. The Offensive Weapon for the Offensive.
heavy armed Foot, was a strong Pike, ordinarily eighteen foot long, but the
Macedonian was of one and twenty, and was called Sarissa; these three foot of
greater length gave a great advantage to those who carried them, for assuredly,
the longer the Pike is, it is the better, so it be manageable, as shall be said
hereafter: and therefore a Pike of four and twenty foot long, would have had
the advantage of that of one and twenty. A good shearing Sword was also a
Weapon for the Cataphracts, both Foot and Horse, though Aelian, in all the
accounts he gives us of the Grecian Armies or Arms, speaks Omission of Aelian.
not one word of a Sword. Perhaps he thought we were obliged to conceive, that
all Soldiers were Swordmen.

The Grecian Velites, or light armed Foot, for most part had no Defensive
Velites how armed.
Arms. Their Offensive Weapons were Swords, Javelins, Darts, Arrows, and
Stones, which they threw, both out of their Hands, and out of Slings: Some of
them had also a short Spear; and for Defense, a little Target, which the
Macedonians called Pelta: But those who carried them needed not make a third
species of the Infantry, as Aelian seems to insinuate; these Peltati being
nothing but light armed Foot; for the best armed of them, were Peltati.
not so well armed Defensively, as the worst armed of the Roman Velites; who
notwithstanding were but reckoned among the light armed Infantry. And indeed I
wonder, why any of the Grecians, at least of the Macedonians, should have
wanted these Pelt^, or little Targets, with which they ought likewise to have
had Head-pieces or Morrions, as most of the Roman Velites had.

The Grecian Cavalry was likewise divided into two sorts; the heavy armed, and
light armed. The heavy armed were called Cataphracti, a word which both the
Romans, and all other Nations, have borrowed from the Greeks; and though it be
common to both Horse and Foot, yet they have appropriated it only to the heavy
armed Horsemen. And here my Reader may observe, that these words Cataphracts,
Gens d'Arms, Men of Arms, heavy armed Horsemen, and Cuirassiers, signify all
one thing. The Grecian Cataphracts for Defense, Cataphracti how armed.
had Head-pieces, Backs and Breasts, Greeves, Taslets, and Boots of Iron or
Brass; and if I understand right, Targets; Their Horses were likewise armed. If
these Riders so armed, were mounted on strong and courageous Horses, assuredly
they were able, either to give or receive a very forcible and strong charge and
impression. But being so heavy, were neither able to pursue an Enemy far, or
run very speedily from him. In this place Aelian is much to blame (as in many
other places) and is here inexcusable, for not Aelian inexcusable.
telling us what Offensive Arms his Cataphracts carried, for he keeps up this
as a secret; but till he or some Body for him, inform me better, I shall
believe their Weapons were Lances, Swords, and Maces, which I suppose, I could
make appear out of History. The light armed Horsemen were of two kinds, Light
Horse how armed.
Hastati, which I render Lancieers; some of these had no^ Defensive Arms, and
some had a Target. The second kind of light armed Horsemen Aelian calls
Ferentarii, other Authors call them Acrobalists, and these were sub-divided
into two sorts; some used Darts, and were called Tarentines; and some had Bows
and Arrows, and were called Scythae, because the Scythians delighted much in
the Bow.

If you will compare the Ancient Grecian, and the Modern Armies used not half
an age ago, in the point of Arms, you will not find any considerable Grecian
and Modern Arms compared.
difference. To the heavy armed Grecian Foot, answer our Pike-men, when they
were, and still should be armed with Headpiece, Back and Breast, Greeves and
Taslets, except in this, that ours want Targets, and walk not in Brazen Boots.
To the light armed or Velites of the Greeks, do answer our Bowmen or
Harquebusiers, when we had them, and now our Musketeers. To the Grecian
Cataphracti on Horseback, correspond our Gens d'Arms, or Cuirassiers, armed
with Lances, when they were in fashion, and now with Pistols and Carabines. To
the light armed Horsemen called Sagittarii or Scyth^, you may compare those
whom the French call still Archers, armed formerly (even since Gunpowder was
found out) with Bows and Arrows, and half Lances, and now with Pistols or
Carabines. To the Tarentines answer generally our Light Horsemen, armed
Offensively now with Hand-guns and Swords, and some of them Defensively, with
Back, Breast and Headpiece, but most without any of them.

CHAP. IV. Of their great Engines, and Machines, of their Training, and
Exercising.
THe Ancients had their Artillery as well as we have. These were their Rams,
Balists, and Catapults. They had also their Vineae, Plutei, Moscoli, and other
Engines, whereby they made their approaches to the Walls of besieged Tow^s. I
think it strange, that some attribute the invention of the moving or ambulatory
Tower so much admired by Antiquity, to Demetrius the Son of Antigonus; for to
me it is clear enough, that his Fathers Master the Great Alexander had one of
them at the Siege of Gaza, which was rendered ineffectual by the deep Sand,
through which it could not be brought so The ambulatory Tower.
near the Walls, as was needful; for the Wheels, on which it was to move, sunk
down. Neither do I think that Alexander himself was the inventor of it: Whether
the Trojan Horse, whose Belly was stuffed with armed men, might be such a
Machine as this, or whether it had only its existency in the Poets brain, is no
great matter. But because the Romans used all these Warlike Engines at the
expugnation and propugnation of Towns, I shall refer my Reader concerning them
to the fourth Chapter of my Discourses of the Roman Militia, where I shall also
show him the substance of what Aeneas, an Ancient Grecian Tactick, says on
that subject. Here I shall only observe, that as the Grecians were very apt to
usurp to themselves the invention of many Arts and Sciences, which they stole
from others: So it will be found that many of these Machines were used in the
World, before the Grecians were so much known, as afterward they came to be.
We read in the seventeenth Chapter of the second Book of the Chronicles, That
Ozias King of Judah, by the invention of skilful Masters made and planted on
the Towers and corners of the Walls of Jerusalem, Engines which shot Arrows,
Darts, and great Stones. And these were no other than those Machines the Greeks
called Catapults and Balists: And this was long before, the overthrows and
defeats of the Persian Monarchs These Machines not invented by the Grecians.
made Greece famous in the habitable World. Some think, Moses invented them,
and I think, they may as well fancy he invented the moving Tower (of all which
hereafter) whereof I spoke but just now. But the place alleged for this, which
is the last verse of the twentieth Chapter of Deuteronomy, will not justify
that; for it is said there (as the Italian Translation has it) Thou shall cut
down those Trees, which bear no Fruits, and make Bulwarks ( Bastioni) of them,
against those Cities thou art to besiege. And though Lipsius and T^rduzzi
think, that here are only meant Stakes and Pallisadoes for Ramparts and
Sconces; yet I may without Heresy believe, that the Vine^ and Plutei, of which
we read in Latin Histories, may be meant in the Text; and the Ram also,
wherewith, I suppose, Joshua may have battered the Walls of those Cities, which
he had no authority from the Almighty, to beat down with the sound of Rams
horns, as he did the strong Walls of Jericho.

The Grecians were very exact in Training and drilling both their Horse and
Foot; and without question, they taught their Soldiers very perfectly to
handle and manage all the Arms they were appointed to carry, whether those were
Javelins, Darts, Stones, Slings, Swords, Pikes, Lances, Maces, or Bows and
Arrows. And as careful they were to teach them those motions Grecian words of
Exercise
and evolutions, whereby their Bodies, whether small or great, changed their
present posture into another, either by Facings, Doublings, Countermarches, or
Wheelings. And though the European Nations were forced to find out words of
Command each in their own language, to teach the use and handling of the
Pistol, Carabine, Harquebuss, Musket, or any other Fire-gun, in regard none of
those were known to any of the Autients; yet the handling of the Pike is the
same in all its postures, that the Grecians had: And all our European words of
Command for the motions and evolutions of Bodies, are borrowed from the Greek.
By Example; That which they called All one with ours.
Declina in hastam, we call To the Right hand. That which with them was Declina
in Scutum, with us is To the Left hand: Because they carried their Pike on
their right Shoulder, and their Target on the left. Their Inflectio in hastam
aut Scutum, was our Right or Left about. Jugare with them, is to my sense,
(though I know others think not so) to Double Ranks. Their Intercalatio, was
our Doubling of Files. Reddere in arrectum, is As you were. It is needless to
give you more, since most of our Modern words are the same with theirs, and are
obvious in most languages. Yet here I shall take liberty to speak a little of
both their, and our Counter-marches, that hereafter I need not trouble either
my self or my Reader with that point of exercise, for which I have so small an
esteem.

They called a Countermarch Evolutio per versum, and they had three kinds of
it, which are yet retained in our Modern Exercises; and these were the
Macedonian, the Lacedaemonian, and the Persian, which was also called the
Choraean. The Macedonian is, when the Batallion is commanded to take up as much
ground in the Van, as it possessed before, e're he who was Leader faced
Macedonian Countermarch.
to the Rear. It is done thus: He who is in the Rear marches through or
between two Files to the Van, and then without an alt so many foot beyond the
File-leader, as the Body at their due distance possesses; all the rest that
were in the File before him, following him in order as they stood, till he
making alt, they all take up their several distances behind him, till he who is
File-leader turn himself about on that same ground he stood on, and then all
turn likewise, so that all the File faceth to the Rear in that same order, that
before the Countermarch it faced to the Van; by this means the Body loses
ground in the Rear: and therefore our Modern Drillers, when they command the
Macedonian countermarch, they say, By the Right or Left hand Countermarch, and
lose ground in the Rear, or gain ground in the Van, which is all one thing.

The Laconian is, when the Batallion is commanded to take up as much ground in
the Rear as it possessed before, and is done thus. The File-leader Lacedemonian.
turns just where he stands, and marches as many foot behind the Rear-man as
the Body at its due distance should possess, all who follow him turn not about,
till their Leaders go by them, and so the Bringer up does only turn himself
without any further motion. The Modern word of Command for this is,
Countermarch to the Right and Left hand, and gain ground in the Rear.

The Persian is, when the Batallion keeps the same ground it had, but with this
difference, that the Leader stands where the Bringer up was, and the Persian.
Rear-man where the Leader stood. It is done thus: The Leader advances three
steps, and then turns and marches to the Rear, and all who follow him turn
not, till they come to that place to which he advanced, and then they face
about, and take up the same ground they formerly possessed. The word of Command
for this is, Countermarch to the Right or Left hand and keep your ground. It
is also called the Chor^an Countermarch, because, O^ Choraean.
as the Chorus uses to sing and dance all together, so here all the Ranks move
at once, and keeping that same measure and distance in turning, resembles a
Dance: But indeed, all these Counter-marches, as most of all evolutions, are
better, and sooner illustrated, nay, demonstrated by a Body of Soldiers in the
Field, than they can be either by words, or figures on Paper.

Philip King of Macedon, Father of the Great Alexander, put down the first of
these Counter-marches, which was his own Country one, and with good reason;
for it has a show of flying, at least of retiring, being a Body of sixteen
deep (as the Macedonian Phalanx was) by that Countermarch lost in the Rear
(where the Enemy is supposed to be) one hundred and twelve foot of ground, one
foot being allowed for every Rank to stand on, and six All three of small use.
foot of distance between the Ranks, at least it loses one hundred and six
foot. And truly, I think the hazard were small, if all the three several
Counter-marches were for ever banished out of all Armies, except those of our
Enemies. It is true, I never saw any of them used in sight of an Enemy; for if
they be practiced then, I am confident, confusion would follow them, which is
but too ready to appear in any Army, though never so well ordered, when it is
unexpectedly attacked by an Enemy in the Rear.

If the Grecians had been acquainted with our great Guns, nay, even with our
Muskets, which kill at a greater distance by far, than Darts or Arrows, and
against which their Defensive Arms would not have been proof; they would have
found that an Enemy a good way from their Rear would have rendered their best
Counter-marches both unfeasible and dangerous. All the good, I suppose, that is
intended by a Countermarch, is to place the very same men and Ranks with their
faces to the Rear in that very same order they were, with their faces to the
Front. And truly, if Captains be careful to place their best men in the Front,
their next best in the Rear, and make middle men of the third, and rank every
man according to his worth and dignity, as they should do, (but too many of
them are negligent in this) it will be needless to hazard a Countermarch, but
with much ease, and with one word of Command, (and that is, By the Right or
Left hand about) an Enemy may be faced in the Rear, without danger of any
confusion or disorder.

I have seen some very punctual Officers and Drill-masters, who have taken much
pains to teach new beginners all these three sorts of Counter-marches* and have
made them practice their lessons very exactly; yet for all that, I could never
in my own Judgment, have a better opinion of Counter-marches, than, they say,
some Physicians have of Cucumbers, which they first order to be well corrected
and prepared with Vinegar, Oil, Pepper, and I know not what else, and then
advise, to throw them out of doors, or over the Windows.

In exercising Bodies, the first care is to make Ranks and Files keep that
distance, that is allowed by the Prince or General who commands the Army, for
he may do in that according to his pleasure. The Grecian Foot had a threefold
distance, the first was of six foot, and this Aelian will have to be in
exercisings and marches between File and File, as well as Rank and Rank; but
assuredly there* was not so good reason for the one as there was for the other,
in regard all the heavy armed Foot cartying long Pikes* required six foot in
their march between Rank and Rank for the convenience of their Pikes; but there
was no need of so much between File and File, as Distances of the Foot.
any man at first view, may easily comprehend. The second distance was of three
foot between Rank and Rank, as also between File and File, and this was when
they were drawn up* and stood in Battle with their Pikes ordered; and their
posture at this distance was called Densatio. The third was of one foot and a
half between both Files and Ranks, and that was, when they were either to give
or receive a charge, and it was called Constipati^. In that posture having
presented their Pikes with their left foot foremost, their Targets touched one
another, and so their Phalange looked like a Brazen Wall, as Lucius Aemilius,
the Roman Consul, spoke of that wherewith King Pers^^s faced him at the Battle
of Pidna, where they fought for the Sovereignty of the Kingdom of Macedon.

The Grecian Horse were marshalled in several figures, and of their distance I
can say nothing, nor does Aelian help me in it at all. Of these several figures
of Horse Troops, I shall speak in the next Chapter but one. And Of the Horse.
then my Reader will perhaps believe with me, that the Square Battles probably
kept that distance that Troops have done since; and that both the Rhombus and
the Wedge required a greater distance, when they were commanded by a motion
either to the Right or Left hand, to change the posture or the place, wherein
they stood; and I conceive, when either of them was to charge, the Horse men
were obliged to ^err together, as close as ever they could, otherwise they
could not pierce so home, as was expected by those who cast them into those
moulds. But this will be better understood afterward.

Whether all those Grecians, who were fit to bear Arms, were Trained or
Exercised, or some only of them elected for that purpose; or whether those who
were picked out and Trained, entered in pay before they were put in Companies
or Troops, or what that pay was, or whether some were bred and Trained in
Military Schools and Seminaries, as Alexander did with those 30000 Omissions of
Aelian.
Persians, whom he caused to learn the Macedonian Art of War, and as the Grand
Signior does with his Janissaries, we know nothing. We should have been much
bound to Aelian, if he had vouchsafed to have given us any light in these
particulars, but he is defective all along in many things, besides these.

The Grecians, and more especially the Romans, thought Training and Exercising
so necessary a duty, that they never either neglected or omitted it, nay, not
in the times of the calmest Peace. A Trained and well Exercised Army has the
advantage of that which is not Trained, though the first be composed of Novices
and Tyrones, and the last of Veterans, whereof Polybius, a famous Historian,
and a good Captain, gives us an observable example in his Fifth Book. Aniiochus
King of Syria, presuming on the experience and Exercising a necessary duty.
approved valor of his Army, and despising the Egyptians, with their King
Ptolomy, (an unactive Prince) whom he had beat before, neglected to exercise
and keep his Soldiers in discipline; mean time Sisibius, Ptolomy's great
Minister of State, protracted time with feigned Treaties with Antiochus, till
he had levied great numbers both of Natives and Strangers, and had by Grecian
Captains Trained and Exercised them well in all Military duties; so that when
the two Kings fought at Raphia, for the Kingdom of C^losyria, with Armies of
near equal numbers, Ptolomy got the Victory.

CHAP. V. Of the Grecian Infantry.
WE are told by Aelian that the Grecian Foot were sometimes marshalled sixteen
deep, sometimes twelve, and sometimes eight. Observe here, that what he or
other Authors call a Longitude we call a Rank, which the Latins called Frons,
and Yug^^^; and what they called Altitude, we call a File, or the depth. The
Germans after the Latin, call the deepness of a File the height of it. The
Macedonians, as Aelian says, marshalled all their heavy Foot sixteen deep.
armed foot sixteen deep; and this height or depth of a File, our Author
esteems to be absolutely the best, because, says he, it makes not too long a
Front, but what if it make too short a one? But his reasons for sixteen deep,
we shall hereafter examine.

Every one of those Files had a leader who commanded it, and was called Dicurio.
Decurio. Observe here by the way, that Decurio is not always he who commands
ten men, as many of my profession fancy. The File had likewise its
Tergiductor, who was our Bringer up: But in Aelians account this Rear-man had
no command, but was subject to the Middle-man, who under the Leader commanded
the last half of the File. There were besides in every File, as Aelian says,
four Enomotarchs, each whereof, says he, had the command A File.
of three men. But here assuredly our Author mistakes himself, for four men,
and each of them the command of three, make completely sixteen, and so both
File-leader and Middle-man were excluded. But certainly the Decuria or Leader
had the three men next him immediately under his command, and the fifth man was
an Enomotarch, who had three under him, then the Dimarite or Middle-man, (who
commanded the last half of the File) had the inspection of the three men
immediately following; and lastly, the fifth man from the Dimarite, and
thirteenth from the Decurio, had the three last men of the File recommended to
his care. By this means, there are but four petty Commanders in every File,
whereas Aelian unadvisedly and unattentively made fix. Lochos with the Grecians
was our File, two of these made a Dilochy, which consisted of thirty two men;
its Commander was called Dilochita; We have no Officer to represent him but a
Lance Spesate. Two Dilochies Ennumeration of the several Bodies of the Foot.
or four Files made a Tetrarchy, whose number was sixty four; its Officer was a
Tetrarch, whom a Caporal in a Company of two hundred or three hundred men may
resemble. Two Tetrarchies made a Taxiarchy, its Commander was called Taxiarcha,
which Aelian's Translator renders Centurio; His command was of eight Files,
which made one hundred twenty eight men. And here, I pray you observe, that
Centurio was not always strictly taken for a Captain of one hundred. And we
shall find hereafter in the Roman Militia, his ordinary command was of sixty,
sometimes but of thirty, as it is here of one hundred twenty eight. A Sergeant
in an old French or German Company represents this Grecian Taxiarch. Two
Taxiarchies, which were sixteen Files, made a Syntagmatarchy of two hundred
fifty six men; its Commander Syntagmatarcha was our private Captain. This
Company was a square of men, sixteen in Rank and sixteen in File, and whatever
way you turned it, still sixteen. And if with Aelian, you allow six foot of
distance between Files as well as Ranks, it will be a Body equilateral, and a
square of ground, as well as a square of men. But of these manner of Battles I
shall speak particularly hereafter.

Two Syntagmatarchies composed a Pentecosiarchy consisting of five hundred and
twelve men; its Commander was called Pentecosiarcha, or, in Latin, Tribunus
minor, we call him our Lieutenant Colonel. Two Pentecosiarchies made a
Chiliarchy of one thousand twenty four men, its Commander was Chiliarcha, or
Tribunus major* to whom answers directly our Modern Colonel of one thousand
men. Of two Chiliarchies was made up a Myriarchy Compared with our Modern
Bodies.
of two thousand forty eight, its Commander was Myriarcha. About eighty years
ago no Colonel in Germany had so few in his Regiment, but now we shall say that
he was as our Brigadeer; Two Myriarchies made a Phalangarchy or simple
Phalange, consisting of four thousand ninety six men; its Commander was called
Phalangiarcha, in Latin, Praeter; for whom suppose a modern Major General. Two
Phalangarchies made a Diphalangarchy, composed of eight thousand one hundred
ninety two men; its Commander was called a Diphalangiarcha, for whom we have
none but a Lieutenant General. Two of these made a Phalange, over which
commanded the General of the Infantry. By this account we find in every
Phalange two Diphalangarchies, four Phalangarchies, eight Myriarchies, sixteen
Chiliarchies, two and thirty Pentecofiarchies, sixty four Syntagmatarchies: in
all one thousand twenty four Files, which consisted of sixteen thousand three
hundred eighty four men, at sixteen in every File.

Here you are to observe, that every Syntagmatarchy or private Company,
consisting of two hundred fifty six men, had beside the Captain and others
already spoken of, five other Officers, whom Aelian calls supernumerary or
extraordinary. These were the Ensign-bearer (for every Company or
Syntagmatarchy had a Colors) a Servant or Assister, or if you please, you may
call him an Adjutant, who carried the Captains Orders: The third was a
Extraordinary or supernumerary Officers.
Praeco, or a Crier, who proclaimed the Captains directions, even in the time
of Battle. Men of strong voices were chosen for that office. The Romans used
them, as it appears by Hannibal's causing them to be counterfeited when he
stormed and entered the Roman Camp at Capua. They are out of fashion now, the
loud noise of Gunpowder having rendered them useless. The fourth was a
Trumpeter, whose office is known. And the last was a Tergidux or Lieutenant,
whose office was to stay constantly in the Rear. These five were superordinary;
the rest were Ordinarii, and this word the Church has borrowed from the
Militia (and reason for it, since on earth she is a Militant Body) in giving
the name of Ordinaries to her reverend Bishops.

But in this place Aelian is obscure, for I know not how he disposes of the
Sergeant, or of the Captain of the Company, nor how he disposes of the
Tribunes lesser or greater, Lieutenant Colonels and Colonels, Brigadiers and
Major Generals, where he appoints them to march, or where to stand or officiate
in time of action; or whether he reckons them in the number of the Phalange,
which consisted of sixteen thousand three hundred A Question not answered.
eighty four men, or not. His Decurions, Dimarites, Enomotarchs, Dilochites,
and Tetrarchs, are all of them, no doubt, of that number; neither can I allow
them any other place to march or fight in, but Rank and File, for they were no
other but File-leaders, Middle-men, Lance-spesats, and Caporals, all of whom
carry Arms. But that all who commanded above them were in Rank and File, is a
thing I cannot fancy. And if the Captain was constantly in the Van or Front of
his Company, why was the Lieutenant, whose station was constantly in the Rear
of it, called a superordinary Officer, more than the Captain? And being all
these five were constantly Officers in the Syntagmatarchy or Company, why
should they not be called ordinary Officers as well as the Taxiarch or
Sergeant, or as the Syntagmatarch or Captain?

The light armed Grecian Foot, according to Aelian, were half the number of the
heavy armed, and by this account they were eight thousand one hundred ninety
two. This he speaks of the Macedonian Foot, for the other Grecian Phalanges
were not so strong. These light armed Foot were drawn Grecian Velites.
up, says Aelian, eight deep. By this account they took up as much ground in
Longitude, Rank, or Front, as the heavy armed Phalange did, and but half as
much in File or depth.

CHAP. VI. Aelian's marshalling the Grecian Infantry examined.
TO hazard all at one cast has ever been thought a piece of madness, except in
very desperate cases, for in them necessity has no Law. It is upon that ground
that Leaders of Armies appoint Reserves, some one, some two, to sustain and
second the first Batallions, in case they be worsted. But this great Body or
Phalange of Aelian admitted of no reserve at all, and therefore the men that
composed it, had need to have fought well; because first, there were none to
second them, and next their heavy Armor rendered them incapable to fly either
fast or far.

That the Phalange might have had Reserves, is unquestionable, if those who
composed it, had not made it so deep, as sixteen. But we shall the better know,
Sixteen deep examined.
whether it might not conveniently have been of a less altitude, when we
examine the Reasons that are given for so great a depth. For take it along with
you, the more a Batallion is extended in length or Front, the more hands are
brought to fight, and the less it is subject to be out-wing'd or surrounded;
and therefore the deepness of this Phalange brings both those inconveniences
with it. Let us now hear the advantages it has.

First, Aelian says, if it be needful that the Files be doubled, the Phalange
may be made two and thirty deep; and if the Ranks must be doubled, then the
Files are made eight deep. I wonder to hear such language from so First reason
for 16 deep.
great a Master; for all this may be done in any Body of men of what depth
soever, provided it be not of an odd number. If Aelian had made his Phalange
but twelve deep, might he not, when he pleased, by doubling the Files, have
made it twenty four deep, and by doubling the Ranks, have made it but six deep,
and by the bargain he had made the Front of his Phalange a fourth part longer,
that where at six foot distance between Files it took up in longitude but six
thousand one hundred forty four foot, it would have taken up eight thousand one
hundred ninety foot? But the mystery of the matter (if I understand Aelian
right) is shortly this, Such an altitude or deepness of the File is most exact,
whereby the Commander in chief may with few words bring his whole numbers by
equal proportions to one man: As sixteen to eight, eight to four, four to two,
and two to one. But this you cannot do with twelve; for twelve divided makes
two sixes, six divided makes two threes; three men you cannot divide, unless
you cut one man in two pieces. Now by sixteen deep, you may bring your whole
Batallion of sixteen thousand three hundred eighty four men into one File, or
into one Rank, and here, I suppose, lies the knack of the business. These
sixteen thousand three hundred eighty four men, at sixteen in File, make one
thousand twenty four Files, which you can bring to one File, thus: Command your
half Ranks to double their Files, and then you have but five hundred and twelve
Files; the same word of Command being obeyed, you have but two hundred fifty
six; give it once more, you have but one hundred twenty eight; let it be done
over again, you shall see but sixty four Files; continue the same word of
Command, your Files come to thirty two, next to sixteen, after that to eight,
from that to four, then to two, and lastly to one. And so you have your whole
Phalange in one File. If you will have your Phalange all in one Rank, command
the Middle-men or half Files to double their Ranks, and then sixteen become
eight; command the same thing, they shall be but four, then two, and lastly
one. But is it not very strange, that Aelian would not know, that all this
might have Answered.
been done with a Body of men four deep, or eight deep, which last many of the
Grecians did not exceed: And certainly, till we hear some more solid reason
than this aerie one, eight deep is for many considerations to be preferred to
sixteen. Nor should this pretended reason hinder either Prince or State to
appoint the depth of their Batallions to be twelve, ten, eight, or six deep, as
they think fit, though by some of them, the Bodies cannot be subdivided till
they come to one File, or one Rank; for it was never seen, nor do I fancy it
can be imagined, that ever such an emergency of War will fall out, that can
move a General, (unless he be to File his Army along a very narrow Bridge, or a
very narrow way) to marshal all his Foot either in one Rank, or one File. So I
conceive the first reason is no reason at all.

A second Reason is, In time of Action an Enemy may charge the Second reason
for 16 deep.
Rear, to rencounter whom, the Dimarit^ or Middle-men are commanded with the
Half-Files that follow them, to face about (but without countermarch) and
sustain the charge. By the way observe, that in such an occasion the Bringer up
or Rear-man has the command of the Half-File, and consequently of the Dimarite
or Middle-man himself, to whom Aelian gave it before. But to the reason it self
I give two answers. First, a Reserve, which Aelians Phalange admits not, would
prevent that danger. Secondly, I say; if they were but twelve in File, nay, but
ten in File, they might withstand Answered.
the charge of an Enemy in both Van and Rear, as well as being sixteen deep,
which I make appear out of Aelian himself, thus: The Grecian Pikes were all
eighteen Foot long, except the Macedonians which were twenty one. We shall
speak of the longest. Next, Aelian allows one foot and a half of distance
between Ranks, when they fought, which distance he or his Interpreter calls
Constipatio. Thirdly, the same Author allows three foot of the Pikes length for
his hands who presents it. These grounds being laid, which are the Authors own,
I say, that only four Ranks of the Grecian Pikes, and five of the Macedonian
could do an Enemy any hurt; and but hardly so either, because between five
Ranks, there are four distances, and for those you are to allow six foot, at
Aelians account, of closest distance; next, you are by his rule likewise to
allow fifteen foot of the Pikes of the fifth Rank to be abated from their
length, which fifteen being added to six, make one and twenty; for three foot
of the Pikes length of the first Rank being allowed for their hands who hold
them, you must of necessity grant the like proportion for the rest. And so the
Macedonian Sarissa did not much advance its point from the fifth Rank beyond
the first Rank, and therefore the rest behind these five Ranks seem useless.
But an Enemy attacks the Rear, to oppose whom, let five Ranks face about, and
present; for if five be sufficient to resist the shock in the Van, certainly
five may do the same in the Rear. And if you will consider it well, you will
think the points of the Pikes of five Ranks sufficient to give or receive a
charge, if all the Files be ^err'd together as the Grecians were, and as all
should be, that no interval be given an Enemy to enter between them. If then
ten Ranks were enough to resist an Enemy in Front and Rear, I presume, the
other six might have been disposed of two ways; first, they might have been
bestowed on the Front, and so have extended it to a far greater length, which
would have brought more hands to fight, and not only saved the Phalange from
being out-wing'd, but have put it in a capacity to out-wing the Enemy:
Secondly, these six Ranks might very advantagiously have composed a Body apart
in the Rear, and that should have been a Reserve, and then no danger of an
Enemy to have troubled the Battle behind.

But I am afraid you may think I am making up a Grecian Militia of my own,
unknown to the famous Warriors of that renowned Nation. I shall tell you truly
and ingenuously, my quarrel is only with Aelian, because he has not told us so
much as he knew, and so much as he was obliged to tell us, which in this
particular is that I am now to tell you, and it consists in two things, one
that Phalanges were not always sixteen deep, and secondly, that they wanted not
always Reserves: To prove both, be pleased to take the following Instances. At
De^^s, when the Athenians fought with the Thebans and other Boeotians, the
Phalanges were all of them eight d^^p, and all Phalanges eight deep.
of them had Reserves. At Leuctra, Epaminondas his Foot Batallions were all
marshalled in eight Ranks. At Siracusa, when the Athenian General Nicia^ was to
fight, he placed his Auxiliaries in the two Wings, his Athenians he divided
into two great Bodies; the half whereof he marshalled in the Battle between the
two Wings, the other half he placed behind at a distance, with And had Reserves.
command, to succor either the Wings or the Battle, as they saw them, or any
of them stand in need of their help, and this was a perfect Reserve: And
observe, that his Wings, Battle and Reserve, were all marshalled eight deep.
Take Thucydides, a noble Historian, and a good Captain for my Author.

But you will say, these were not Macedonian Phalanges, true; but they were
Grecian ones though, and the Commanders of them without all peradventure, did
well enough foresee, in what danger their Phalanges of eight deep might be by a
sudden charge of an Enemy in the Rear, which, no question, they would have
opposed, by making the last four Ranks face about, if their Reserves served not
their turn, neither could the fourth Rank extend its Pikes (being three foot
shorter than the Macedonian ones) much beyond the first Rank. But to take the
Objection more fully, let us come nearer, and view the Great Alexanders Army at
Arbela, and we shall see, he was not at all limited by Aelians rules of a
Macedonian Phalange, though by it, they say, he conquered the Persian Monarchy.
Sir Walter Raleigh says right, that in this place Alexander drew up his
Forces, so that they faced to Van, Rear, and both Flanks; but this is not to be
understood so, that he made his heavy armed Phalange front four several ways:
for then it should have been immovable, and only apt to resist, but not to
advance, which had been both against the intentions of that brave Prince, and
his actions of that day; for he charged the Persian Batallions both with his
Horse and Foot. But the meaning must be, that he ordered some Horse and Foot at
a distance from his main Battle to face to the Rear, for preventing any
misfortune there, and the like he did on both his Flanks; but all these, when
his main Battle moved, faced to the Van, and advanced with it, and when it
stood, they took up their former distances, and faced as they were appointed:
And all this was done, lest his Army (small in comparison of that with Darius)
should be surrounded. If the Army he was afraid to be out-wing'd, as assuredly
he was, it will easily be granted Alexander at Arbela but eight deep;
that the more ground he took up in Front, the less subject he was to that
danger. And this Curtius confirms, when he tells us, that the Commanders of the
several Bodies had orders given them, to extend their Batallions* as far in
length, as without eminent danger they might, lest, says the same Author, they
should be environed. I conceive then, it cannot be doubted, but Alexander
studying how to make as large a Front as feasibly he might, against so numerous
an Enemy, he made his heavy armed Foot Phalange but eight deep, as that which
suited best with his present affairs, and as he had seen other Grecian Captains
do before him, for by that means he made himself master of twice as much
ground, as he had when it was marshalled sixteen in File. That he had Reserves,
is most clear both from Curtius and others, for Nicanor followed the Phalange
with the Argyraspides, or Silver Shields, and these were heavy armed, (observe
it) and Cenos with a Band of men, which, And had Reserves.
says Curtius, was appointed (note this) to be a Relief. Then Horestes,
Lincerta, Polycarpon, and Philagus, all with several Bodies followed the
Phalanx. And that all these were Reserves, Aelian himself, nor any for him,
will not be so impudent as to deny. But I shall speak more of the marshalling
this Army in the Chapter following the next.

I come now to the third Reason, which is pretended for sixteen deep of Third
reason for 16 deep.
the heavy armed Phalange. And it is this. Though the Pikes of all those Ranks,
that stand behind the fifth, or if you will, the sixth, be useless; in regard
they can reach but little or nothing beyond the File leader (and you will
remember these Ranks are not fewer than ten, if not eleven) yet being at close
order, with their Pikes advanced, they bear forward with the weight and force
of their Bodies those five or six Ranks that are before them, and so make the
Impression the greater and stronger, they take all occasion of flight from
them, and impose a necessity on them to overcome or dye. I answer first, that
this pretended advantage, if it was any at all, was very often dear Answered.
bought. Secondly, I say, five Ranks having their Pikes presented to the Enemy,
three Ranks behind them might have served sufficiently to bear forward the five
before them; or if Aelian thought six Ranks might present all their Pikes with
advantage, then let four Ranks be allowed behind them to bear them forward to
the charge and hinder them to fly, and this will make in all but ten Ranks, and
so still six Ranks might have been disposed of either to enlarge the Front, or
make a Body in the Rear for a Reserve. And thirdly, I say, when Aelian's six
foremost Ranks were busy in fight, the ten behind them, who were to bear those
six forward, were at their closest distance (which he calls constipation) and
so not able to open very suddenly, and face about in so good order, and so soon
as was requisite to receive, or beat back the charge of an unexpected Enemy:
For certainly they must first have opened backward, and then faced about; both
which must have been done by the command of some of their Officers, probably
the Lieutenant, and it is well enough known* how confusion and disorder (which
seldom fails to attend such occasions) stops the ears, and dulls the judgment
of Soldiers, that they can neither hear nor understand the words of Command
aright. I will fetch two instances from History, and those, I believe, will
prove all I have said, and clear this whole matter pretty well.

At the Battle of Cynocephalae, or Dogs heads, fought by Philip the last King
Battle of Cinocephalae.
of Macedon, except one, against Titus Flaminius, a Roman Consul, the half of
Philips heavy armed Phalange on the right hand, bore down all before it, and
trod over the Legions, gaining ground so far, that the Macedonian thought the
day his own. But Flaminius having observed that the left Wing of the Phalange
could not draw up in any close order, because of the unevenness and knottiness
of the Mountain (whose little hillocks represented the heads of Dogs) sent a
Tribune with a Legion and some Elephants up the Hill, to charge that Left Wing,
which he smartly doing, easily routed it, and immediately fell on the Rear of
the victorious Right wing, and without opposition, cut it in pieces. Now, if
the Left Wing of the Phalange, which had no convenient ground whereon to draw
up, had placed it self on the top of the Hill at a distance behind the Right
Wing, as a Reserve, the Romans durst never have hazarded to have come between
them; or if the last ten Ranks of the Right Wing who served for nothing but to
bear forward the other six Ranks, had faced about (according to Aelians rule)
they could not so easily have been broken. But the close posture or
constipation of these last ten Ranks to bear forward the foremost six Ranks,
made them incapable to do that quickly, which the present necessity required,
or else the sudden charge of an unlooked for Enemy did so appal them, that they
knew not what they were doing, nor who commanded, or who obeyed, which, as I
have said, frequently falls out in such cases. So this Phalanx cast in Aelian's
Macedonian mould, cost King Philip very dear, but another modeled after the
same fashion, cost his Son Perseus much dearer.

At Pidna, a Town of Macedon, King Perseus fought with Lucius Aemilius, Battei
of Pidna.
a Roman Consul, and the ground for his Phalange being as good as his own heart
could wish, the Roman Legions were not able to resist its furious charge, but
gave ground in several places, insomuch that the Consul seeing Fortune look
with so grim a countenance upon him, began to despair of the Victory, and to
tear his Coat of Arms, but being of a ready judgment, he quickly espied his
advantage, for he saw the Phalange open its constipation, some small Bodies of
it pursuing those who gave ground, and others fighting loosely with those of
his Romans who made stouter opposition, and therefore ordered some of his
Legionaries to fall into those void and empty places of the several
Phalangarchies, and these getting entrance at those intervals, came upon the
sides of the Macedonian Pike-men, and so without much trouble made most of them
dye on the place. If but a third, nay, a fourth or fifth part of this Phalange
had been standing at a convenient distance in Reserve, ready to have charged
the weary and disordered Legions, will any man doubt, but that in all humane
probability, Perseus had been Master of the Field? But the want of that lost
him, in the twinkling of an eye, his Wife and Children, his Kingdom, his Riches
(which he loved too well) his Honor* and at last his Life.

The Defect then of the Macedonian Phalange, as Aelian describes it, was
Defects of Aelians Phalange.
twofold; First, by the exorbitant deepness of its File, it took not up ground
enough in the Front, and next it admitted not of a Reserve. Both which
inconveniences other Grecians shunned, and so did Alexander himself, the
greatest Macedonian that ever was. But I am of opinion, that Aelian in his
days, never saw any thing (except in figures) so like the other Grecian
Phalangarchies, as we may see very frequently in our Modern Wars, for he wrote
his Tacticks to the Emperor Adrian, who lived some Centuries after the Grecian
Phalange was forced to do homage to the Roman Legion.

Our Author tells us, that the Velites, or light armed foot were half the
Velites.
number of the heavy armed, but we shall see hereafter that this held but
seldom. He will also have them to be eight deep, because the heavy armed were
sixteen in File. By this rule, the other Grecians, who marshalled their heavy
armed eight in File, should have drawn up their Velites but four deep. Aelian
does also appoint them to be drawn up behind the Phalange, and Indeed he might
make them stand, perhaps march, where he pleased; but the manner of their Fight
being a la disbandad, we may believe, they kept but little good order in
fighting with an Enemy, less in pursuing him, and least of all in flying from
him.

CHAP. VII. Of the Grecian Cavalry, with some Observations upon it.
IT seems the Greeks did not tie themselves to any precise or certain number of
Horse in their Armies, as Aelian has tied them to a determinate number of
Foot, some of, them using more, some fewer, as they conceived needful for
managing the present War they had in hand, augmenting, and diminishing the
numbers of their Horse Troops, as also the number of the men of each Troop, as
they found their occasions required. Aelian tells us, that Officers of a Horse
Troop.
every Troop of Horse had a Captain, whose place was in the Van; a Lieutenant,
whose station was in the Rear; and a Cornet, who, he says, stood with his
Standard in the second Rank next him who was on the Right hand of the Troop.
All these we have. He says, it had likewise two Flank Commanders, who, if they
rode in Rank, are represented by our Corporals. He tells us nothing of a
Quartermaster; perhaps one of these Flank-Officers was he, or officiated for
him. But that wherein he is very forgetful, is, that he makes no mention of a
Trumpeter; but assuredly, since every Foot Company, called a Syntagmatarchy
that had Colors, was allowed a Trumpeter, every Troop of Horse having a
Standard had likewise one, if not more. Nor speaks he of Horn-winders, though
these were used by the Grecians, as other Authors tell us. Other Nations used
them also, The Persians had them; for Xenophon in his first Book says, that
Cyrus had his Cornici^^s, or Horn-blowers, as well as Tubicines, Trumpeters.
The Romans had them also, whereof we shall speak hereafter.

Aelian in that Treatise of his De instr^^ndi^ Aci^^^^, gives us many figures
of Troops of Horse, most of which do but represent the several postures of a
Body of Horse in doubling Files and Ranks, and Countermarching. Some of these
figures it will be found difficult to imitate, and perhaps our Author (as
ingenious as he was) would himself have found it hard to have marshalled them
so in the Field, as he has done in Pap^r, and they are indeed but those
Schematismi, whereof L^psi^^ on another occa^ion speaks. Three odd figures of
Horse Troops.
Particularly Aelian presents us with an Oval Figure of a Troop, another of a
Lunar, or Crescent, and a third which he calls Phalanx In^^rva, not unlike that
form of Battle* after which the famous Hannibal is said to have drawn up his
Mercenaries at Cannae, which Body could no sooner move, but presently i^ lost
its form, and therefore, I think it is probable, that he marshalled his
Auxiliaries in that fashion, to stand before his choice Carthaginians, to weary
the Romans, that so his best Soldiers might have a cheaper Market of them* as
the Great Turk is said to blunt the Sword^ of his Enemies, with the
Interposition of his Asapi, between them and his Janissaries. If any of the
Grecian Troops of Horse were drawn up after any of these three forms that I
have mentioned, I shall very boldly say, that they needed to have kept their
ground very tenaciously, and to have received the Enemies charge very
^^^^fastly and courageously; for to my sense, it was impossible for them either
to march, or give the charge, without falling immediately into an irrecoverable
disorder; and this may be obvious to any man that will have the curiosity to
look upon them, and consider them right.

I find the Grecians used three kinds of Battles of Horse ordinarily, not to
Three for^^ of Horse Batallions.
speak of extravagant ones. These were the Rhombus, the Wedge* and the Square.
The Thessulians, who were thought to be the first and perfectest Horsemen in
Europe, used the Rhombus: The invention of the Wedge is given to Philip of
Macedon, Father of Alexander; and the Square was used by them both, as also by
all the other Grecians; who sometimes made use likewise of the other two forms.

A Rhombus is a Geometrical Figure consisting of four acute Angles, and The
first is the Rhombus.
four sides equilateral, or if you imagine two equilateral Triangles joined
back to back, and their Angles equidistant (for when two Triangles are joined,
both of them have but four corners) you conceive the figure of a Rhombus right
enough. To explain the Rhombus Horse Battle, let us imagine a Troop to consist
of sixty four Riders, which number Aelian gives to a Macedonian Troop. These
sixty four were thus marshalled. Next the Captain stood one Horseman, Simple
Rhombus.
behind him two, next them three, behind them four, then five, then six, then
seven, then eight: That Rank of eight made two Angles, where the two Flank
Commanders stood; for behind that Rank the number decreased, as thus: Behind
the eight stood seven, then six, then five, then four, then three, then two,
and lastly one. Add all these together, you will find the aggregate to be sixty
four. Behind the last one, to my sense, stood the Lieutenant, though Aelian in
some of his Figures, seems to make the Captain and Lieutenant to be two of the
number; and if the two Flank Commanders were so too, then the Troop consisted
only of sixty, besides Officers, and not of sixty four.

There is another kind of Rhombus, which in some sense may be called a The
greater Rhombus.
double one, and it is marshalled by increasing the number of every Rank after
the first by two, till you come to the eighth Rank, and after that, your number
is to decrease by two in every Rank till you come to one, and then your Rhombus
shall consist of one hundred and thirteen Riders, as thus: First one, behind
him three, behind them five, behind them seven, then nine, then eleven, then
thirteen, and in the eighth Rank place fifteen; from that Rank your number
decreaseth, for next to fifteen you are to place thirteen, behind them eleven,
then nine, then seven, then five, then three, and lastly one. This is also a
Thessalian Rhombus of Horse, a Figure whereof Aelian bestows upon us. This
Troop, I conceive, being at open order (for it was very requisite it should be
so) could upon an occasion front any way without wheeling, to the Right or Left
hand, by a half turn of their Horses, and to the Rear by two half turns, and
immediately thereafter serr together, either to give or receive the charge.
This Figure of the Rhombus is called by some the Diamond; but if so, the
Diamond which it resembles, must be a four-corner'd one. Observe here, that
Aelians number of Horse represented in his Figure of the Simple Rhombus amounts
but to forty nine; and this I attribute to his neglect, for he told us it
should consist of sixty four.

The Wedge Battle, which the Latins called Cuneus or Rostrum, was a Body The
second is the Wedge.
of men, either on Foot or Horseback, drawn up with a sharp point, and
increasing in its bigness, till it came to that greatness, which the maker of
it designed for it, and so represented a Wedge, from which it has its
denomination; or it is like a Dagger, sharp at the point, growing broader till
it come to the haft. I told you, that Philip of Macedon invented it, choosing a
Wedge to be the fittest pattern whereby to model his Macedonian Troops, by
placing his choicest Men and Horses, both for strength of body and courage of
mind in the foremost Ranks, the rest behind them serving to bear them forcibly
forward. Take the description of it thus: First one, then three, then five,
then seven, then nine, then eleven, then thirteen, and lastly fifteen: These
added together make up Aelian's Macedonian Troop of sixty four Horsemen. But
in his description of it he oversees himself twice; first, in A twofold mistake.
his words, for he says the Wedge is just the half of the number of the great
Rhombus, but that consists, as I just now told you, of one hundred and
thirteen, and the Wedge is of sixty four, much more than the half of one
hundred and thirteen. Next in his Figure, which presents us only with thirty
six Horsemen, twenty eight fewer than King Philips Troop. But if you would
take a Wedge out of the Rhombus, you may do it easily, by causing that Rank
wherein are fifteen Horsemen, with all the Ranks that are before it, to stand,
and all that are behind it, to remove, and then you have a perfect Macedonian
Wedge Troop, consisting of sixty four Riders.

But the manner of embatteling in form of a Wedge was not appropriated Wedge
Battles of Foot.
only to the Cavalry; The Infantry both of Grecians and Romans, and several
other Nations used it in many occasions: Epaminondas, that famous Theban, at
the Battle of Mantinea, seeing the Lacedaemonians stand stoutly to it, (after
he had routed their Confederates the Athenians) chose out a parcel of his
gallantest Foot, cast them in a Wedge, and broke so forcibly in upon their
Batallion, that he pierced it, and after brave resistance, forced them to quit
the Field; but this proved his last action, for in it he received so many
mortal wounds, that he dyed of them before the next day. I shall speak more of
this Wedge Battle in my discourses of the Roman Militia. Neither it nor the
Rhombus have been heard of in the World in many ages since those ancient times.
It is probable, the Great Alexander permitted his Thessalians to make use of
the Rhombus at Arbela, because almost half of their Great Rhombus might face to
the Rear, and so prevent surrounding by Darius his numerous forces. It is also
like, that his Macedonian Horse might have kept the form of a Wedge both at
Issus and Arbela. And I find, that his great Captains (who after his death
shared his vast Conquests among themselves) used it frequently. But I believe
likewise, that both he and they, and other Grecians and Asians too, made use of
the Square Battle.

The Square form of embattelling was most commonly used by the Grecians The
third is the Square.
in marshalling their Infantry, and most of them used it in ordering their
Cavalry. I speak not of an equilateral Square, but an oblong one, such as we
use in our modern Wars. Yet I do not deny, but the Ancients several times used
equilateral Square forms of their Batallions, as when they made their Ranks and
Files consist of equal numbers of men, and this we call a Battle Square of men,
or sometimes Square of ground, when the Front was of no greater extent of
ground than the Flank, but of these I shall speak hereafter, when I come to
discourse of the Square Root. Not only many of the Grecians, but the Persians
and Sicilians used the Square Horse Battle, and many great Preferred to the
other two*
Captains preferred it to both the Rhombus and the Wedge; first, because by it
the Troops *could march with more celerity and convenience, and next, they
could bring more hands to fight at one time. As for Example, in a Wedge Troop
of sixty four, the first Rank consists but of one, the second of three, the
third of five, and the fourth of seven: In these four Ranks there are but
sixteen Riders. Oppose a Square Battell'd Troop of sixty, and marshal it in an
oblong, fifteen in Rank and four in File, you may see that the sixteen Riders
in the four first Ranks of the Wedge must fight with all the sixty of the
Square Troop; this is a very great odds, and as much may be said of the
Rhombus. But Aelian does not at all tell us, how deep the Grecian Square
Battles of Horse were.

This was a great neglect, for thereby we might have known how many of Aelian
speak^ nothing of the deepness of Horse Files.
the Ranks could have reached an Enemy with their Lances, and whether the rest
behind served only to bear forward those before, as the ten last Ranks of Pikes
did to the six foremost. Yet as far as I can conjecture by some of his Figures,
he seems to insinuate, that his Contrymen ordered their Horse to be half as
many in File, as they were in Rank. His Figure of that Phalanx, which he calls
Quadrata, of fifty Horse, has ten in Rank and five in File. This manner of
Battle (whether it be of Horse or Foot) is called by the Square Root men a
Doubled Batallion, of the fashion of which, and how it is done, I shall show
you in its proper place. But I dare not believe that all Grecian Troops were
marshalled so, neither indeed does Aelian aver it. I know not then, why I may
not imagine a Grecian Troop of Horse, consisting of sixty four, to be
marshalled three deep, as most of our Modern Troops now are, and so there
should have been in it twenty one Files, for 21 multiplied by three produces
sixty three, and he who shall make the sixty fourth, shall be the Trumpeter,
with whom we could not meet before in Aelian's enumeration of the Officers of a
Troop.

What distances were kept between Ranks or Files, between several Troops, or
yet between greater Bodies of the Horse, Aelian tells us not: Yet writing of
the right ordering of Batallions, I think, he was obliged to speak of
Distances, for who can marshal an Army, unless those be condescended Nor of
Distances.
on? I conceive, that assuredly the Rhombus was obliged to keep a great
Distance both between its Ranks and its Files, otherwise it could not turn to
either Right or Left hand, or to the Rear, without Wheeling; and this, if I
mistake not, was one of the advantages the Thessalians proposed to themselves,
by that form of Horse Battle. But when either it or the Wedge was to charge,
they were obliged to serr together as close as they could, otherwise they could
not pierce so home, as was expected by those who cast them in those moulds. It
is probable, that the Square Bodies of the Grecian Horse were exercised, did
march and fight at those distances used now in our Modern Militia.

Our Author makes the number of the Cavalry in a Macedonian Army, to be half
the number of their Velites, or light armed Foot. I told you, those were eight
thousand one hundred ninety two, therefore the Horse must be four thousand
ninety six. The smaller Bodies, of which he composeth this Cavalry, are shortly
these: Sixty four Horsemen made a Denominations of the several Bodies of the
Hor^e.
Troop, and were called an Elarchy, its Commander Elarchas, our Ritmaster. Two
Troops made an Epilarchy of one hundred twenty eight Horsemen, its Commander
Epilarchas, for whom we have no Officer, unless a Major; and I find no such man
among the Macedonians. Four Troops made a Talentinarchy of two hundred fifty
six Horse, its Commander Talentinarch^ is represented by our Lieutenant
Colonel. Two Talentinarchies made one Hipparchy, of five hundred and twelve
Horse, he was called Hipparcha, our Colonel. Two Hipparchies made an
Ephipparchy, its Commander Ephipparch^ had under him one thousand twenty four
Riders, our Brigadieer may resemble him. Two Ephipparchies made a Telos, which
consisted of two thousand forty eight Horse, its Commander was called Telarcha,
whom, if you please, our Major General of Horse shall represent. Two Telarchies
made up an Epitagma, and this consisted of four thousand one hundred ninety six
Horsemen, which composed the whole Phalange of the Macedonian Cavalry, its
Commander was called Epitagmarcha, for him our Modern Militia furnishes us
with a Lieutenant General, or if you will, a General of the Horse. Now, though
our Author has given us the exact number of both the smaller and greater
Bodies of the Macedonian Cavalry, Inexcusable omission.
yet he has not at all told us, how many of them were heavy armed, and how
many light armed, for which he is inexcusably to blame.

CHAP. VIII. Of the Great Macedonian Phalanx, of its number, and how
marshalled; with some Observations on both.
APhalanx signifies a number of men, great or small, Trained and Instructed
The signification of Phalanx.
in Military Duties, and ordered in Ranks and Files. By this Definition any
Foot Company, or Horse Troop is a Phalanx, as well as an Army; and a whole Army
is a Phalanx, as well as a particular Company or Troop. It is true, in Authors,
the word Phalanx is ordinarily taken for the great Body of sixteen thousand
three hundred eighty four heavy armed Foot, which formerly I have out of Aelian
described to you, of which I shall tell you thus much more, that he says it
had two Horns (for so the Translator renders the word K^ras) and those were the
Right and Left hand Horn, which we either simply call the Right or Left hand,
or the Right and Left Wing. But indeed I wonder why Aelian divides the whole
Phalange of Foot into two Horns, Right and Left; and why so many of our
Commanders in the Modern Wars imitate him, in dividing a whole Body into the
Right or Left Wing; never considering, that naturally and really there is a
Body between two Wings: and the same error is committed, in dividing a whole
Batallion of armed men into two Flanks, very ordinarily done by some
Drill-masters. And here, no doubt, Aelian forgot himself; for the Phalange of
the heavy armed Foot was divided, as I ^old you before, into four lesser
Phalanges or Phalangarchies, two whereof made the two Wings, which he calls
Horns; and the other two composed the Body. These four Phalangarchies made
three Intervals, how great we know not, out of Phalangarchies.
which, before the fight, issued the light armed; and if they prevailed, they
pursued their Victory, being followed by the Phalange; but if they were beaten,
as for most part they were, they retired to the Rear the same way they came,
and then the four Phalangarchies closed together, to give or receive the
charge, according as they were ordered by their Superiors.

But now I am to speak of the whole Macedonian Army, which was called The great
Macedonian Phalanx of both Horse and Foot.
the Great Phalanx, consisting of heavy and light armed Foot and Horse, not
reckoning their Chariots and Elephants. Their heavy armed Foot were sixteen
thousand three hundred eighty four, the Velites were eight thousand one hundred
ninety two, the Horse four thousand ninety six: Add all these together, you
will find the Macedonian great Phalanx to consist of twenty eight thousand six
hundred seventy two Combatants.

A Story goes, that either the Great Alexander, or Julius C^sar, or both,
should have said, That they desired no more than thirty thousand men to conquer
the whole World: Certainly, if either of them, or both said so, they meant,
that that number should still be kept complete and full, for though they should
have been constantly Victorious, and never have lost one man in Battle or
Skirmish, yet sickness and toil would have made all that number to have
moulder'd away, before they could have marched over the tenth part of the then
habitable World. But I do not at all believe that either of them said so, for
true Histories (if there be any truth in Histories) assure us, that both of
them had Armies which far exceeded that number. At Arbel^, Alexander had more
than double the number of a Macedonian Army; and yet Aelians numbers did no^
always hold
at that same time, when he feared to be surrounded, I suppose, he wished his
forces to be more numerous than they were. Neither do I believe, that his
Father Philip, who was the framer of the Phalanx, did keep himself precisely
within that number, for at Cher^nea, where he routed the Confederated Greeks,
he exceeded it far. His Son Alexander, when he crossed the Hellespont, to
invade the Persian Monarchy, had thirty two thousand Foot, and five In the
Macedonian Armies;
thousand Horse; above eight thousand more men, than in Aelian's Macedonian
Phalange. At Issus he was stronger, and at Arbela he had forty thousand Foot,
and seven thousand Horse, all Grecians, besides very many Asians whom he had
subdued. So we see that Aelians numbers of Horse or Foot, did not hold even in
the Macedonian Armies.

Much less will his rule hold in other Grecian Phalanges, who drew up their
heavy armed Foot but eight deep, and so by our Authors method, their light
armed but four deep; for if you allow their heavy armed Phalange to be one
thousand twenty four Files, these multiplied by eight, which is the number of
the File, that Batallion consisted of eight thousand one hundred ninety two
men: Their Velites being half of that number, they were four thousand ninety
six: Give the half of that number to their Cavalry, they must have been two
thousand forty eight. And thus by Aelians rule, their whole Phalange Nor in the
other Grecian Phalanges.
of both heavy and light armed Foot and Horse should have amounted to neither
more nor less than fourteen thousand three hundred thirty six Combatants. But
they neither observed that number, nor his rule in the division of that number.
At Delos, the Thebans and Boeotians had an Army consisting of seven thousand
heavy armed Foot, ten thousand light armed, and one thousand Horse. If they had
been ruled by Aelian, they should have had more than ten thousand heavy armed,
five thousand and odd Velites, and all the rest should have been Horse in this
P^^lange of theirs. When the Athenians sent Alcibiades and Nicias to Sicily,
they did not dream of any such exact numbers. At Mantinea, Epamin^^das his Army
consisted of thirty thousand Foot, and three thousand Horse; a number exceeding
the great Macedonian Phalange by four thousand three hundred twenty eight men.
The Armies of the Laced^monians and Athenians that fought against him in that
last Battle of his, were twenty two thousand Foot and Horse, and these were
more by seven thousand six hundred sixty four, than a Grecian Phalange should
have been by Aelians method, at four deep the light, and eight deep the heavy
armed, and yet came short six thousand six hundred seventy two of the number of
the great Macedonian Phalange. By this we see our Authors numbers of Phalanges
did not always hold; and it is a very great question to me, if ever they did
exactly hold at all.

I have already told you, how he marshals his Phalange of heavy armed Foot,
without Reserve, I have shown you that was not always done, and I have
demonstrated and instanced the inconveniences of it, when it was done; Let us
now see where he places his Cavalry in time of action: To this he says, it
was marshalled according to the Generals pleasure, sometimes on the Flanks of
the heavy armed Foot, sometimes before them, and sometimes behind them. That
they were drawn up according to the Generals pleasure, he needed not tell us,
that was not the question, but it was where the Generals pleasure was to place
them. For marshalling the Horse on the Flanks of the Foot, there is reason
enough for it; it was, and still is a common practice. To marshal them when
they are to fight before the Foot, is not, in Where Aelian marshalled the
Cavalry.
my opinion, advisedly done; some to skirmish does well, but if all the Horse
fight in the Van of the Foot, and be beaten, they may readily rout their own
Infantry, without the Enemies help, for something like that I have seen
practiced. And though the Macedonian Foot Phalange had, as I said before, three
Intervals, through which, the Horse might perhaps (if worsted) have retired in
good order, and drawn up in the Rear of the Foot, yet their Flight or Retreat
would have infinitely discouraged the Infantry, which was presently to enter
into action; nor do I think such a manner of fight has been often practiced. To
draw up the Horse behind the Foot would be, in my judgment, yet of less use;
but Aelian in his Figure of the whole Phalanx, marshals the heavy armed Foot
foremost, next them the Velites, and the Cavalry behind both. If he did not
intend the Horse should fight in that place, why did he marshal them there; and
if he conceived they might fight there, why did he not tell us, how they could
do it. It is true, it may be imagined, the Velites might bestow their Arrows
and Stones cast out of Slings upon an Enemy, over the heads of the heavy armed
Phalange: but what hurt Horsemen, heavily armed, could do an Enemy over the
heads of both heavy and light armed Foot, drawn up in two distinct Bodies one
behind the other, is not so easy to fancy. And with permission of Aelian, I
doubt, it can hardly be made appear, that any General before his time, whether
Macedonian, Grecian, or Barbarian, ever drew up an Army in that fashion, if
they had ground to do it otherwise. Cyrus placed his Foot in the Battle, and
his Horse in the Ordinarily Horse fought in the Wings.
Wings, when he fought with the Assyrians, says Xenophon. The Grecians at
Delos, Leuctra, and Syracusa, put their Horse in the Wings mixed with light
armed Foot, their heavy armed Phalange in the middle, and some of their Velites
skirmishing before it, with Reserves behind. Alexander used that same custom
in all his Battles, though at Issus, the Streights of the Mountains would not
suffer him to put his Army in that order he had designed, till he acquired a
more spacious ground. At Arbela, where he totally overthrew Darius, he
marshalled his Army nothing after Aelians pattern; but so, that you may almost
say, that our Modern Generals draw up their Armies now in imitation of him, and
according to the Copy he cast them there* For his Right Wing consisted of Horse
mixed with light armed Foot, the Right hand whereof was commanded by Clitus,
and the Left by Philotas. His Left Wing was likewise Horse mixed with Velites,
on the Right hand whereof stood Meleager, and on the Left, Philip with his
Thessalian Cavalry. Between these two Wings was ranged his Phalange of heavy
armed Foot, some Velites skirmishing before it, and behind all these, both
Phalanae and Wings, were those Reserves, under Horestes, Lincerta, Polycarpon
and Philagus; whereof I formerly told you.

The altering a Phalange from one form, posture, or site to another, gave
Several forms of a Phalange gave it several denominations.
occasion to the Grecians to give it some new denomination, though it was still
that same Phalange, it was before the motion or evolution made the alteration,
which perhaps has given a rice to Aelian to present us with so many several
Figures in his Treatise; nor would they be hard to be understood, if they were
illustrated by either smaller or greater Bodies in the Field, as they are by
him in Paper. When the Phalanx presented their Pikes by half Files to Front and
Rear, the Greeks called it in that posture Amphistomus: When the General
commanded the Wings of the Phalange to advance; and the Body to make a Bow or
Crescent, and in that posture to receive the charge of a Wedge Battle, then it
was called Antistomus: And when by facing either by the Right or Left hand
about, the Rear was made the Front, then the Phalange was called Peristomus:
And so of others needless to rehearse. It may be I mistake in the Greek names,
as having indeed but very little knowledge in that Language.

CHAP. IX. Of the Grecian March, Baggage, Encamping, Guards, and of their Paean.
ALL these belong to the Art of War of any Nation and none will doubt, but the
Grecians had set rules and orders for them all, and every one of them, which
they did not alter, but according to the circumstances of things and emergency
of affairs, on which depend most of Military actions. Aelian gives us little
light, or indeed none at all, in any of these particulars, Most of them forgot
by Aelian.
but leaves us to glean what we can out of History, and thereon to build our
own conjectures.

It had been convenient for us to have known the manner of their marching,
where or how the Horse, the heavy and light armed, and how far every day all of
them were obliged to march, as also whether the Chiliarchies (which were
Regiments of Foot) and the Hipparchies (which were Regiments of March.
Horse) changed day about, or if they marched constantly in one place according
to their Antiquity or Precedence. For there is no doubt but their Ephipparchies
(which were Brigades of Horse; and their Myriarchies (which were Brigades of
Foot) might have changed Van and Rear every day by turns, as easily as our
Brigades do. But since we are left by our leader Aelian in the dark, I shall be
of the opinion, that being there were by Aelians account four Ephipparchies in
the Cavalry, and four Phalangarchies in the Phalange of the heavy armed Foot,
they changed day about, and each of them had the Van every fourth day; as also,
I think, it was most consentaneous to Reason, that there being four
Chiliarchies in every Phalangarchy, and four Talentinarchies in every
Ephipparchy, they likewise daily changed; so that every Talentinarchy had the
Van in the Ephipparchy every fourth day, as every Chiliarchy had in the
Phalangarchy. I shall likewise believe, that the Cavalry marched either before,
behind, or on the Flanks of the Foot Phalange, according to the Enemies
motions, and so did the light armed Foot. By these conjectures I do not offer
to impose on any man's belief, but leave him that liberty that I have taken, to
guess as probably as he can. How far the heavy armed Phalange was bound to
march in one day, as I can assert nothing, so I may only guess, that they could
be bound to march but twenty or five and twenty miles, as the Roman Legionaries
were, and therefore I can hardly believe Polianus, who says, Philip made his
Phalange march in one day three hundred Stadia or Furlongs, which make thirty
seven Italian miles and a half, you will think this the more incredible, when
you hear immediately what Baggage they carried.

Concerning the Baggage of a Grecian Army, our Author gives us this account;
first, that it was necessary to appoint a judicious and active person to have
the conduct of it, he says well: Next he tells us, that sometimes the Baggage
marched in the Van of the Army, and so I think it should if the Baggage.
Enemy were in the Rear. Sometimes, says he, it marched in the Rear, when the
Army advanced toward an Enemy, and good reason it should be so. Sometimes,
says he, it marched in the middle of the Army, and there may be strong enough
Reasons for that too. But sometimes he says, it was ordered to march in the
Flanks of the Army, and so it might, provided it had good Guards on the Flanks
of it. And lastly, he avers, the Grecians sent their Baggage sometimes before
their Army, when they were to enter iuto a declared Enemies Country. And here,
I profess, I do not at all understand the mystery of this Stratagem of War. But
I wish Aelian had cleared us in this, whether the Soldiers or Companies of
Horse or Foot, had Wagons, Carts, Beasts of Carriage, Drudges and Slaves
allowed them to carry their Meat and Drink, and Fardles, or if they were
obliged to carry all, themselves; for in my next Essay of the Roman Militia, I
shall let you see a Legionary carry three Magazines on his Head, Back, and
Shoulders, the first of Arms, Stakes or Pallisadoes; the second of Meat and
Clothes; and the third of Utensils for a Kitchen. If of all these three, the
Greek was only obliged to carry his Arms, he had a great advantage of the Roman
in all marches and expeditions. Yet, I suppose, my Reader may hazard with me to
believe, that before Philip of Macedons time, the Grecian Soldiers carried no
other burdens than their Arms, but had The Grecian Soldiers carried no
Baggage,
either Carriage-Beasts or Drudges allowed them, for carrying their Victuals
and other necessaries; and this conjecture I ground upon what I have read in
Thucydides, who tells us, that at Syracusa, after the unfortunate Athenians had
lost their Navy, in which were all or most of their provisions, and that they
were to march away by Land from the Siege of that potent City to seek new
fortunes, their Soldiers were necessitated to carry their meat themselves;
because, says the Historian, they had mostly lost their Slaves and Drudges who
were accustomed to carry it; and some few, whose Slaves had stayed still with
them, durst not trust them with so precious a thing as meat then was, lest in
that sad disaster they should run away with it, and so starve them. If then
their Slaves ran away from Till Philip of Macedons time.
them, then Slaves were allowed them. And it seems King Philip abrogated this
custom, for he caused all his Foot Soldiers to carry their Meat and Baggage
themselves, allowing only one Soujat to carry a Hand-mill for the use of ten
Soldiers, and a Drudge to every Horseman; this caused the other Grecians to
call the Philippians, Jumenta Philippi, Philips Beasts of Carriage. But for all
that, I have not Faith enough to believe Frontinus, who says, that the same
Philip caused his Foot to carry at one time Triginta dierum farinam, meal for
thirty days. And if his Son Alexander kept up that custom, as it is like he
did, then his Phalangites needed not to have yielded to the Roman Legionaries
for heavy burdens in both long and wearisome marches, which you will easily
grant to be true, if you will consider the indefatigable expeditions of that
magnanimous King through Persia and India.

It seems Aelian has not thought Castrametation a subject pertinent to his
Castrametation.
Treatise, for he speaks nothing of it, and yet it is a very considerable part
of the Art of War. I find the Grecians did not put their Soldiers to so much
fatigue, as to fortify their Camp every night, as the Romans did. They chose
their Castrametation to be in places of advantage, on Heights, Hills, or Rising
grounds, or where they might have a River or Water as their Back, or one of
their Flanks, and if they had these, or any of these, they used to cast up but
a slight Retrenchment, unless they were to encamp some long time. Sometimes the
Figure of the Grecian Camp was Oval, sometimes equilateral Square, sometimes
Oblong, and I have read that Lycurgus appointed his Spartan Camps to be round,
if they could have none of those advantages I spoke of; the defect of that
Figure is, that it wants Flanks, which should not be wanting in any
Fortification; but it had the advantage of other Figures, that it could contain
more than any of them, because, Rotunda est omnium Figurarum capacissima. If it
be true, what some say, that the Romans learned their Art of Encamping from
Pyrrhus King of Epirus, then we shall know what his or the Grecian manner was,
when I come to speak of the Castrametation of the Romans, where we shall see,
if he was their Master, he needed not be ashamed of such Scholars. This Pyrrhus
was Brother-in-law to Demetrius, Son to Antigonus, who was a great Captain
under a far greater Captain, the famous Alexander; who, no question, understood
the Art of Encamping very well. We read, that the very day he fought his last
Battle with Darius at Arbela, upon sight of that numerous Alexanders Camp at
Arbela.
Army he had to deal with* he became doubtful how to carry himself in so great
an exigent, and therefore withdrew his Army to an Hill, (which Mazeus the
Persian had deserted) placed his Camp on it, and ordered it to be fortified,
which was immediately done; for we read in Curtius, that after he had caused to
put up his Pavillion, reviewed the Enemies Forces, and resolved to give Battle,
he commanded the Retrenchment to be cast down, that his Batallions might march
out in Breast. All this being done in a very short time, shows that his Army
was well acquainted with both Castrametation and Fortifidation.

To know how the Grecians kept their Watches and Guards, we must expect no
light from Aelian, who speaks nothing at all of that affair. Perhaps he has
been of one opinion with that Anabaptist Minister, who preaching on that Text,
Watch and Pray, told his Audience, He would not trouble them with the various
Interpretations of the word Watch, for he would assure them, in few words, that
Watch, was as much as to say Watch. But because I have not read of any
essential differences between the Roman Guards and Watches, and those of the
ancient Grecians, I shall refer my Reader to my discourse of both, in the
twenty second Chapter of my Essays of the Roman Art of War, where I shall
inform him of any observable thing concerning them, mentioned by Aeneas, in
those fragments of his, which all-devouring time has left us, and those are
but few.

Before the Grecians began their Battles they sung their Paean, which was Paean
a Hymn to Apollo.
a Hymn to Apollo; after which they had their shout or cry, which the Romans,
with a barbarous word, called Baritus. If they gained the Victory they sung
another Paean or Hymn to that same Deity: Then they loudly cried to the God
Mars, Alala, Alala; doubling and re-doubling that word Alal^ ^. cry to Mars.
very often. Neither was this custom peculiar to the Greeks, for we read in
the First Chapter of the Seventh Book of Xenophon, that Cyrus, the Persian,
used the very same thing when he fought that great Battle with Croesus, wherein
he was Victorious; for we read not of any Paean any of them sung, if they were
beaten; thinking belike they were not obliged to thank their Gods for any
misfortune that befell them.

By what I have said, you may easily perceive how little, I think, we have
learned of the most essential points of the Ancient Grecian Militia, from this
great, and so much talked of Master of the Art of War, Aelian. And if any say,
he only undertook to acquaint the Emperor Adrian with the marshalling Grecian
Battles, I shall say first, that he has but very ill acquitted himself of that
undertaking; and next, that he might have done that great Prince as great a
favor to have informed hi^^^^f all those points of War, which he has
neglected; as of the manner how to marshal a Phalange, and all the several
parts of it.

CHAP. X. One of our Modern Armies compared with the Macedonian Phalanx.
OUR Batallions of Pikes in the Modern Wars would resemble the Grecian heavy
armed Phalange of Foot, if they were as well armed for the defensive as they
should be, and as they were one hundred years ago. Our Modern Infantry
resembles the Grecian one.
Muskets, Harquebusses, Firelocks and Fusees, give us an uncontroverted
advantage over their light armed, or yet the Roman Velites, whatever Lipsius
say to the contrary, as shall be shown in the last Chapter of my Essays of the
Modern Art of War. A Swedish Company, as it was in the time of the Great
Gustavus and since, being of one hundred twenty six men, resembled the Grecian
Centuriate, which consisted of one hundred twenty eight men* And a Swedish
Regiment wherein are one thousand and eight men, comes very near to the Grecian
Chiliarchy, wherein, according to Aelian, there were one thousand twenty four
men.

Since the time that the Switzer Cantons confederated so strongly, and Switzers.
fought with their Masters so fortunately, that they got themselves declared
Free States, their great Batallions of ten, sometimes twelve, sometimes sixteen
thousand (all armed for the Offensive, with long and strong Pikes) and having
their Heads, Necks, Backs, Breasts, Bellies, and Arms and Thighs well defended
with Iron and Steel, resembled perfectly a Macedonian Phalange of heavy armed
Foot. And what great Victories they gained with those Batallions shall be spoke
of hereafter en passant. But one hundred years ago, and before that, they came
short of the Grecians for their Velites* for we read not, that then they made
use of any Musque^ or Harquebu^s, though other Nations did. But not long after
that time they began to follow the custom of the Germans, who then, and long
after, made up their Bodies of Foot of two thirds of Pikes, and one third of
Fire-men. For to arm two parts of a Company of Foot with Muskets, and one part
with Pikes, is a custom of a far later date. But of this more in another
place. Upon the whole matter, I say, that our Infantry of Musketeers and
Pike-men, (if they be well armed for the Defensive) resembles the Grecian heavy
and light armed Foot, and so do our Cuirassiers and Light Horse represent their
Cataphracts and light armed Horse. I wonder why the Turks pretend that their
Janissaries represent the Macedonian Foot Phalange of heavy armed; for carrying
Guns, Half-Pikes, and Javelines, they come far short of the Phalange, in the
strength whereof the Macedonians (as they had reason) put their greatest trust.
But if these Infidels be not guilty of greater crimes than of vain ostentation,
I think, as good Christians, we are bound to forgive them.

But since the time that Gunpowder made a loud noise in the world, I do not
read of any Europ^an Army that so nearly resembled the great Macedonian
Phalange consisting both of Horse and Foot, as that of Henry the Second, King
of France, when he marched into Germany to assist the two Protestant Electors
Army of Henry the second, King of France.
of Saxony and Brandenburg, against the Emperor Charles the Fifth; and by the
way took in M^tz, Thoul, and Verdun, with which Towns, his Successors, the
French Kings, have not yet parted. This Army of his is very particularly
described by a Noble Author, who, though he conceal his name, yet, as his
writings speak him to be an excellent Historian, so they bewray him to have
been a Commander in the Wars, both in that Kings time, and in the Reigns of all
his three Sons. By the relation of it, we will see how both the French Infantry
and Cavalry were mounted and armed, and how their Batallions were marshalled
about one hundred and twenty years ago.

His Foot was marshalled by his Great Constable Monmorancy, in three
Batallions: One consisted of Germans, whose number was seven thousand, and His
Germans.
therefore I conclude them to have been two Regiments, each consisting of
twelve Companies, and each Company of three hundred men or thereabout,
according to the custom observed then, and long after, by that Nation. They
were armed Defensively as the French were; but for Offense, two parts How armed;
of them had Pikes, and the third part Harquebusses. They were commanded by the
Rhinegrave, whom most of the French Historians call very vitiously, and almost
ridiculously Count of Rhingrave, which is as much as Earl of Rhine^arl. Under
the Rhingrave.
These Germans were Mercenaries, or Auxiliaries at best, and therefore I shall
not say they were properly of the French Army, which I am now to compare with
the Macedonian great Phalanx, as Aelian describes it.

His French Infantry was divided into two great Batallions: The first consisted
His French Foot,
of fifteen thousand fighting men, of these nine thousand were heavy armed, and
six thousand were light armed. The nine thousand had for their Defensive Arms,
Head pieces, Backs and Breasts, Gantlets, Sleeves and Taslets; for the
Offensive, they had Swords, and long Bois, under which name you are to
comprehend Pikes, Halberds, Partisans, and long Staves, How armed.
banded and pointed with Iron, and most of them all had Pistols at their
Girdles. The other six thousand of the first Batallion, who were light armed,
had for Armor, rich Morrions, and Jacks and Sleeves of Mail, and for Weapons,
they had Swords and Harquebusses for the most part, and some Muskets, all
bright, clear, and fixed. The second French Batallion of Foot was composed of
those who were brought out of the Southern Provinces of France, and it was ten
thousand strong, whereof seven were heavy armed, and the other three thousand
light armed, they were armed much as the first Batallion was.

His Cavalry was sub-divided into Gens d'Arms, Archers, Light Horsemen, His
Cavalry.
and Harquebusiers: His Cuirassiers or Gens d'Arms, consisting all of persons
of noble Families, were about one thousand, admirably well mounted on French
Coursers, Turkey Horses, or Spanish Gennets. They were strongly and heavily
armed for the Defensive; for Offense, they had each a Lance, a Mace, Gens
d'Arms.
and a Sword, no word here of a Pistol. Their Horses were armed with Bards and
Plates of Brass, richly caparison'd; and many other Horses they had, on which
(beside their led Horses) their Servants, Pages, and Grooms read. The Captains
and other Officers of these Gens d'Arms were in rich Armor gilded and
curiously wrought, mounted they were on courageous How mounted and armed.
Horses, who were armed and richly caparison'd, and their Harness covered with
either Velvet or Cloth of Tissue, with Goldsmiths work or Embroydery. Every
one of these Gens d'Arms had an Archer, who followed him, Archers.
by the French constitutions of War, who though then they used neither Bow nor
Arrow (as formerly they did) yet did still retain the name of Archers. They
rode on small, but very nimble Horses, who vaulted pleasantly; each of them
carried a Lance, a Pistol, and a Sword, all of them well accoutred, striving
who should appear finest. The Light Horsemen were mounted on Light Horsemen.
good Nags, little, but very swift; for Armor, they had light Helmets,
Corslets, and Sleeves; for Offensive Arms, each of them had a Cutlace, and
either a half Lance, or a Pistol, which of them he pleased, but not both. Of
these Light Horse there were about eighteen hundred. The Harquebusiers were
mounted on as good Geldings as they could make themselves masters of;
Harquebusiers.
they had Jacks, Morrions, and Sleeves of Mail for Defense; their Weapons were
Swords, and Harquebusses of three foot long, hanging at the courches of their
Saddles. He had about fifteen hundred of them.

Besides all these, there were about four hundred English Gentlemen, all
Volunteers, under the command of an English Lord; they were mounted on English
Volunteers.
handsome and swift Geldings; they were provided with little Armor for
Defense; their Weapons were Swords and Lances, like Half-Pikes, says our
Author. These were King Henry's Forces.

Setting the English aside, we have of French Cavalry, one thousand Gens
d'Arms, one thousand Archers, eighteen hundred Light Horse, and fifteen hundred
Harquebusiers: Add these together, the aggregate is five thousand three
hundred. This exceeds the number of the Macedonian Horse* by one thousand one
hundred and eight. In the next place, set the Rhingrave and his German Foot
aside, the heavy armed French Foot were sixteen thousand, which wanted but
three hundred eighty four of the Macedonian heavy armed Phalange. The French
light armed Foot were about nine thousand, which was eight hundred and eight
more than Aelian allows to the Macedonian Velites. The French Foot and Horse
amounted to thirty thousand three hundred Combatants, those of Aelians great
Phalange to twenty eight thousand six hundred seventy two; the difference is
sixteen hundred twenty eight. But if we reckon the English and French
Volunteers, the Kings own Guards of Scots, French, Number of the whole French
Army.
and Switzers, with the Rhingraves seven thousand Germans, this Army exceeded
the number of forty five thousand men; with which marched the Great Master or
General of the Artillery of France, who had the conduct of forty four pieces of
Ordnance, great and small, with Powder and Bullets suitable to so many Guns.

The Author tells us, that King Henry viewed this mighty Army of his near the
City of Metz, where he says it was drawn up in Battalia; but he forgot A great
oversight.
to inform us here of two very considerable points; the one, of what altitude
or depth both the Foot and Horse were; the second, what distances were kept, or
ordered to be kept, between the several Files and Ranks both of Horse and Foot,
and how great the Intervals were between the several Batallions and Bodies, as
well of the Cavalry as the Infantry; for thereby we should have been able not
only to have made a probable conjecture, but determinately to have known, how
much ground the whole Army took up in longitude, but there are others who are
guilty of this neglect as well as this Author of ours, who has failed in this.

With these, indeed formidable Forces, did the French King intend to defy, and
fight within the Bowels of the German Empire. Charles the Fifth, a greater and
braver Prince than whom (though he had not been elected Emperor of the Romans)
either for propriety and large extent of Patrimonial Dominions, or for personal
Courage and Prudence, the Western World had not seen since the time of Charles
the Great. But whilst this Magnanimous King is viewing, and exceedingly
pleasing himself Henry views his army,
with the sight of his gallant Army, a beggarly and contemptible crew, of some
Soldiers, some Soujats and Grooms, and some Country Clowns, in sight of this
great Prince, his Nobility in splendid equipage, and of his whole Batallions,
charged those who were appointed to guard the Baggage, and in spite of the
King, then in his greatest strength, carried a rich and considerable And
receives an affront.
booty into Theonville, an Imperial Garrison not far from the place: Nor was
this affront done so publicly to so powerful an Army at all revenged, only
some Light Horse were sent before the Town, to vapor and brave the
Imperialists, who failed not to sally out, and skirmish with the French, from
which bickering neither party carried away any thing but blows. And at length
Henry's great preparations came to nothing, for the two German Princes having
(not without some stain to their Honor) made their Peace with the Emperor,
without the French Kings privity, he was glad to return, and defend his own
Territories against Charles, who was horribly incensed against him, for
offering to assist his Rebels (for so he called those Electors) against his
Lawful Authority.

As this French Army, which, I think, so much represented the Phalange,
Conclusion.
vanished; so the Macedonian Phalanx it self (on which Aelian bestows the
Titles and Epithets of Invincible, Inexpugnable, and Irresistible) after it had
in Philips, and his Son Alexanders time, given the Law to the Eastern World,
and after their deaths, had been kept up by Alexanders Successors and Great
Captains the space of one hundred and sixty years, yielded to fate, and was
brought to nothing in Perseus his time; and Macedon it self reduced to a
Province by the Romans, of whose Legions, Art, and Order of War, we are in the
next place to take a view.

PALLAS ARMATA* Military Essays ON THE ANCIENT ROMAN ART of WAR. BOOK II.
CHAP. I. Of the Ancient Roman Government, and Militia in General.
THE hand of Heaven, which cast the Empire of the best part of the known World
into the lap of the Romans, was the more visible* in that before they came to
any great progress of Conquest, and after too, their State was Inward Diseases
of the Roman State.
obnoxious to those difficulties which might have rendered it not only
incapable to overcome its Enemies, but subject to be a prey to any of its
Neighbors. And of these, any who have perused their Histories, may, if they
please, with me observe them which follow.

First, Their frequent change of Government, as, from Kings to Consul^, First.
then to Consuls joined with Tribunes of the People, from these to a
Decemvirate, from that to Military Tribunes, invested with Consular Authority,
from them to Consuls again, from these to a Triumvirate, and from that to
Emperors.

Secondly, The almost continual ^arrs and debates between the Senate and Second.
the People not only concerning the ^ex (...), and division of Lands, but even
about the Supreme Power of the Governament it self* in which the Commons ever
gained ground, and at the long-run obtained the principal points and marks of
the Sovereignty; those were, the (...) of Magistrates, yea, of the Consuls,
making and repeating Laws power of Life and Death, and the last Appeal.

Thirdly, The constantly Seditious Orations and Practices of the Tribunes Third.
of the People, whereby they publicly obstructed many times the Levies of
Soldiers, and the pursuance of many Victories gained against their Neighbors:
Whilst the State was yet in its Infancy, all those alterations and contentions
proceeding from an inward disease of State, could not choose but exceedingly
weaken it in the undertaking any great action abroad. But,

Fourthly, Their Cruelty and Ingratitude to their own Citizens and Captains,
Fourth.
who had done them the best and greatest services, some whereof I shall
instance in in another place; few of them all escaping a severe censure; enough
to withdraw any generous Spirit from a desire to serve them.

Fifthly, Their frequent making Dictators, almost upon every sudden
apprehension Fifth.
of fear, or supposed danger; an Office so unlimited (having power to do and
command what they pleased, without comptrol, appeal, or ^ear to be questioned
after their time expired) that it is a wonder none of them prevented Julius
C^sar, in usurping the Sovereignty.

Sixthly, Their making two Consuls of equal authority, the very fuel of discord
Sixth.
at home, and of most dangerous consequence abroad, when a powerful Enemy
necessitated them to join their Forces. Take some Instances: In one of the Wars
against the Volscians, Lucius Furius was joined in equal Command with Marcus
Furius Camillus (that famous Roman, who freed his Country from the Invasion of
the Gauls) in this War young Lucius would needs fight sore against old Camillus
his advice; and well beaten ^e was, and had been utterly routed, if the old man
had not waited hi^ opportunity, and come to his rescue with the Triari^. Fabius
the Dictator (nick-nam'd the Cunctator) had Minutius joined in equal command
with him, who would needs with the half of the Army fight* Han^^bal, whether
the Dictator would or not* The Carthaginian beats him, and had made an end of
him, and perhaps of the War too, if old Fabius had not parted the fray. But the
Romans escaped not so easily at Cannae; for there Terentius Varro, in spite of
his Colleague Paulus Aemilius, fought with the same Hannibal, where both of
them received such an overthrow, that if he who gave it them, had followed
Maharbal's advice, and immediately marched, he might, in all probability, have
dined the fifth day after in the Capitol, and for ever have extirpated the City
and name of the Romans. Here Rome was fav'd not at all by the Senates prudence,
but by her Enemies negligence.

Seventhly, Their custom to recall their Consuls and Proconsuls at Seventh.
the end of every year (unless by mighty favor or invincible necessity they
were continued) which made their Generals either desperately hazard Battle, or
grant an advantageous and honorable Peace to their almost conquered Enemies,
lest their Successors should have the honor to finish the War. Take these
instances: Sempronius, against all reason, would needs fight Hannibal at
Trebia, before his Colleague Publ. Scipi^ was recovered of his wound, for fear
new Consuls should come and rob him of the glory of the Victory: The like fear
made Titus Flaminius grant an advantageous Peace to Nabis, the Tyrant of
Lacedaemon, when Titus was almost Master of all Greece. So did Scipio the
African, to the vanquished Carthaginians, after he had beat Hannibal at Zama;
publicly professing, that the ambitious desires of Claudius and Cornelius (who
aspired to succeed him, and put an end to that long War) was the cause he did
not finish it himself (wanting time) with the destruction of Carthage.

Eighthly, Their extraordinary superstition beyond all other Nations: They
Eighth.
must sacrifice great and small Beasts, make Processions, Lectisterniums, and
Supplications to all their Gods and Goddesses, (who were not a few) not only
some days, but sometimes some weeks, before their Generals were permitted to
march from the City, whereby time and occasion (not to be recovered in the
matter of War) were very frequently lost. All this must be done to pease their
angry Deities when any prodigies were seen or heard of, either within or
without the City* for some whereof, natural reasons might have been given; some
of them were palpable and ridiculous lies, and not a few of them composed
either by the State or the Priests to cheat the credulous vulgar, and yet with
the relation of them Titus Livius even nau^eates his Reader; insomuch, that
Boccalini tells us in one of his Raguagli, that when Dion was severely reproved
in Parnassus, before Apollo, for writing such fabulous Miracles, Livius was
observed to blush, as guilty of the same crime; yet Boccalini's own Tacitus,
and Suetonius use us very ^ittle better. Livy tells us of several Oxen that
spoke, particularly of one that said, Cave Tibi Roma. But I wonder why many
more poor men's Oxen did not learn to speak, since this Ox for his seasonable
warning, (in bidding Rome beware of herself) was ordered to be fed on the
public charge. Suetonius tells us of a Crow, which toward the end of
D^mitians Reign, told the Romans from the Capitol, That all should be well: If
she had not loved her liberty better than her meat, she had not flown away, but
stayed still and been fed at the public expense of the City, and perhaps been
worshipped as Fatidick, for things did indeed grow well after that Monsters
death; yet methinks she was a very ill* natured Bird, that would not tell so
good news in the vulgar language, which was Latin (for you are to know she
spoke in Greek) that the poor people of Rome (who were oppressed by that bloody
Tyrant) might have understood the comfortable Prophecy as well as the fabulous
Priests. I pray you take the Story in Verse:

Tarpeio nuper sedit quae culmine cornix,
Est been, non potuit dicere, dixit, Erit.
Upon the Capitol, the Crow
Did not say, All was well,
But, That things shortly well should go,
Distinctly she did tell.
Nor must the Roman Generals go out of Rome, till they took their auspices
right, nor must they fight, if the entrails of the Sacrificed Beasts did not
fully please the juggling Priests, or yet if the Sacred Pulle^s did not eat
their meat well; and it was well enough known, how the Chicken* masters
cozened the Consuls often enough, with the eating or not eating of the Chicken,
it being almost constantly in their power to make the Consuls give Battle, or
abstain from it, when they pleased. Julius Caesar would not be so cheated, for
though the Hostia which he was to Sacrifice, run away from him, which was
thought to presage had fortune, yet went he on to Africa, and at his landing
there his foot tripping he fell; this his Soldiers thought very ominous, but
he gave it another interpretation, and said, He had taken possession of the
Country, Teneo te Africa. But contrary to what I have said appear two famous
Authors, Machiavelli and Polybius. The first, in his first Book of his
Discourses on Titus Livius, makes the Romans tenacious ad^ering to Machiavelli.
their superstition (which he calls Religion) to be one of the causes of their
aggrandizing their Empire, and commends them much for ^uffering no Innovation
to be introduced in their Holy Rites* yet all he does upon the matter, is to
show that the Ancient Romans made a prudent use of their pretended Religion,
and under the notion of it, governed their Commonwealth politickly: But I say,
first, that is but one of his own conjectures, and notwithstanding any thing he
says to the contrary, I suppose those Romans were as eally superstitious as
they pretended to be, even the Senators themselves; and himself in the eleventh
Chapter of that Book avers, that there was never greater fear of God for many
ages, than in that ancient Republic; then by his own account, it was no
pretended, but a real Religion. And is not this ^ound Christian Doctrine, to
aver, that the fear of God was, where Devils, under the notion of Deities were
publicly adored and worshipped? Secondly, I say, if the Roman Senate was to be
commended for not suffering any alteration to be made in that Religion which
their second King Numa Pompilius had established amongst them, then by
Machiavell's rule, we must approve of all the persecutions of the Heathen
Emperors against the Christians, for thereby they did but endeavor to banish
all new Religions out of their Dominions. Truly I think, that not any one part
of that Florentines Writings smells ranker of Atheism than this does. But
Polybius, an universally approved Author, speaks very near Polybius.
the same language in the sixth Book of his History, where he says, that that
which with other Nations was accounted a Vice, was made useful by the Romans,
for keeping their Subjects within the bounds of their duty; and that was, says
he, the superstitious veneration of their Gods in an extraordinary way; but
withal he adds, that the Romans did well to restrain the fury and other
passions of the Commons with unseen terrors, with feigned and fearful
bug-bears, and that both they, and other Ancient Nations had done prudently to
induce in credulous minds the opinion of Deities, and of the torments of Hell;
and though these have no existency, yet the Doctrine of them, says he, is not
to be rashly condemned, since it over-awes the vulgar. Whether this Discourse
will not prove Polybius (though he knew not the true God) to have been in that
Idolatrous age, wherein he lived, as very an Atheist, as Machiavelli was, when
he wrote his Discourses on Livy, and his Book Di Prencipe, I shall not
determine, but leave those who accuse him of that crime, and his Translator
Casaubon, who defends him from that imputation, to debate the matter between
them.

Ninthly, Their horrible and bloody Civil Wars, enough to have destroyed Ninth.
ten other Nations, as that between Sylla and Marius, Father and Son; and that
between Caesar and the Pompeys; and that of the Triumvirate: In all which, how
much the Roman State was at a loss, may be conjectured by one review the
Dictator Caesar made of the Roman Citizens, even before he had made an end of
the War, wherein he found the number to be less by one hundred thousand men
than when he began that one Civil War, which had continued not full four years.

But there were other difficulties wherewith the Roman State had to wrestle,
and those made up likewise an inward disease, which came unexpected and
unlooked for, and not being foreseen, could not well be prevented; and those
difficulties are most proper for this discourse, because of a Military Subject;
and those were the frequent and terrible Mutinies of the Roman Legions Mutinies
in the Roman Armies.
or Armies. Indeed these laid them open to the Attempts and Invasione of all
their Enemies and maligning Neighbors, and have left beside, especially when
unpunished, an eternal blemish on their Discipline of War, so much cried up by
all Nations, and in all Ages, the like of which Mutinies, either for number or
danger, I do not read to have fallen out in any Army of the World, if you
except those infamous ones made by the King of Spains Forces in the
Netherlands, about twenty or thirty years, or more, after the beginning of the
Intestine Wars of those Countries, whereof John Petit, Strada, and Bentivoglio,
with other Historians of those times, may give the curious Reader a full
account. Of the Roman Mutinies, some whereof were punished, some never, I shall
give you these following Instances.

When Caesar, the greatest Captain that ever was, made War in Spain against
Against Caesar.
Pompeys Legates, because he would not fight when his Legions would, they
Mutini'd, and told him, they would not fight when he desired them. He pacified
them with good words, as knowing it was not time to use force. At Placentia his
ninth Legion Mutini'd, and ^efus'd to go to Africa with him, but desired to be
dismissed, and he accordingly disbanded them. When Lucullus Against Luculius.
had gained a Victory against Mithridates and Tigranes, he could not get it
pursued for the Mut^^^ of his Army, which would neither be entreated nor
commanded to march, alleging they had served out their time. The Leons which
were lest at Corfiniuns by the Senate and Pompey, to whom they had sworn
Fidelity, Mutini'd against their Governor Domitius, and delivered Against
Domitius, Against A^^^nus.
both him and the Town to Caesar. Aulus Posthumous Albinus, a Legate and an
Admiral, upon a false suspicion of Treachery, was barbarously murdered by his
own Army. Caius Fimbria, with the help of his Mutinous Soldiers murdered the
Consul Valerius Flaccus; and thereafter justly fearing Against ^laccus.
the same measure, entreated one of his own Slaves to do him the courtesy to
kill him. The Consul Cinna, because he would have had his Legions to fight
Against Ci^^a.
against Sylla (at that time a declared Enemy to the State) is murdered by
them. Lucius Scipio being to fight with the same Sylla, is deserted by his
Mutinous Against Luci^s S^ipio.
Soldiers, who went all over to the Enemy, nor were ever any of those Mutinies
or Murders punished or looked after. But because it may be said, most of all
these were acted in time of Civil Wars, when Authority was ^^od under foot, and
every man did that which seemed good in his own eyes, I will tell you of some
Mutinies, and those of the deepest dye, that fell out, when the Ancient Roman
Discipline was in its vigor, and was said to be executed with the greatest
severity and strictness.

I shall not speak of the Commons leaving the City, and going to Mon's Sacer,
or the Holy Hill, when they were brought back by the witty Parable of Menenius
Agrippa; that being a Sedition or Secession of the people, rather than a Mutiny
of the Soldiers. But sure those Legions, who without Against the Senate.
liberty given, came out of the Fields to the Apennine Hill, and made their
demands to the Senate in Arms, was a Mutiny; but so far from being punished,
that the Mutiniers got what they demanded. Consul C^so Fabius beat the Against
C^s^ Fabius.
Aequians out of the Field with his Cavalry, but could not persuade his Legio^s
to advance, or mend their pace, or make so much as a show of pursuit; but on
the contrary, they marched back to their Tents, and offered rather their
Throats to be cut by the Enemy (if he had turned head) than obey their Consul;
nor was ever this pernicious and dangerous Mutiny punished. When Appius
Claudius had marshalled his Legions against the Volscians, Against App^us
Claudius.
they Mutini'd, refused to fight, and fled back to their Camp; and though many
of them were killed in the Rear, yet neither Honor, Duty, or which is more,
Self-preservation, could move them to turn their faces to the Enemy; their
wickedness and obstinacy continued next day, when the Consul marching
homewards, the Volscians again attacked him, and made a carnage of the Rear of
his men without any opposition, for none would fight, but all ran and fled,
insomuch that the Enemy might have made the whole Roman Army his prey, if he
could have made use of so favorable an opportunity. It is true, Appius found
his time to punish the execrable Mutiniers; and did it to some purpose, by
whipping first, and then beheading all the Centurions, as also all the
Ensign-bearers that had lost their Colors, and the Soldiers that had cast
away their Arms; all the rest ^e decimated, and beheaded every tenth man, says
Livy; bastinadoed, says Florus: What manner of death this bastinadoing was,
shall be told you in the twenty fourth Chapter of these Discourses. A Legion of
four thousand Romans was sent to Rhegium to keep Against the State.
it for the State, they Mutiny, kill the principal Citizens, and keep the Town
for themselves full ten years, at last being forced to yield, all that were
taken alive, were well whipped and beheaded in the great Marketplace of Rome.
Posthumous a Military Tribune, with Consular authority fought fortunately
Against Posthumous.
with the Aequians, (observe in all these that the Roman Empire was but yet in
its Cradle) is called back to the City, in his absence his Army Mutinies
against his Treasurer, beats him and wounds him: The Tribune returns in haste
(and indeed he made more haste than good speed) and endeavoring to punish the
Mutiniers, is himself stoned to death by them; nor was this highest insolence
and baseness ever punished, as both in Justice and Honor it should have been.
Sulpitius, a Dictator, thinking to use the Fabian Against Sulp^tius.
way, and protract the War against the Gauls, is forced by his Mutinous Army to
fight, nor did he ever punish any of the Mutiniers, perhaps because he was
successful in beating the Enemy; yet did not this savor so much of that Roman
severity, for which they desired to be so much cried up. At Capua, before
Hannibal entered Italy, some Roman Legions hatched a dreadful and monstrous
Mutiny, which portended no less than the ruin and dissolution of the State it
self, they came to a head at Lentul^, fortified their Camp, and Against the
Commonwealth.
took Titus Quintius (who had been a Military Tribune) out of his
Countrey-House, and forced him to be their General: Neither was this most
dangerous Mutiny appeased by the Authority of either the Senate, or the
Dictator Valerius, but to the advantage of the Mutiniers; in so far, that the
Horse-mens pay was diminished at the instance of the Mutiniers, who were all of
the infantry; and all because the Horse had refused to join with the Foot in
that detestable design of ruining the Commonwealth. So you see the custom of
punishing honest men, and rewarding knaves, is not of a new date. Great Scipio
the African, a person of great authority (if ever Rome bred any) being Against
Scipio the African.
in Spain, eight thousand of his Army lay at a place called Sucro, a great way
from him, they Mutiny, chase away their Tribunes, and choose Captains of their
own, before two of whom were carried Axes, and bundles of Rods, the badges of
Sovereign power: Scipio by policy and good words making fair weather with them,
brought them to the rest of the Army, and then suddenly laid hold upon thirty
five of the Ringleaders, these he whips and beheads, the rest he pardons. The
same Scipio had a Legate, one Pleminius, who lay at L^ori in Italy, his
Soldiers and those of some other Tribunes go Against Pl^minius.
together by the ears, Pleminius composeth the matter, but because the Tribunes
had not done their duty in parting the fray, he will have them whipped with
Rods; their Soldiers Mutiny, beat Pleminius, and cut off his Nose. Scipio
hearing of the disorder, hastens thither, acquits his Legate, as having done his
duty; and for satisfaction to his Noseless face, orders the Tribunes to be sent
in Fetters to Rome, there to receive their punishment, and so goes away. But
when Pleminius put his hand to his Face and missed his Nose, he could not be
satisfied with the Consuls arbitration, and therefore resolved to cut out his
own Revenge, which he performed with a very bloody Knife, for he put all the
Tribunes to death with most exquisite torments.

Let those Modern Writers who so much cry up the Ancient Roman Discipline Not
so great disorders in the Modern Wars.
of War (and which of them all does it not?) and complain of the slackness of
the Modern one, tell me of greater Insolences, Mutinies, or Contempt of
Authority, in any age, since the decadency of the Roman Empire, than these I
have mentioned; all or most whereof fell out when the Military Laws of Rome
were thought to be most strictly observed; nor can it be said, that the Ancient
Discipline was worn out, for at the latest of these Mutinies at Locri the
Romans were but young Lords, being Masters of little more than the half of
Italy, in one of the best corners whereof, Hannibal their sworn Enemy, made yet
his abode, and would have done so longer, if his unhappy Contrymen had not
first withdrawn their assistance from him, and at length called him home to
Africa, to support their now decaying and tottering State.

Notwithstanding all these inward Maladies, enough to have consumed the vitals
of any State, the Romans in time prevailed over all those, with whom they made
either a just or an unjust War: for as the all-powerful God had pre-ordained
them to be a mighty people, so he had qualified them with parts, abilities, and
endowments, to attain to that greatness: These were, True Fortitude, Prudence,
Abstinence, Temperance, Equity (either real or Roman Virtues.
pretended) Patience, with an admirable Toleration of all manner of wants and
difficulties, inuring their Soldiers to all manner of toil and fatigue; and
above all, with Magnanimity, as never succumbing, or yielding to adversity, but
in their greatest affliction, and lowest condition, showing greatest Courage
and Confidence; which those Senators well witnessed, who would needs dye in
their Robes, with the Ensigns of Majesty, when the Gauls had taken and burnt
their City. And after their total rout at Cannae, when Hannibal sent
Ambassadors with overtures of Peace to them, they sent out and discharged his
Messengers to approach the City: And after that, when that Great Captain came
(a little too late indeed) and sac'd their City with his Victorious Army, they
sold that piece of ground on which his Pavilion was erected, publicly by the
Drum, at an over-rate; and to show him that this was not a rant, one of their
Consuls offered him Battle two several days, but that great hazard was
hindered by fearful Temp^sts from Heaven. With these, and other abilities, were
the famous Romans fitted for the performance of that which the Almighty had
ordered for them, and that was, to over-master the most part of the then known
World, and to govern and rule all other Nations with a Rod of Iron.

They who desire to know perfectly the Ancient Roman Ordinances and
Constitutions Most of the Roman Tacticks lost.
of War, have reason to wish that those Authors mentioned by Vegetius, were yet
extant; which were, the Treatises of the Emperors Augustus, Adrian, and
Trajan; but most of all, that of Marcus Porcius Cato, who was not only a great
Senator, and an eloquent Statesman, but an excellent Captain, whereof bear
witness his prudent Conduct of Armies, his Victories, and his Triumphs, all yet
on Record. And yet he professed, that he thought he had done the Roman
Republic the greatest service, in preserving their Military Art from Oblivion,
and transmitting it to posterity by his Writings. There is no question, but
that Treatise of his, if it had not been lost, had cleared us of many of those
doubts and difficulties, which none that are extant do or ever will do. All
that is left to give us a glimpse of light in the Roman Art of War, are some
fragments of Polybius, and a Book of Flavius Renatus Vegetius De re Militari:
Both of them Noble Authors, and eminent persons in their several times. For the
last, he is so much cried up by most, and thought to be understood by all,
that, I do confess, it must be my dullness that makes me not understand him in
many places, wherein I think Vegetius his Defects,
him so obscure, so wandering, and so little constant to himself, that I go
away from him, and those who comment on him, as ignorant of some points of the
Roman Militia, as when I met with either him or them. I am not guilty, nor
shall be, of so great presumption, as to fix any blemish on a person whose name
has been held for so many ages in so much reputation, and therefore, I shall
think, first, we have not all he wrote on that subject, though Excused.
his Treatise seem to be full; and next, that when Printing first appeared in
the world, some Papers of his have been too carelessly pieced together, and that
perhaps put in several Chapters which should have been in one, (hence may come
his frequent Tautologies) and a close made to a Paragraph, to which the Author
perhaps intended an addition or interpretation, and thereby in some places he
is made to speak that sense, which perhaps he never intended. Nor dare I
qualify Vegetius, as Lipsius in the sixth Book of his Poliorketikon, Lipsius
severe to Vegetius.
very magisterially does, in these words, Bonus Vegetius hic and alibisolut^s
and negligens, and parum ad Genium Antiquum; nec peccarem, sitalem Testem
rejicerem, and contemnerem; Good Vegetius, says he, here and elsewhere loose
and negligent, who had little of the Genius of the Ancients; neither should I
commit any sin, if I should reject or contemn such a Witness.

Though in the following Discourses I intend to speak of the Roman Military
Art, in all its dimensions, yet it is not to be expected, that I either will or
can explain all their Ordinances of War, which has been done by none whose
Writings are extant: I shall follow Vegetius in those points he speaks of, and
wherein he is wanting (and he is that in many things) I shall take what help I
can get from others; when I leave him, it shall be when I think him out of the
way; nor shall I take upon me to tell my own opinion in any point, but where
Reason, History, or other men's Authority, seems to empower me.

CHAP. II. Of the Military Election or Levy of the Roman Soldiers.
THE great Bulk or Body of the Roman State was divided into three Three Orders
in the Roman State.
Principal Members; these were, the Patritian, the Equestral, and the Plebeian.
Out of the first were chosen the Senators, Dictators, Consuls, Pro-Consuls,
Praetors and Pro-Praetors; till the Commons, after long strife, wrong from the
Patritians the privilege to have a Plebeian Consul, and other Magistrates. Out
of the Equestral Order were all their Horsemen levied, so that all of the
Roman Cavalry were Gentlemen, which custom was followed Roman Horsemen all
Gentlemen.
by many Nations for many ages, but is now well near worn out. The Roman
Horsemen were chosen by the Censors. Of the Plebeians or Commons were the Foot
Soldiers elected. Vegetius says, that the Countrey-fellows were rather
chosen, than those bred in Cities; and in the persons who were to be elected,
he does not so much require bigness or talness of Body, (as Marius did) as the
largeness of their Breasts, the vivacity of their Eyes, the brawniness of their
Arms and Legs. He makes choice rather of Artificers and Tradesmen Foot
Soldiers Plebeians.
than Merchants, but of these he rejects Fishers, Fowlers, Clothiers,
Confectioners, and all such whose Trades are sedentary; and hereby he excludes
Tailors and Shoomakers, (but I have known good Soldiers of both) for all these
he esteems womanly: But he admits Hunters, Hawkers, Smiths, Carpenters, and
such as they. This upon the matter is all Vegtius tells us of the Roman Levy.

Other Authors show us the manner of their Levy, which was this: Every Manner
of the Roman levy.
year when the Consuls were elected, four Legions were levied, (unless some
extraordinary occasion required more) that was two for every Consul, which with
as many from the Allies, made up two Consular Armies. At that time did all the
Tribes appear, which in the flourishing condition of the Romans came to be
thirty five. In the first place, twenty four Tribunes or Colonels were chosen,
whereof fourteen were of the Equestral, and ten of the popular Order: Suppose
still, that four Legions were to be raised, for if either more or less, the
number of the Tribunes was augmented or diminished. Vegetius says, that six
Tribunes were constantly ordained for every Legion, whatever strength it was
of* but by his favor, Livy tells us in his Ninth Book, that there were but
four Tribunes in every Legion in the War against the Samnites: And at that time
the Tribunes were chosen by the Tribes, and from thence they have their
denomination; and I find likewise they were chosen by the Tribes in the time of
the Second Punick War, but in the Macedonian the Consuls had the election of
them. Two years after that War was ended, Livy informs us, the Tribes resumed
their former liberty, and elected their Tribunes.

The manner in which the Tribunes or Colonels elected their Soldiers was How
the Legions were elected.
this: Every Tribe divided its men that were fit for service, by fours: Of the
first four, the eldest Tribune of the first Legion chose one, the eldest
Tribune of the second Legion chose the second; the eldest Tribune of the third
Legion chose the third, and the fourth man fell to the lot of the eldest
Tribune of the fourth Legion. Of the second four, the first Tribune of the
second Legion chose the first. Of the third four, the first Tribune of the
third Legion chose the first. And of the fourth four, the first Tribune of the
fourth Legion chose the first; and so again alternatively, till the Legions
were all complete; and the election for all the four Legions as equally made as
possibly it could be. Those who were elected, were not always Tirones or
Novitiates, for many of them had served in the Wars before, but were still
obliged to be enrolled at new levies (if elected) till they had served out that
time that was appointed, and what that was, shall be immediately told you.
Those who were levied for the Foot service, were ordinarily divided into four
Classes: In the first were the most experimented, and were called Triarii; in
the second those of the strongest Bodies, and had the name of Principes; in the
third were those who were in their youthful years, and had least experience,
and were called Hastati; in the fourth Class were those who were ordained to be
light armed, and had the name of Velites. Of all these, and every one of them,
I shall speak particularly in the sixth Chapter.

The Tribunes had the power also to choose the Centurions, the Standard, How
the Officers were elected.
Ensign, and Eagle-bearers, but not according to their own pleasure, but
according to the time they had served, the degrees they had attained to, the
Donatives they had got, and the services they had done; and if any of them
conceived he got wrong, he had power to appeal from the Tribune to the Consul.
Observe here, that no man could be chosen to be an Officer, but he who had
served out half his time, which was this: The Horsemen were obliged to serve
ten years, and the Foot twenty, (suppose still, that they were not mutilated,
or made unserviceable in the Wars) after that, they were Emeriti Milites, and
were to get their Dimissions; How long a Roman Soldier was bound to serve.
and this sometimes occasioned Mutinies, when the State could not conveniently
spare them. The members elected for the War, were not to be under seventeen
years old, nor above forty seven. But it is strange, how Vegetius in the
fourteenth Chapter of his First Book, against the current of all Writers,
affirms, that those of fourteen years old should be brought to the election, if
the ancient custom, says he, were observed. But these Dimissions were
sometimes dispensed with, when Reason of State required it: And Livy says,
that in the Macedonian War there was no Cessation from Arms, nor Dimissions
granted, but to those who were past the fiftieth year of their age.

If any absented themselves from the time and place ordained for election, they
were punished; but how, neither Polybius nor Vegetius tell us. But Lipsius,
Absents from elections how punished.
that great Investigator of Antiquity, out of History informs us, that
sometimes they were fined in Money, or Bestial; sometimes they had all or most
of their goods taken from them; some of them were corporally punished by bonds
and imprisonment, some of them had whipping with Rods, and some had their
Fingers and Thumbs cut off, and many of them were sold for Slaves. He says
also, that some persons were appointed (whom he calls Conquisitores) to search
out, and find such Delinquents. But in process of time, especially after the
Roman State was converted into a Monarchy, this laudable and strict way of
election wore out, and decayed; and instead of free born, and of the lustiest
and ablest Plebeians, Soujats, Slaves, Drudges, and the Servants of Vintners
and Cooks were elected and enrolled, to the disgrace of the Roman Militia, and
subversion of the Empire; whereof Vegetius has just reason to complain.

Two things my Reader must observe here; first, that besides this formal
Tumultuary levies.
election, there was a sudden and tumultuary levy, which was made when the
danger was great, the Enemy prevailed, or other Emergencies, or Reasons of
State required expedition. In these cases, no respect was had to Age or
Dimissions, but all, young and old (provided they were fit for service) were
enrolled, and forced to take Arms in defense of the Commonwealth. The second
thing to be observed, is, that though most Authors say, that so long as the
Roman State kept up its Ancient and strict discipline, (this some will have to
have been done till the time of the Emperors) all the Roman levies, whether
formal or tumultuary, were all made of Freemen, notwithstanding, I say, this
assertion, History tells us, that that noble Nation did not tie it self so
strictly to that point of Honor; but both could, and did dispense with it,
when the Senators thought fit. For after the defeat at Cannae, they bought
eight thousand Slaves from their Masters, and enrolled and armed them, who
thereafter for their good service done at Beneventum, were manumitted. Nor was
this all, the Dictator Junius Brutus, by open Proclamation, invited all who
were condemned for capital A strange Proclamation.
crimes, or who were banished and fled, and all who were imprisoned for debt,
to come and take Arms, exempting the first from all punishment, and the last
from all payment. An action which seems not to relish much of Justice, but Dura
matter Necessita^: Necessity will be tied by no Law. And the like was practiced
afterward in the times of most of their Civil Wars.

CHAP. III. Of their Arms, Offensive and Defensive, and their Military Oath.
NAture teaches us to defend our selves, before we offend our Enemies*
Defensive Armor most necessary.
and indeed if we consider it right, all the offense we should intend is our
own preservation, or reparation for injuries done. For this cause all the
Ancients had an especial care to provide themselves with such Armor as might
defend their Bodies from the strokes, pushes, or thrusts of those with whom
they were to fight; and there is no question, but the confidence and opinion a
Soldier has, that his Body is well guarded from danger, does much animate and
encourage him to attack his Enemy.

The Roman Horsemen (as V^g^ce has it) carried for the Defensive, a Roman
Horsemens Defensive Armor.
Corslet (called a Cataphract, and from this, both heavy armed Horse and Foot
were called Cataphracti) a Headpiece, and a Target, which, he says, was short
and round. He speaks not of Greeves, B^lly-pieces or Taslets, perhaps he is
defective here, for other Authors allow them. Nor does he mention Boots, though
there be reason to think, that every Horseman should have had two Boots,
since, as we shall see presently, one Boot was allowed to every Footman. For
the Roman Horse-mens Weapons, or Offensive Arms, we must consult Polybius, who
gives them a Sword and a Lance, the Sword longer than that a Foot Soldier
carried: It is strange, that Veget^^s speaks nothing of this. Some Authors say,
the Horsemen carried like wise some Darts, Offensive Weapons.
which may be probable. Josephus informs us, that they carried Lances, Long
Swords, and two or three Darts within their Shields, the points whereof, he
says, were as long as that of a Lance; and the Lance had two points, one at
each end. It might be so in Josephus's time, but the Ancient Roman Horsemen
made use of no Darts. How the light Horsemen were armed, I cannot tell you;
many very probably say, that no light horse were made use of till the time of
the Emperors, and but a few of them at first; and if this be true, Vegece
might have told us, how they were armed, since he lived under an Emperor.

The Roman heavy armed Foot wore Head-pieces, Back, and Belly-pieces, Foot
heavy armed.
and Taslets, all these of Iron or Brass: They had likewise Iron Boots, but how
many is a question. Polybius seems to allow them two, for he speaks of Boots in
the plural number. Vegetius says, they had each but one Boot, Their Defensive
Armor.
which he affirms, they wore on their Right Legs. His words are, Dex^ris
cruribus, because, as some imagine, their Targets defended their Left Legs,
when they came to the shock. Yet for all this, Livy in the Fourth Book of his
first Decad, says, The Samnites wore their Iron Boots on their Left Legs,
perhaps so did the Romans their Neighbors; but we shall meet with greater
uncertainties. I shall now speak particularly of some of these Arms and Weapons.

Though Vegei^^s does much commend the Ancient Roman Arms, and lays the blame
of the losses the Empire suffered by the Goths and Huns, on the want of these
Arms, yet is he not at the pains to give us so perfect a description of them,
as other Authors have done. He tells us of Shields, and that all the heavy
armed Foot had Shields, but speaks not of their form nor bigness. A nice
distinction.
There be some, and among them Achilles Terduzzi, who make a difference between
a Shield, and a Target; and it is this, the first was of a round figure, and
the second of a long, angular, or oval. If so, we must conclude those used by
the Romans to have been Targets and no Shields, in regard they were ordinarily
four foot long, and two foot and a half broad. But notwithstanding this nice
distinction, I shall use the word promiscuously, and call the Roman Target a
Shield. If we consider, that there was an allowance of three foot of ground
between the Roman Files, and that the breadth of their Shields covered two foot
and a half of that ground, we must conclude, there was but one half foot left
for them, first to throw their Javelines or Darts, and then to present the
points of their Swords against their Enemies; and their Shields being so near
each other, and their Bodies so strongly defended by them and their other
Armor, it is no wonder, they either gave or received a charge courageously.
For Vegetius says well in the twentieth Chapter of his First Book, that those
who are exposed naked to receive Wounds, must think more of flying than
fighting: And in the end of that same Chapter he says, that he who has his
Head and Breast well armed, is not afraid of Wounds, and therefore needs not
fear to fight.

As first the Roman Shields were made of Timber, Bulls-hides, or other Leather,
The Roman Shield.
artificially interwoven and wrought together, the Timber being ordinarily of
the Fig or Willow-tree, cut in small pieces, and all well covered with the
strongest Leather: But Camillus having to do with the Gauls, who carried heavy
slashing Swords, caused them to put a Margin or Border of Iron on the upper
part of the Shield, thereby to resist the force of their furious blows; and
after Camillus his time, there was a strong-pointed piece of Iron put to the
lower part of the Shield, upon which they fixed it in the ground, either when
they stood Sentinel, or when they stood in Battle array, expecting an Enemy, as
Ae^ilius his Legions did, when they were to fight with Perseus and his
Macedonian Phalange; for at those times they leaned and rested themselves on
their Shields. They made also good use of those points, by pushing and
thrusting with them at an Enemy, when they came to any close medley. Many, and
almost all Nations, besides the Grecians and Romans, made use of Shields,
especially the Gauls and Germans, who peradventure had the use of them before
the Romans were a Nation.

Of Shields, either in Battle, or at the taking of Towns and Forts was A
Tortoise o^ Shields.
composed that Figure, which the Romans called Testudo, or Tortoise, because it
resembled that Animal, which covers it self within its shell, and there were
two kinds of it. The first was framed thus: The first Ranks covered their First
kind.
faces with their Shields, and all the rest kept their Targets above their
heads, thereby making such a Wall of Defense, that they were not only able, say
Authors, to despise all Darts, Stones, and Arrows, but to resist a furious
charge of either Horse or Foot. But I wonder why any Tactick will call Not
Invincible.
this figure of Battle Invincible, even against missile Weapons, since the
Romans themselves were oftener than once beaten by the Parthian Archers: And
L^vius tells us in his Tenth Book, that in the great Battle fought by the
Romans against the Samnites, Vmbrians, and Gauls, when both the Hastati and
Principes were well near routed, some Tribunes coming with the Triarii to the
rescue, found the Gauls serr'd together in a Testudo, covering themselves with
their great Shields, in such a manner, that the Roman Triarii (who were heavy
armed) durst not hazard on them, till first with Darts, Javelines, and other
Missiles, they put them in disorder, and then they routed them. Livius Second
kind of a Tortoise.
tells us of the second kind of the Testudo, made of Shields, at the assaulting
of Towns, the manner this: So many Centuries, Maniples, or Cohorts, as the
Consul or General pleased, stood near the Walls or Ports with their Shields
over their heads, the first Rank stood straight, the second bowed a little, the
third bowed a little more than the second, the fourth more than the third, so
still declining, till the last Rank, (suppose the tenth) kneeled. Up their
Backs as up stairs, did those who were ordained to storm, run to the assault,
and so either entered, or broke down places for others to enter. This, I
believe, was practiced often in their Plays on the Amphitheatres, and indeed it
was more to be used in jest than in earnest, for great Stones thrown down by
the Defendants, would easily have broken the Tortoise-shell, and then molten
Lead, boiling Oil, or scalding Water (all ordinarily practiced on such
occasions by the Ancients) would, to my sense, either soon have killed, or
chased away the Tortoise it self.

It is my opinion, that, when the Romans marched, and no Enemy in sight of
them, they carried their Head-pieces at their girdles, and their Shields,
within covers, on their Backs; my reason is, Caesar in the Second Book of the
Gallick War, says, that the Nervians gave him so brisk and sudden a a charge,
that his Soldiers had not time enough to put on their Head-pieces, or pull
their Shields out of their covers. And it was necessary they should have been
covered, for the preservation of those Devices and Coats of Arms that were
Painted on them, a custom used by several Nations before Romulus laid the
foundation of Rome. But both before, and long after the Romans had
over-master'd the habitable World, or most of it, men used to Coats of Arms.
put on their Shields what fancies or devices they liked best, some Birds, some
Beasts of several kinds, some the noble actions of their Ancestors, some the
Sun, some the Moon, and some a lesser Star. This, I suppose, gave the rise to
many of our Romance Writers, to give several denominations to all their Knights
Errant, by the devices of their Shields, and to make them distinguishable
thereby, when their faces were undiscernable with the Beavors of their Helmets.
But in after ages, Princes thought fit to restrain men from the vanity of
taking Coats of Arms as they pleased, till they were given them by authority.
Hence have the Heralds their rise, and if they were permitted to exercise
their office strictly, it is to be thought, we should not see so many
extravagant Coats in the World. I was acquainted long ago with a German (and
there be many good Heralds of that Nation) who had assumed for his Coat the
French Kings Arms; I asked him his reason for it, he told me, That his
Christian name was Louis, as well as that of the Most Christian King, and since
they had both one name, he knew not why they might not both have one Coat of
Arms.

The Roman Head-pieces, as many think, were of Leather, till the time that the
Gauls invaded their Seigneory; and then Camillus the Restorer of Rome, caused
them to make them of Iron or Brass, and indeed they had need of such to resist
the mighty strokes of those strong-bodied Barbarians. I find, their Helmets
were tied under their chins with clasps of Leather, Iron or Brass; nor can I
learn, that any other part of their face was either armed or covered, which, no
doubt, moved Caesar at Pharsalia to bid his Soldiers strike at the saces of
the Pompeyans, after they had cast their Javelines. Miles, feri faciem, were
said to be his words. Upon their Helmets the Roman Soldiers had three Roman
Helmets.
Feathers, either Red or Black, standing straight up, one foot and a half high,
says Polybius; and those seemed to add, says he, so much to their stature,
Crests.
and made a fine show. These Feathers were the common Soldiers Crests, but
Commanders chose for their Crests such things as best pleased their fancy; and
by these they were known, as by the Devices of their Shields. As Pyrrhus King
of Epirus; was known by his Crest of Goat Horns.

Their Corslet, Cataphract, Cuiras, or Back and Breast, (for all these are
Roman Corslets.
one thing) was of Iron or Brass, such, say some Writers, that no Sword could
pierce, much less a Dart or an Arrow: But this I will believe at full leisure,
for the Great Alexander at the Siege of Gaza had his Body wounded with an
Arrow, through his Corslet, which I may rationally suppose to have been as good
as ever any Roman Legionary wore; but we shall have more of this stuff anon.
Some instead of a Corslet had a Jack, made in that same fashion as Jacks of
Mail.
Fronts, with Plates of Iron, and so artificially, that many wore them next
their Shirts, with as much ease, say some, as we wear our Doublets. If I should
inform my Reader of a Corslet made by a Cyprian, and presented to Demetrius,
which a Javeline shot out of a Catapult could not pierce; perhaps he would
believe it as little as I do my self. It is writ of some who made Jacks Jacks
of Silk.
so well and so strong of Linen and Silk, that they could defend men's Bodies
from Darts and Arrows, whereof some have been undertaken to be made in our time
Pistol proof. But here, let it be enough to know, that the Roman Corslets
ordinarily were of Iron and Brass.

There is no question, but the Sword was the Weapon of Offense, in which Roman
Swords.
the Valorous Romans put their greatest trust, as that whereby they gained
their most glorious Victories. Plutarch affirms, that the Roman Sword was of so
well tempered metal, that no Head, Back or Breast-piece was able to withstand
its force, and their Helmets and Corslets so strong (as I told you before)
Romantic.
that no Sword could pierce them. What shall I say then of all this, but that
the Roman Soldier might be stout enough, since his Sword was irresistible, and
his Armor impenetrable. When I read all this fine Story, I fancy them all to
be Enchanted Knights, till I remember how the Gauls and Carthaginians in many
bloody bickerings opened their Veins through the strougest Fortification of
their Harness. Or if this should be denied me, yet, I hope, it will be granted,
that Roman Swords could plerce Roman Corslets, in their Civil Wars, where so
many thousands of them dyed by the edge of the Sword. Livy tells us, that after
a scuffle between the Romans and Macedonians, Pers^us King of Macedon, chose
rather to leave his men unburied, than discourage his Soldiers by looking on
those horrible, ghastly, and frightful Wounds, that were given by the Roman
Swords, whereby Heads were cut in two pieces, notwithstanding the Macedonian
Brazen Helmets, and Legs and Arms were cut away notwithstanding any Brazen
Greeves or Boots, wherewith they were guarded. And yet, Vegetius says, the
Roman Swords were made for pricking and thrusting, as well as for cutting,
slashing, or cleaving; the Soldier was taught to use his Sword both ways, yea,
thrusting was more and oftener used than the other, as that which gave Death
sooner than cutting did, and did not expose the Body of the Soldier to danger,
so much as the other did. And it is certain enough, that at Pidna, Perse^s his
Phalanx was disordered and routed by the Roman Swordmen, who getting within
the long Pikes of the Macedonians, with thrusts pierced the most naked places
of their Bodies. Vegetius seems to allow to every Soldier two Swords, one
longer than the other, he calls them Spatha and Semispatha, Swords and Sword
and Dagger.
Half-Swords; you may call them Swords and Daggers. They carried, he says,
their Swords on their right sides, and so says Polybius too; but where they
carried their Daggers, none of them tells. But Josephus says, they carried
their longest Sword on their Left side, and the short one on the Right. Some
Authors would persuade us, that the Gauls carried Swords as long as Romantic
Swords.
the Spears of other Nations, and that the points of their Spears were as long
as other men's Swords. Livy says not so much, but he writes, that they had very
terrible Darts.

Because the Roman Pilum was not properly a Dart, I shall English it, as Livius
Roman Pilum.
his Translator does, Javeline. Vegetius in the fifteenth Chapter of his Second
Book, makes two kinds of it, the longer and the shorter, the first was five
foot long, and the second three foot long; the first was also called Hastile:
the Iron of Both was Triangular, and to every heavy armed Soldier he allows
two Javelines. But we need not believe him in any of these assertions. First,
for the length of the Pilum, Polybius affirms, that the shaft or handle of it
was four Inches of circumference, that the Timber was four foot and a half
long, and the Iron as much; but near the half of the Iron was clasped to the
Timber, that the one half only added to the length of the Javeline: And thus by
Polybius his account, the Roman Pilum was near seven foot long, almost Its
length.
two foot longer than Vegetius his longest, and might with more reason be
called Hastile* Some think, that only the Hastati and Principes carried these
Javelines, and that the Triarii had a Weapon of eight foot long, like our
Half-Pikes, which they managed with both their hands, till they came within
stroke of Sword, and that in Marius his time the use of it wore out. As to what
Vegeti^^ says, that every Soldier had two Pila, History contradicts him, that
allows in ancient times but one; whether they had two or none in his own time,
he knew best; but the old Romans darted their ^avelines, as they were advancing
toward the Enemy, and were commanded by their Generals to make haste to come
to dint of Sword, esteemed by them the Prince of Weapons. So Caesar's
Legionaries at Pharsalia, were ordered, after each man had cast his Javeline,
to run to the shock, which accordingly they did. The manner of throwing their
Pila, was, that the first Rank threw first, and immediately How they were
thrown.
bowed down, that the second Rank might cast over their heads, so did the
third, and fourth, and the rest, till all the Ranks had thrown. When they stood
in order of Battle, they used to stick their Javelines in the ground, till the
sign was given; so it seems they were sharp at both ends, and no doubt, in time
of Battle they might have made a Pallisado of them against Horse, as Suedish
Feathers have been used in our time, yet we read not in History, that any such
use was ever made of the Roman Pilum.

Being now to speak of the Roman light armed foot, I shall desire my Reader
once for all to take notice, that Vegetius was desired by the Emperor
Valentinian to give him the Constitutions, Laws and Practice of the Ancient
Roman Art of War, and not of any customs lately crept in: Notwithstanding which
he reckons among the light armed Foot, Plumbati, whom he likewise calls
Martiobarbuli, and Fustubularii, whom I cannot English otherwise, than the
first to be Lead-casters, and the second to be Slingers with Battoons: He
reckons also Archers, but in Ancient History we do not read of any of those
three, for the old Romans acknowledged no other light armed or Velites, but
Slingers Roman Velites.
and Darters. Both these were armed Defensively with Head-pieces of Raw-Hides,
and a Target four handful long, and of an oval form. For Offense, How armed.
the Darter had a Sword, and seven Darts; the Slinger had a Sling, a Sword, and
a number of Stones. Some allow also to both of them a little Javeline of three
or four foot long. The Spanish Darts being winged at the point, could hardly be
pulled out of a Shield, or the Body of a man; such Arrows are common, and are
called Barbed. But the Sagumine Dart, which was called Falarica, deserves The
Saguntine Falarica.
to be taken notice of. Livius describes it thus in his twenty first Book*
Falarica was a kind of Dart used by the Saguntines, when Hannibal besieged
their City, (perhaps they invented it at that siege*) it had a long shaft,
round and even every where, except toward the end of it, and that was headed
with Iron, three foot long, Tow being wrapped about it, smeared with Pitch;
this Tow they fired, when they were to lance the Dart, the violent motion
increased the fire, insomuch, as when it could not pierce the Body, it forced
the Soldier to cast away his Shield or Corslet, and so exposed him disarmed to
the Darts or Arrows which were shot afterward. The Timber of the Roman Dart
Roman Darters.
might be two foot long, and the bigness of a man's finger; the point of it of
Iron, one foot long, sharp, small and subtle, that it might pierce, and in
piercing bow, that so an Enemy might not make use of it, by throwing it back
again, but this was the practice of other Nations as well as the Romans; yet I
pray, observe what Livy says in contradiction of this. In that Battle, which I
mentioned but a little before, the Triarii gathered up all the Darts (for they
were allowed to carry none of their own) which were strayed all over the field,
and, no doubt, had been all cast before, and with these they disordered the
Gauls (who had made a Pent-house of their Shields) and so put them to flight.
What shall we then believe? And is it not strange too, that these Darters would
throw their Darts four hundred foot; for my part, I dare not believe it, and if
it be true, certainly the blow could not be mortal.

The Roman Slingers used to cast Stones out of ordinary Slings, which they
Roman Slingers.
wheeled about their heads, and would hit at the distance of six hundred Foot;
for no less (as Vegetius affirms) was allowed them at their exercise. Other
Slingers the Ancient Romans had not. The Inhabitants of the Balearick Islands,
which now are called Majorca and Minorca, were Balear^ans.
esteemed both the best and the first exercisers of the Sling, the Mothers
refused to give their children meat, till they had hit the mark was given them
to throw at. Livy in his thirty eighth Book cries up the Aegean Slingers, of
whom one hundred ^^^ans*
not only beat back the stout Samians, when they sallied out of their Town, but
also never missing to ^it them, when they appeared on the Parapets of their
Walls, forced them to render their City to Marcus F^lvius the Roman Consul. And
yet it is more than probable, that neither the one nor the other were skilful
^enjamites.
or so ancient practicers of the Sling as the Israelites for there were 700 of
one Tribe who could hit within an hair-breadth. With this Weapon did David
obtain the Victory over Goliath, of which I shall speak in another place.
Vegetius has reason to prefer the Sling to the Bow, in this regard, that an
Arrow cannot wound unless it pierce, but a Stone bruiseth though it pierce not,
and if it be of any weight, it kills, notwithstanding the resistance of any
Headpiece or Corslet.

In the times of the Emperors, or a little before, came the Plumbati or
Martio^arbuli in fashion with the Romans. Vegetius tells us, what great
services Lead-casters.
they did in the reigns of Dioclesian and Maximian, but does us not the favor
to describe the thing it self. They threw Bullets of Lead of one pound weight.
I do not remember whether Livy mentions any of them to have been among those
Roman Slingers, who beat the Gallo-Greciant at Olymp^^. The Fustibalus
Battoon-Slingers.
or Battoon-Sling was a Sling of Leather tied to a Battoon of four foot long,
which the Slinger managed with both his hands: and out of which, says
Vegetius, he threw Stones as out of an Onagra, with so great force, that
neither Target, Headpiece, or Corslet could resist it. But these expressions
are ordinary with him. I am of the opinion there was no difference between the
Plumbati or Lead-casters, and the Fustibalarii, or Battoon-Slingers, but that
the first cast Lead, and the last great Stones; but how far, our Author tells
us not.

Archers were not reckoned among the Velites, till the second Punick War,
Archers Auxiliaries.
and even then, they were rather Auxiliaries, than either Romans or Allies.
They were however made good use of after Hannibal invaded Italy. Vegetius in
the fifteenth Chapter of his First Book, affirms, (for which he has no
authority of History) that the fourth part of the youth of Rome was trained to
the use of the Bow, for we read of no such custom. Scipio Aemilian^s (who
destroyed Carthage) made much use of Bow-men against the Numantines, and
without them, if you will believe Vegetius, he thought he could not over-master
that Valorous Enemy. The Emperor Justinian made a singular good use A good
practice.
of some of his Archers, which was this: He caused them to put on such
Defensive Arms as his Legionaries wore, and mixed them together; these Bowmen
poured showers of Arrows on the Enemy, before their heavy armed could come
within distance either to cast their Javelins, or draw their Swords; yea, the
nearer they were, the more mischief they did, and when they came to a close
medley, they quit the Bow, and took them to their Swords. How great use was
made of Auxiliary Bow-men by the Romans, may be conjectured by this, that when
some of P^mpeys Legions stormed one of Caesar's Castles at Dirrachium, and were
beat off, thirty thousand Arrows were reckoned to Caesar himself, all which had
fallen in the Sconce: And one Scava a Centurion, Shields resist Arrows.
showed his Shield to his General, wherein were one hundred and thirty holes.
Observe by the way, that Targets resisted the violence of Arrows. Some write,
that Augustus caused them to levy Roman Citizens to be Archers, both on Foot
and Horseback; perhaps he had been taught to do so by the losses his
Competitor Anthony, and before him Crassus, suffered by the Parthian Bowmen.
The wicked Emperor Domitian was said to be so cunning an Archer, that
Suetonius writes, he could direct his Arrows to the mark between the fingers of
a Boy, stretched one from the other, without hitting any of them; of such we
have heard in later times.

After the Roman Soldiers were levied and armed, they were marked in the Hand,
or some other place of the Body, and an Oath of Fidelity taken of them, which
Vegetius in the fifth Chapter of his Second Book describes to be this* as it
was imposed by the Emperor Constantine the Great: I Swear by Roman Military
Oath.
God, by Christ, and by the Holy Spirit, and by the Majesty of the Emperor,
whom I worship, that I will do all things that he commands me, and that I shall
never desert his service, nor refuse to dye for the Roman Commonwealth. Let us
observe some things of this Oath: First, That in these times, Christian
Soldiers thought it no sin to pay Civil Worship to their lawful Prince.
Secondly, They took more liberty than they should have done, to swear by the
Emperor; for this being an Oath taken with mature deliberation, and in
Judgment, was a greater sin in them than it was in Joseph, to swear rashly (by
a bad custom he had learnt among the Egyptians) by the Life of Pharaoh.
Thirdly, Our Author has forgot to tell us, what manner of Oath the Roman
Soldiers swore before the Emperors were converted to the Faith, or what
Military Oath was made to the State before the Heathen Emperors usurped it;
though this should have been told us, who desire to know the Military
constitutions of the Ancient Romans. I suppose, they swore by Jupiter, and all
the rest of their Gods, to be faithful to the Senate, and People of Rome, to be
obedient to their Commanders, and not to desert their Standards or Ensigns.
This or the like Oath was exacted by the several Tribunes of every man under
their Command. But I must inform my Reader that this public and judiciary
Swearing Fidelity was not practiced by the Romans till the Second Punick When
first imposed.
War. For Livy witnesses in his 22 Book that before that time no Oath was
required of the public Officers either of State or Militia, only the Foot
Soldiers in every Century, and the Horsemen in every Decurio, were accustomed
to promise and swear one to another, not to fly one from another, or to desert
the service. But after Hannibal's Invasion, a formal and solemn Its rise.
Oath was imposed, which, I believe, had its first rise from the Oath which
Publius Cornelius Scipio at that same time both swore himself, and forced other
young Gentlemen (who, after the rout of Cannae, were preparing to leave Italy)
to Swear in these words: I Swear with all my Heart, that I shall not desert the
Republic, nor suffer any other Roman to desert it: If willingly I fail in
this, then may the Greatest and Best Jupiter inflict on Me, my House, Family,
and Goods, the worst of evils. This Swearing and Marking were called the
Military Sacraments, Sacrament.
after which the Soldiers were enrolled, and entered in pay; neither was it
lawful for a Roman to fight with an Enemy till he had taken the Oath, and if he
killed an Enemy before he swore Fidelity, he was to be punished as a
Manslayer. The word Sacrament, was by the Fathers in the Primitive times
borrowed from the Militia, to signify the Initiation, and Holy Mysteries of
the Militant Church.

Polybius tells us likewise, that the Soldiers at the time of their enrolling,
swore to obey all the Commands of the Consul, and of all Officers under him. He
says likewise, that when they came to be encamped, another Oath was Another
Oath.
exacted, not only from the Soldiers, but all that followed or belonged to the
Camp, whether Bond or Free, Master or Servant, not to steal any thing out of
the Leaguer, and that, if they found any thing by chance, they should bring it
to one of the Tribunes.

Other Oaths were likewise sworn, sometimes voluntarily by the Soldiers Rash
Oaths.
with mutual consent, sometimes imposed by some of the Commanders, most whereof
were rash or vain; particularly one, That they should not return from Battle
without Victory, as Livy in his Second Book informs us. And Caesar in his
Seventh Book of the Gallick War, says, that the Horsemen desired that it might
be declared by a solemn Oath, that no man should return either to his Parents,
Wife, or Children, who did not charge twice through the Enemy; which being
agreed on, all were forced to swear. And in his Third Book of the Civil War, he
tells us, how Labienus swore never to desert Pompey, but to share with him in
all his Fortunes; the like did An Oath ill kept.
the rest of his Army. This Oath was sworn at Pharsalia, and was ill kept, for
both Pompey deserted his Army, and was deserted by all those who had sworn to
stand by him.

CHAP. IV. Of Sieges, and Defense of Towns and Forts, and of the great Engines
and Machines used in them, by the Romans, and other Ancients.
THE several ways by which Towns, Castles, and Forts, in our Modern. The
Ancients expugned Towns as we do.
Art of War, (as they are described in the twenty fourth Chapter of my
Discourses of the Modern Militia) are taken, were all used by the Ancients; for
Gunpowder has only augmented the violence and fury of the Battery, and
furnished us with more fearful and mortal Darts, than the men of old were
acquainted with. In ancient times, Towns were taken by Circumvallation, and
starving the Defendants out of them, they were taken by formal Sieges and
approaches, they were taken by Assault, by Scalado, by Surprizal, and by
Treachery; and they are still taken by some of these. If they conceived the
place, either for its Situation, Fortification, or Defendants, so
inconsiderable, that it did not deserve a formal Siege, or that they either
could not, or would not spend time upon it, they stormed it very soon after
they came to it, with Ladders or Grapples, or with a Tortoise or Pent-house
made of their Shields, whereof I spoke in the foregoing Chapter. And in doing
this, they environed it with a Corona, as they called it, or a Crown; Corona.
which is, they drew up their Armies round about the Town, in manner of a
Crown, leaving no part free from being invested. But Grotius says, that the
Hebrew Interpreters tell him, that when their Ancestors were to assault a Town,
they left a part of it free unenviron'd, non cingebant Corona, that whoever
came out at that place and submitted, should be pardoned. I think this custom
had prudence in it as well as pity, and verified the saying, A Golden Bridge
for a Flying Enemy. This Corona, or Crown, was sometimes a single Crown,
sometimes a Double, and very often a Triple one, according to the quality or
greatness of the place, or the number of those that were to attack it. If it
were a Threefold Crown, the first was composed of the heavy armed foot, The
first Crown.
who were to give the assault, and in it to defend themselves with their
Targets, and other Defensive Arms: Behind them was the Second Crown, Second.
of the Velites or light armed, whose business was, with Darts, Stones, and
Arrows, to beat away the Defendants from the Parapets, that the heavy armed
might storm with the less opposition. Behind these Velites, was the Third
Crown, which consisted of the Cavalry; and these stood for two uses, Third.
first, to hinder the Foot from flying, (a thing practiced sometimes in the
Modern Wars) secondly, to prevent any danger that might arise by the sudden
arrival of an unexpected Enemy. If it was not thought fit to try this sudden
way of Expugnation, or that it had been tried without success, then approaches
were made with the help of those Engines, which have been time out of mind laid
aside, as altogether useless in our Modern Expugnation of Forts.

These Machines were of two kinds, Lesser and Greater. The Lesser were Lesser
Engines.
the Moscles and all manner of Mantilets, which were indeed no other but
Pent-houses and Shrowds, and under that name you may comprehend the Vinea,
Plutei, Crates, and such like; under the shelter whereof the Ancient approached
to strong holds. The Greater Engines were the Tortoise, the The greater ones.
Ram, the Scorpion, the Onagra, the Balist, and the Catapult; for most of
which, men have not yet found out proper words in the Modern Languages. Then
there was that great Engine which excelled them all for efficacy, and matter of
admiration, both to Antiquity it self, and to us too, who have seen and heard
the Thundering Canon; and that was, the Moving or Ambulatory Tower.

To give a particular description of all these, and of the Mechanical Structure
of them, belongs properly to an Engineer, says Terducchi, who was one himself.
And Ste^echius says, there is much difficulty and obscurity in the explanations
of their frames, which he who would curiously know, may, says The description
of these difficile and obscure.
he, consult Vitruvius, that great Master of Architecture. And when these
Engines were in fashion, a General of such Artillery may, says the same
Author, look on some places of Turnebus. I shall also tell my Reader that
Authors differ much in the description of those Machines; but if any desire to
see the Figures of them, I refer them to the same Steuechius, and if he do not
satisfy their curiosity, perhaps Justus Lips^s in his Poliorcetikon, will do
it fully. However, it is fit I speak a little of every one of them, and of
their several uses.

The Romans were so far from challenging to themselves the Invention of these
Machines, that it is certain, they had not the use of them from the beginning
of their City, nay, nor of their Republic, after they had banished Kingship.
It is true, Livy says, that one of their Kings, Servi^s T^lli^s, appointed two
Centuries of Tradesmen, for making Warlike Engines, but these were of the
lesser kind. At the Siege of V^i^ (which lasted ten years) they had Aggeres, or
Ramparts; Vinea, or Vines; and Towers, but not Ambulatory ones. The Vinea and
Pluteus are very often consounded by Authors, Vinea and Pluteus.
and made to be one thing. Some make the difference between them to be, that
the Pluteus was made to sloop but on one side, the Vinea descended, and sloop'd
on both. But Vegetius makes them differ in this, that the Pluteus had Wheels,
the Vinea non^. They were eight foot high, seven broad, and six long, some say,
sixteen; for Authors do not agree. They were made of small Timber, and were
raised on Legs, and being interwoven with Twig^, sometimes of the Vine-tree,
they represented Arbours, and from thence had the denomination of Vinea. Above
they were covered with Hair-cloath and Raw-Hides, to save them from Wildfire;
as also with Hurdle^* but below them with strong Boards, where great opposition
was expected; they had within them Rasters, on which was a Gallery, wherein the
Besieger^ were sheltered from Stones, Darts, and Arrows, when they made their
approaches to the Ditch, and out of these they endeavored to chase the
Defendants from their Walls and Parapets with all manner of missile Weapons.

The Agger was a Rampart of Earth and Hurdles, wherewith they environed Agger
or Rampart.
besieged Towns, and for their own Defense, against either the Enemy within the
Town, or abroad; they fortified this Rampart both within and without, for
ordinarily they had two of them, with Stakes or Pallisadoes. In some places of
these Ramparts, at a convenient distance one from another, were Sconces built,
which they called Castles and Towers. The use of these Agger^s was known in
some places of the World before the name of Rome was heard of, or that any
Grecian had put Pen to Paper, for it is of these Hurdles and Stakes, and other
Timber for Ramparts, and it may be for the Vinea and the Ram too, that Moses is
to be understood in his command to the Israelites, not to cut down any Tree
that bore fruit, mentioned in the twentieth Chapter of Deuter^n^my, of which I
spoke before.

The Moscoli were also of the Lesser Engines, made of strong Boards covered
with raw Hides; they moved on Wheels: And under them men were Moscles.
sheltered when they approached to the Walls and Ditches. Some very rationally
say, that the proper use of the Musculus was to help to draw forward the great
Moving Tower, to cleanse and clear its way, and give it the name from that Fish
which Naturalists say, goes before the Whale to be its guide, and to discover
Rocks and Shelves: And so Vegetius seems to describe it. But others,
particularly Caesar (who deserves trust) makes it a lesser Testudo, or
Tortoise, and describes it at length in his Second Book of the Civil War.
Others write, it had a snout like a Mouse, wherewith it picked Stones out of a
Wall, and was therefore called M^rusc^lus, and corruptly Musculus: And there be
some who say, it battered a Wall as the Ram did. So far do Ancient Authors
differ.

Besides the Tortoises composed of men's Shields, spoken of in the foregoing
Testudo or Tortoise.
Chapter, there was an artificial Engine, which the Ancients called a Testudo
or Tortoise. This was made of such a bigness as it pleased the General of the
Army, or General of the Artillery to appoint; within it was a great Beam, which
sometimes had on the end of it an Iron Hook or Grapple, which they shut forth
when they thought fit to draw Stones out of a Wall, or for other uses, and
pulled the Beam in again, when they pleased; and therefore they gave it the
name of that Creature, which can put it self out of its shell, and in again
when it, pleases. And sometimes on the end of this Beam, says Vegetius, was
fastened a great Iron Head for Battery, and was called a Ram, either because
the bulk of Iron was fashioned in the form of a Rams Head, or because after
every stroke, it was forcibly drawn back, that at its return it might batter
more violently, as the custom of Rams is, when they fight. This is all
Vegetius speaks of the Testudo or Aries, except that he makes the last to be
put in the lowest Stage of the Ambulatory Tower.

But other Authors tell us, that the Aries, or Ram was of it self a formidable
Machine. And as the manner of our War is now, to give the worse conditions to
the besieged, when they hold out the Battery of Ordnance; so of old, those who
did not yield before the Ram had touched the Wall, got the worse quarters.
Caesar in his Seventh Book of the French War, says, he gave some of the Gauls
their lives, because they rendered themselves before the Ram began to batter.

The description of this Engine, is thus given us by Achilles Terduzzi: A great
Beam and of a great length, 200 foot and more, made like the Mast of a Ship,
Aries or Ram.
had an exceeding ponderous and great Head of Iron, which sometimes resembled
that of a Ram, sometimes it had another shape. This Beam was supported by two
other great ones, which made the base of the Engine, they meeting above in a
sharp Angle, kept the Ram suspended in an Aequilibrie. It was managed by
Soldiers behind, and as many on both sides as could be conveniently lodged, in
Tortoises, Moscles, or other Pent-houses, that were ordained to convey it. No
solidity or strength of Walls was able to resist the continuated and reiterated
Verberations of this Engine, as Josephus in his Jewish War, and many other
Authors witness. And yet we have seen Stone Walls of Towns, built by the
Ancients, make a notable resistance against the Battery of Whole Cannon. It
soon made such a breach in the Wall, that Miners could lodge in it, and enlarge
it as they pleased. In the time of its Battery, it was defended above with
Hurdles, Baskets full of Earth, and Raw Hides, and on both sides with Moscles,
Vines, and Tortoises, out of, or from under which the besiegers incessantly
cast their missiles against the Defendants. And they, at the approach of the
Ram to the Wall, beat it with huge great Stones, or heavy lumps and How it was
opposed.
weights of Lead, tied with strong Ropes or Chains of Iron to a Crane or
Telenon: Those who were appointed to defend the Ram, endeavored to gripe those
Ropes or Chains with long Hooks or Grapples; and on the other side the besieged
essayed with long Scythes to cut the Cords, which governed and sustained the
Ram. The Defendants also used to hang over the Walls, Beds, and great sacks
filled with Straw, Feathers, or Wool, which broke the sorce of the strokes
before they came to the Wall; and these are all of good use in any Retrenchment
suddenly made up against the Battery of Canon, in our time. The Invention of a
more dreadful Engine than the Ram, the Ordnance, did not hinder this Engine to
be made use of by D^valo, Marquess of Pescara, at Pavia, which when Francis
King of France had besieged, and that the Imperial Army could not draw him out
of the Park to Battle, Davalo in the night time with three Rams broke down the
Park-Wall (which The Ram made use of at Pavia by Davalo.
Giovio says, was of an admirable strength) not thinking it fit to do it with
Cannon, for alarming the French, yet the violent strokes of the Rams were
heard, but not at all suspected; passage being made by these Ancient Machines,
some Horse and Foot entered, who soon took possession of the great House or
Lodge of the Park, called Mirabell: This imposed a necessity on the French King
to fight, and though he did it well, yet was he beaten, and taken.

The Telenon was such another Engine, as that we draw Water with out of The
Telenon.
Wells, called a Sweep, or like those Cranes, wherewith great burdens, packs,
or weights are pulled up and let down. It was a huge Beam of Timber laid cross
way, balanced on another Beam fastened in the ground, the one end of the
Cross-Beam mounting up, when the other was depressed. The besiegers made use of
it, by making at one end of the Cross-Beam a little House of Boards or Osier
Twigs, in which they might lodge three or four men, whom they might therewith
set on any part of the highest Wall, to bring them Intelligence what the
Defendants were doing. But the Besieged made better use of it, by tying* great
Stones or Lumps of Lead to it, with which, as is said before, they might beat
in pieces either the Ram or Tortoise. And here I shall tell you, that the old
Tactick Aeneas, advises a hole to be dug through the Wall by the Besieged
themselves, and out of it, with a Ram of their own, batter the Besiegers
Battering* Ram. The Defendants used also, to tie to the Talenon, Hands, Drags,
Clasping Irons, and Grapples, wherewith to lay hold on the Rams Head, as also
by them (fastened to Iron Chains) to pull up men, when they came to assault
their Walls; yea, and some of the Lesser Engines also. Terduzzi is of the
opin^on, that Archimedes his famous Machine, wherewith he drew up Ships into
the Air, and let them fall with violence, was no other thing than this Telenon,
but he gives not his Reasons for this opinion of his.

The Balist was a great Machine, out of which were shot, as some say, Balist.
Darts, Lances, yea, Spears of thirty foot long, but others say, that it threw
only great Weights and Stones. Vegetius gives it only power to throw Darts; nor
does he at all mention the Catapult, which, some Authors say, shot Catapult.
very great Stones, and of it all other Ancient Writers take notice: And they
are by them clearly distinguished the one from the other. Philip, the last King
of Macedon, except one, at the Siege of Echinum had Ambulatory Towers, and upon
them (says Polybius in his Ninth Book) he had Catapults, and a platform
besides for Balists: And in his Fourth Book he says, that the Sinopians being
destitute of all necessaries, got abundance of rich gifts sent to them by
several, and that particularly the Rhodians sent them, besides many other
necessaries, four Catapults with Engineers to manage them; and more clearly in
his fifth Book he says, that at the Siege of Pal^, Philip had both Catapults
and Balists. The diversity of Judgments of Authors concerning these two great
Engines, was this: Vegetius says, the Balist threw only Darts and Lances:
Ammianus, who was Vegetius his Contemporary, and both a great Soldier, and a
great Engineer, speaks only of Stones for that Engine. Valerius Maximus and
Vitruvius (both of them great Architectors) affirm that Stones were the proper
missiles of Difference among Authors concerning these two Machines.
Balists, and that Catapults threw Darts, Lances, and Spears. Polybius, a great
Captain, in that cited place at Palae, says, Philips Balists and Catapults
threw Stones, and so confounds them; yet in another place he distinguishes;
for he says, In that Battle at Mantinea, which Mechanidas the Tyrant of
Laced^mon, fought against Philopoemon the Ach^an, the first had Catapults,
which he placed in the Van of his Army, and Wagons laden with Darts for them,
therefore they shot no Stones. But this is downright against a greater Captain
than any I have yet mentioned, and that was Julius Caesar, (who besides his
other perfections, was an excellent Engineer) he says, in the First Book of
his Civil War, that the Catapult threw great Stones. In such a diversity of
opinions, I think, Achilles Terduzzi offers a fair expedient of agreement,
which is, that it is An expedient of reconciliation.
probable, in the times of the Emperors the names of Catapult and Balist were
confounded, so that the one was taken for the other; or that by a new
Invention, not heard of before, both the one and the other threw both Darts and
Stones.

The Balist and the Catapult were made and framed according to the weight of
the Stone, and the length of the Dart or other missiles which they were
ordained to shoot; as our Ordnance are founded according to the weight of the
Bullet intended for them; from whence many of them have their denomination, as
a three, four, or six pounder. I made mention of Balists and Catapults* in the
fourth Chapter of the Grecian Militia, the Invention of which Of their
Invention.
some would bestow upon Dionysius, one of the Tyrants of Syracusa, but I have
proved in that Chapter from Holy Writ, that they were used many ages before
Syracusa was forced to submit to Tyranny. Lipsius seems to give it to the
Syrians, which may be true; and though I told you, Oziah one of the Kings of
Judah, had them on the Walls of Jerusalem, yet it was no such shame for the two
Tribes to borrow the Invention of Military Machines from Heathen Nations, as it
was sin for the ten Tribes to borrow and follow the pattern of the Altar of
Damascus from their Idolatrous Neighbors.

There were, if you will believe Authors, some of these Machines, which could
shoot Stones of one hundred, some two hundred, and some of them three hundred
and sixty pound; and those that cast one hundred pound, threw their Stones the
length of two Stadia, or Furlongs, and these make the fourth part of an English
Mile. It was a custom also to cast into Besieged Towns burning Iron, Vessels
with molten Lead, dead Horses, and Tubs and Barrels full of excrements, or any
thing else, that could infest, annoy, or vex the Besieged. And some write, that
out of a Catapult was shot a long Spear, or A strange story.
Lance, from one Bank of the River Danubius (where it is broadest) over to the
other. This I dare not believe, for, I suppose, that mighty River, before he
discharges himself, may be more than two Italian Miles broad; and I will
suppose likewise, that Gunners will confess, that no piece of Ordnance will
shoot a Bullet so far point blank, especially over a River.

Vegetius in the fourteenth Chapter of his Third Book, allows Carrobalists
Carrobalist.
to march with the Roman Army: Terduzzi thinks they were Arcobalists, they
shot, as our Author says, bot^ Darts and Stones. Vegetius says, they had many
Conductors; but in the last Chapter of his Book, he says, every Century had a
Carrobalist (this was a Balist mounted on a Carriage) and he allows Mules to
draw it, and eleven Soldiers of the Century to manage it: Now observe, that in
Vegetius his Legion there were five and fifty Centuries, and therefore fifty
five Carrobalists; every one of which had eleven men to manage them. Multiply
fifty five by eleven, the product is six hundred and five, and so many of every
Legion Vegetius allows for these Engines. And A File eleven deep.
I pray you observe here in passing, that Vegetius expressly allows eleven
Soldiers for every Tent, or Contubernium, by which he does not obscurely
insinuate, that the Files of the Roman Foot were eleven deep. The greater these
Carrobalists were, the further they carried their Darts; neither, says our
Author, could any Cors^et resist their blow.

The Onager, says Vegetius, shoots Stones like Thunder*bolts, greater or
Onager.
lesser, according to the bigness or thickness of its Cords; so it is a kind of
Catapult or Balist. It has its name (as Steuechius says*) from the Greek word,
which signifies a Wild Ass, for those Animals when they are hunted, fling
Stones with their heels, at those who pursue them.

The Scorpion, says Vegetius, shoots small and subtle Darts, whereby present
Scorpion.
death was procured. But Animian makes the Onager and the Scorpion to be all
one thing; and he avers the Onager to be a new word brought in the room of the
old one, which was Scorpio; and in the description he gives of it* cited by
Steuechius, he makes it only to cast great Stones, and no Darts; so great a
difference there is between him and Vegetius, who lived both at one time. Yet
several are of Vegetius his opinion, and say, the Scorpion threw Darts and
Arrows, and poisoned ones too, and that from thence that Engine had its name.
But on the other hand, this seems not probable; if i^ be true, as i^ seems to
be, that all or most Nations have with a tacit assent made it their constant
practice and custom, and so to pass for Jus gentium, or the Of Poisoned
Arrows, Bullets, Darts, Waters, or Wells.
Law of Nations, to abstain from all such malefices, as shooting poisoned
Darts, Arrows, or Bullets, or from poisoning of Victuals* Liquors, Waters and
Wells, observed also in our Modern Wars. We read* it is true, of some exceptions
from that general custom, and that Poison has been used in open, just, and
declared Wars, but for these perhaps Invincible necessity may plead an excuse.
The like we may say of Assassination of Princes, Generals, or Of Assassination.
eminent Commanders, whom a declared Enemy may lawfully kill* as E^^d killed
Eglon, or as Scaevol^ intended to kill P^rs^nna; but it is not at all lawful,
but against the practice of a fair and declared War, to suborn, exhort, or hire
any other, especially those who belong ^o, or are under the jurisdiction of
that Prince or General, to kill any of them. But for all this, I do not deny,
but a Sovereign Prince or State, may* lawfully set* a price on the head of a
powerful Rebel, against whom they cannot proceed by the ordinary way of
Justice. This much I have taken occasion to say on this subject, that I may not
trouble my Reader with it hereafter. But to our present purpose, I say that the
Carrobalist, the Onager, and the Scorpio, are but several species and sorts of
the Catapult and Balist.

And now I come to speak of the Moving or Ambulatory Tower, whereof Ambulatory
Tower.
that which Vegetius writes is enough to astonish any Reader, who has not
heard of it before, but he who will read other Writers, will easily believe all
Vegetius says on that subject: He tells us, they were built after the form of
Houses, thirty, forty, or fifty foot broad, and so high as to equal the height
of Towers on the Wall. The Tower which our Author describes, is three stories
high: In the lowest he lodges a Ram, with men to manage it, and that, when the
Tower came within convenient distance, battered the Wall. In the third and
highest stage he placed the Velites, who afflicted the Defendants with Darts
and Arrows, and pelted them with Stones out of their Batton-Slings, to
necessitate them to quit the defense of the Parapets: And in the middle Story
he places a Bridge, one end whereof being laid upon the Wall, and the other
remaining fixed within the Tower, Bands of armed men passed safely over, and
then, says our Author, Illi^o capta est Vrbs, Immediately the Town was taken.
But he is mistaken, for Towns have been defended, when Turris Vegetiana three
stories high.
all these things were done. This is the Moving Tower, which is called Turris
Vegetiana. If this Tower of his be wonderful enough, what shall we say of those
Towers which were one hundred and twenty Cubits high, that is, one hundred and
eighty foot, and sixty or seventy foot broad, in which might Towers twenty
stories high.
be eighteen or twenty several stages or stories, and every one of these
capable to contain Balists and Catapults, and men to manage them, besides armed
Soldiers to handle their Weapons. Or what shall we think of that Tower whereof
Livy speaks in his thirty second Book, which one of the Roman Consuls made of
several stories, out of which (you must suppose by Bridges) he sent whole
Cohorts of Legionaries, one to sustain and relieve another, against a
Macedonian Phalange, that stood in Battle ready to receive them within the
Walls; and we are to believe, that the Roman Cohorts at that time were about
five hundred strong, and yet the Macedonians made the place good against them
all. The same Author tells us of another Tower, A stupendous Tower.
which Hannibal made at Saguntum, in which he had numbers of armed men, besider
his great Machines. Steuechius tells us, that Vitruvius, Master of the
Machines, or General of the Artillery, writes of a Moving Tower, which weighed
three hundred and sixty thousand pounds, not reckoning the Men, Arms, and
Engines that were within it: And that it could resist the force of Stones shot
out of Balists of three hundred and fifty pound. But that which is more
admirable than all I have yet said, is, what the same Vitruvius writes of an
Engineer, who made a Counter-machine within a Besieged* Town, by which An
Incredible Engine.
he drew one of the Besiegers Ambulatory Towers, within the Walls of the
beleaguered Town. Let me say here with Ovid, Si sit credenda vetustas.

These Moving Towers were composed of great Beams, Joysts, Rasters, and Boards,
covered with Raw Hides, and some of them were faced with Iron. They moved on
many Wheels, which were pushed forward below with How the Tower moved.
the strength of many men, assisted with Leavers; the Tower was open behind,
that it might more conveniently be thrust forward by those numbers of men
ordained for that purpose. Before it went many Mantlets, Vines, and Moscles,
full of armed Soldiers, who were both to make way for it, and to defend it
from those, who might sally out to burn or destroy it. It was sometimes drawn
by Beasts of Carriage, but these had Machines before and about them, to defend
them from the Darts and Arrows of the Besieged* This last part being neglected
by Vti^ King of the Goths, when he besieged Rome, the famous Bellisarius, who
was within the City, suffered the Tower to come pretty near the Walls, and then
caused to be killed the Beasts with Darts and Arrows; this made the Tower stand
still, and so rendered all its preparations (which were very costly)
ineffectual, and the Fabric it self contemptible and ridiculous to the
Besieged.

Several means were used to frustrate the effects of this dreadful Machine; How
it was opposed.
these were, First, A Desperate Sally, by which the Besiegers guards being
beaten from the Tower, it self became a prey, and was easily burnt. Secondly,
They used to undermine the ground, which the Tower was to traverse (and that
was soon seen and perceived) before it approached the Walls, and that indeed
was a sure way, for the vast weight of it, not having ground to support it,
would quickly make it sink, and stick fast. Thirdly, They used to make such a
Tower within the Walls, and oppose it to that without. This was, no doubt, a
good help, but a very costly one. And Lastly, They endeavored to burn them
with Wild Fire, or Fiery Arrows.

Sometimes these Ambulatory Towers were made with that Artifice, that when one
of them approached the Wall, whose height the Tower seemed not Turricul^*
to surmount, suddenly a smaller Tower (which was hidden within the greater
one) of one or two stories high, was elevated with Scrues, to the great terror
and astonishment of the Besieged City.

I told you in the fourth Chapter of the Grecian Militia, that Demetrius could
not be the first Inventer of the Moving Tower, (though it be very The Moving
Tower of an* Ancient practice.
probable, he has added much to it) for his Fathers Master made use of one of
them at Gaza, and Curti^s in his Second Book says, that Alexander had one of
them at the Siege of Mazacus in India, which seemed so wonderful to the
Barbarians, that they thought some Deity, or more than humane strength did
assist that Magnanimous Prince. One of these Towers which Julius Caesar erected
against a Town of the Nervians, (if I mistake not) wrought a contrary effect,
for the Defendants laughed and flouted at it, as a thing made to no purpose,
since it could not hurt them at such a distance, till they saw it begin to move
toward their Walls, and then they began to have other thoughts.

All these Machines were ordinarily made in the place where they were to be
used, but if the Generals conceived that at the Towns they intended to besiege,
they could not be accommodated with things requisite for these Fabrics, then
they carried all the materials along with them, on Camels, Mules, Horses,
Carts, and Wagons; As the Great Turk carries his Metal with him, till he come
where he intends to make use of Ordnance, and there he causes them to be
founded.

Besides all these ways spoken of for expugnation of Towns, the Ancients made
frequent use of Mines; this the Romans called Cuniculos agere, because Mines
resemble the digging of Rabbets; neither did the Besieged in those Mines.
times want the knowledge to find out Mines, and provide Counter-mines against
them. The way of Mining they used, and we still do, is all one, except that
they wanted the springing of Mines by Gunpowder, and therefore the use they
made of Mines produced a twofold effect. First, The Mine First effect of the
Ancients Mine.
being brought within the Town, without taking notice of the Walls, Soldiers
suddenly issued out, and run to the Ports to open them, and so make way for the
Besiegers to enter, and at that time ordinarily Alarms were given to all
quarters, that the Besiegers might be diverted, and not suffered to observe the
Sally of those who were entered the Town by the Mine: Such a Mine, and the
effect of it, Hannibal had at Saguntum. Secondly, When they had made large
Second effect.
Chambers in the Walls, they under-propt them with logs of dry Timber, and
having laid store of combustible matter beside them, so soon as the Army was
ready to storm, Fire was put to the Train, and the supporters being burnt, the
Wall immediately fell, over the ruins whereof the Besiegers entered. And this
effect had the Great Alexanders Mine at Gaza. Aeneas tells us of a Mines how
discovered.
Shield of Brass used in his time to discover Mines, ^or if it were placed
directly above the place where the Miners were working, it would utter a sound;
later times have found a Drum and Dice upon it, or a Basin of Pease or Beans
serve the turn as well.

The same Aeneas, an old Grecian Tactick, advises against all manner of Aeneas
his Sails.
the Ancient approaches to Besieged places, to hang up great Sails within the
Walls, which he will have to serve for three uses. First, For Blinds, that what
is done within, may not be seen by those without, a thing ordinarily practiced
in our Modern Wars. Secondly, That all the Darts and Arrows that are cast or
shot, even from the Moving Towers, may be received in these Sails, where
sticking all the day long, they can do no hurt, and at night may be taken out,
and thrown or shot back to the Enemy. This would be useless against our
Bullets. Thirdly* They were notable Defenses against Fiery Arrows, shot
ordinarily to fire Houses thatched with Straw or Reeds.

But indeed, there is no such solid or sure defense against all manner of
Approaches and Mines, against all Machines and Engines of the Ancients, and
Batteries of Modern Artillery, as that which the same Author Aeneas speaks of,
and that is, a Double Wall, and a Double Ditch. For the first, being long, and
well defended, the second imposes a necessity on the Besiegers to begin new
Approaches, new Batteries, and new Mines. But if the place be Countermures or
Retrenchments.
not doubly fortified, then he advises the Besieged to make a Counter-mure
within that part of the Wall, against which the Assailants make their Battery.
The same is done still, or should be done in all besieged places. It is that we
call a Retrenchment, and the Germans an Absuerd. It was by this the Plataeans
kept out the long Siege of their Town against the Lacedaemonians, till hunger
made them yield to their merciless Enemy: And hereby did the Samians frustrate
all the means the Roman Consul used for the expugnation of their City, with
Catapults, Rams, and Moving Towers, till Famine forced them to submit to his
cruel pleasure. Concerning Mines, Countermures, or Retrenchments, you may see a
little more in the twenty fourth Discourse of the Modern Art of War.

CHAP. V. Of the Military Exercises, Duties, Burdens, Marches, and Works of
the Roman Soldiers.
THE Roman Soldiers being Levied, and Armed, and having sworn Fidelity, we are
in the fourth place to see how they were Trained and Exercised. And First, We
will take all the help Vegeti^s vouchsafes to give us: And assuredly, you will
think he speaks very fully of all manner of Exercise, The sum of what Vegetius
says of Exercise.
when I tell you, that he has bestowed upon that affair alone eleven full
Chapters of his First Book, to wit, the 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18,
and 19 Chapters, wherein oftener than once, he tells us one thing twice over*
And, as if he had forgot that he spent so much Time and Ink on that subject in
his First Book, he falls to it de novo in the twenty third Chapter of his
Second Book, which he entitles De Exercitati^ne Militum. But for all this, he
has not done the third part of the work that might in reason have been
expected from him; which you will believe to be true, when I have told you all
he says of that matter, and all I inform you of concerning it out of other
Authors. That which Vegetius says of the Roman Exercises in all those
Chapters, is briefly this: That the Latin word Ex^rcitus, an Army, is derived
ab exercendo, from Exercising: That the Tyrones, or raw Soldiers were Trained
in the Campus Martius, Mars his Field, which lay near the Tiber, in which (when
they were weary of their Land exercises) they washed themselves, and learned to
Swim, a thing very incumbent for a Soldier to practice, because, says
Swimming.
he, Armies have not always the convenience of Bridges, and must, in that case,
when they either follow or retire from an Enemy, swim Rivers. Before Vegetius
go further, I must remember him of two things: First, that Campus Martius got
but that name after the Tarq^^nes were banished out of Rome, for it belonged to
them in propriety; and at the time of their leaving the City was a Corn-field,
as Livy tells us. Now certainly the Romans had their Military Exercises the
whole time of the Reigns of their seven Kings. Secondly, I say, as Swimming is
fit to be learned by all young men, especially Soldiers; so I think an Army is
in a desperate condition, when the men who compose it, are put to swim for
their safety from a pursuing Enemy, for by that shift, hardly will the tenth
man escape; nor needs a retiring Army fear much hurt from an Enemy who cannot
overtake it but by Swimming over Lakes and Rivers. But our Author proceeds, and
tells us, that an Army must be taught to march in Rank and File, that an Enemy
may take no advantage by finding it in disorder. The Romans had two kinds of a
March, the Ambulatory, Two kinds of March.
and the Cursory. By the first, they were (if so required) to march twenty
Italian miles in five hours, and by the second, twenty five in four hours, with
their full Arms, Baggage, and Burdens. Thirdly, He informs us, that the Foot
Soldier was Trained at a Stake or Pallisado of Wood, six foot long, Exercises
of the Foot.
fixed fast in the ground; he had a Target of O^^ers, and a Club or Battoon of
Wood; both of them double the weight of the Shield and Sword he was to make use
of in earnest: With these he was taught to strike a^ the Pale or Stake, as if
it had been an Enemy, to make sents and foyn^ at several parts of it, as if it
had had Head, Body, Legs and Arms; but more especially the Roman Soldier was
taught to thrust and stab with hi^ Sword, for they found that by that manner of
fence, they had the advantage of those Enemies who used ^lashing and cutting
Swords. And at the same stake they were to cast their Pil^ or Javelines. But at
other marks (namely, Sheaves of Corn or Grass) the Velites were taught to shoot
and cast their missile* Weapons; whether these were Stones or Lead, out of
Slings and Ba^^oon-Slings, Arrows out of Bows, or Darts out of their Hands.
Fourthly, The Foot were taught at these Exercises to carry burdens of sixty
pound, that being habituated, they might thereafter more easily carry their own
Arms, Provisions, Baggage, or what else they were commanded to bear. Fifthly,
The Horse men were taught to mount Wooden Horses in the Fields, if it Of the
Horse.
was Summer; but in Winter, in Houses made purposely for that use, and
thereafter to mount living Horses, at first, without Arms, but after they were
expert, they were to get on Horse back with full Arms, either at the Right or
Left side of the Horse, and as you will find hereafter, without Stirrups; and
with drawn Swords or Maces in their hands. Thrice a month, says Vegetius, by
the constitutions of Augustus and Adrian, the Veteran Armies were to be
Exercised, and to march ten miles out of their Camp, and back again that day.
And he says, that Soldiers were taught to run, leap Ditches, and to make
Ditches and Ramparts. This is the substance of all that Veg^tius delivers to us
in those mentioned eleven Chapters of his First Book. Now in the twenty third
Chapter of his Second Book, he troubles himself and his Reader with the
repetition of most of this, only he adds, that the young Soldiers* or Tyrones,
were Exercised twice a day, morning and evening, the Veterans once a day; and
this was done without intermission. So it seems what he speaks here, is meant
of Training particular Soldiers or Companies once or twice a day, and what he
said before, was of Exercising the whole Army once a month. Thus far, and no
further, we have the help of Vegetius in the matter of Training, drilling, or
Exercising.

Before I inform you further of the several kinds of the Roman Exercises, I
Burdens.
must see what Burdens the Roman Soldiers were obliged to carry in their
Marches, whether those were Ambulatory, or Cursory. And first, I believe, that
the weight of sixty pound, which Vegetius says they were bound to carry, was
meant only of their Arms, Defensive and Offensive. And I suppose, you may be of
my opinion, if you consider their heavy Head, Back, and Breastpieces, their
Greeves, Taslets, Target, and an Iron Boot, a Javeline or two, and a Sword, and
it may be, a Dagger too. And if these weighed sixty pound, what shall we say of
their Fardles, their Provisions, the Stakes and Pallisadoes they were bound to
carry, and of some utensils to make ready their meat? and these perhaps were
carried alternatively by those that belonged to one Contubernium; for if I
conjecture right, Beasts of Carriage were only allowed for carrying their Tents
and Hand-mills. Quinti^^ Cincinnatus being chosen Dictator, to lead an Army
against the Aequia^s, caused every Legionary of his Army, besides his Arms and
Baggage, to carry five Exceedingly* heavy.
days meat, and twelve Pallisadoes. It is true, his march was but short, the
Territory of Rome being then of no great extent. And yet, you will think the
Romans have been but at that time raw Boys, if you observe what follows. Scipio
Africanus the Younger (who destroyed Carthage) caused every one of his Foot
Soldiers to carry provisions for thirty days, and seven Stakes, wherewith to
Pallisado his Camp. C^sar says, that Afranius, Po^p^ys Legate in Spain, caused
his Soldiers to carry meat for twenty five days, besides Stakes. The Famous
Consul Marius intending a Reformation of the Roman Discipline (in his time
corrupted) thereby to make himself more able to overcome the Cimbrians and
Teutones, who had invaded the Roman Empire with a Deluge of men, made his
Soldiers march with such excessive Burdens, as if they had been Asses, and
thereby got them the name of Marius his Mules, Muli M^ri^n^. To march at a
running pace or trot twenty five miles in four hours so heavily loaded is truly
admirable, and if you will consider what I have said in the Ninth Chapter of
the Grecian Militia, what Burdens Philip's Macedonians carried, and how far
they marched, and observe what I say here of the Romans, you cannot but be
ready to suspend your belief. And such marches under such heavy burdens not
being now practiced, I shall not blame you to think them well near incredible,
as Louis d^ Montgomery seemed to do, when Louis de Montgomery.
he says in his French Militia, that such Soldiers not being now to be found
any where, he thinks (according to Pythagoras his Transmigration) they were
converted into the Mules and Asses of A^v^rgne. And indeed our Modern Armies
(whose heavy armed are scarce so well armed for Defense as the Roman Velites
were) do not march twenty Italian miles in one day, but with a very great loss
in the Rear, whereas the Romans marched further in five hours; Marches almost
incredible.
which was practiced by C^sar, when he marched after, and overtook the Eduans,
who had deserted them: He marched with all his Cavalry, and four Legions of his
Foot. It is true, his Soldiers carried no Baggage with them, for that was left
in the Camp with his Legate, who stayed behind, with two Legions to maintain
the Siege of Gargovia. It is written of Galba, (who was afterward Emperor)
that when he was Legate in France, he run on foot at the Emperor Caius his
Chariot the whole time that his Army marched their Cursion; which, as I have
said, was twenty five miles in the space of four hours; Galba being then forty
six years old. Vegetius says, a Roman Army marched ordinarily twenty Italian
miles in one day, and this is verified by Caesar, who calls it, Vnius Di^^
justum Iter: The just march of one day.* But The just March of one day.
if the ground were rocky, Woody, full of Marshes, or otherwise of ill
passage, then they were necessitated accordingly to take their measures, as
well as other Nations were. In Thessaly, four thousand Romans, who were sent
but as a fore-party (and were not troubled with Baggage) by the Consul Martius
Philippus, had much ado to march fifteen miles in two days, says Livy in his
Forty fourth Book. But Soldiers were undoubtedly ^as'd of those insupportable
burdens, when this very strict Discipline became neglected and corrupted; and
that there were almost as many Soujats, Drudges, or Slaves in the Roman Armies,
as there were Soldiers in them: As when (the afterward Emperor) Vespasian
marched with sixty thousand men against the Rebellious Jews.

Being perfectly wearied of those terrible Burdens, I return to the exercises
of the Roman Soldiers, and these I find divided into three kinds. The first
is, of those who were peculiarly and properly called Military Exercises; the
second, of those duties the Soldiers owed to their Superior Officers; and the
third, of their work and fatigue.

The Exercises properly called Military, were of seven sorts. First, To march
First kind of Military Exercises.
or run in full Arms twenty, or twenty five miles in four or five hours time.
Secondly, To leap over Ditches. Thirdly, To swim Rivers, at which Julius C^sar
was excellent. Fourthly, to skirmish or fight with Sword and with Target,
heavier than ordinary ones. Fifthly, To lance and throw Darts and Javelines.
Sixthly, To throw Stones at a mark, either with the Hand, Sling, or
Batton-Sling. Seventhly, To mount or dismount a Horse on any side, in full
Arms, with Swords or Maces in their hands, and without a Stirrup: The last
Vegetius forgot, yet of all these sorts he has made mention.

The Second kind of Exercises was of those Duties and Services the Soldiers
Second kind.
owed and paid to their Officers and Commanders, beside the public duties
they owed to the State. These were to set up their Tents and Pavillions, to
make convenient places for their Servants, Necessaries and Baggage, and
sometimes to empale them round about, to keep all places about their Lodgings
and the Streets likewise clean from mire, dirt, or dust, and (if they were to
encamp for any time) to lay the ground with Sand, and much more of this nature.
These services all Soldiers were bound to perform, except such, who for some
reasons, were exempted and freed from all public duties, and were only bound
to fight, and wait on the Consuls. Those who had no exemption were called
Munifices, Duty-doers. There are some who say, that the Triarii were free from
these duties, and particular services to Officers; and full well it might be
so, since they were bound to look to the Horses of the Cavalry, and therefore
in Encamping were constantly quartered beside them, as you will see in my
discourse of their Castrametation. But from other public works they were not
free, for they fortified the Camp; which both Paulus Aemilius and C^sar
testified, when they made the Triarii fortify with Spade and Mattock, while
they faced the Enemy with the Hastati and Principes.

The third kind of a Roman Soldiers Exercise was work and labor, which Third
kind.
in our Modern Armies is not so unusual, as Lipsius would make it, as shall be
demonstrated against him in its proper place. Indeed, there were not such
creatures as Pioneers known in the old Roman Armies, all was wrought by the
Soldiers themselves; yea, some write, that their Velites were not admitted to
work, as unworthy to be employed in a service of so much reputation, and so it
seems, it was a Maxim with them diametrically contrary to ours, which was, The
greater Fatigue, the greater Honor. Of these public works there were many
kinds, these were, the Cutting, Carrying and Squaring Turf and Sods, Stakes and
Pallisadoes for their Camps, Castles, Towns, Forts, and Sconces, the fortifying
all of these, working and digging at the Approaches, and expugnation of Forts
and Towns, the making and managing great Engines, Mining, Countermining, making
Retrenchments or Countermures, cutting deep Ditches and Channels of a very
great length, building Magazines, Amphitheatres, and other huge and vast
Edifices, and all these with many more, not only in time of War, but of the
calmest Peace, when no necessity could be pretended for them, and those not so
much for the ornament of Countries and Provinces, (though that was likewise
taken into consideration) as to inure the Soldiers to toil, and to keep them
habituated to it, that when they were necessitated to fatigue in earnest, they
might find it easy, as that which was no new thing to them; and they found
that this labor procured to the Soldiery both health and strength. Suetonius
says, that Galba, before he was Emperor, Veteranum and Tyronem militem assiduo
^pere corroboravit; He strengthened both his old and raw Soldiers with daily
work and labor. And Scipio the lesser, kept his Army constantly at hard work
at the Siege of Great fatigue.
Numantia, where he frequently told his Soldiers, That he who would bathe his
hands in the blood of his Enemies, must first soil them with dirt and mire. It
must be observed, that the Romans fortified their Camps with their Swords at
their sides, as we read in Sacred History Nehemiah did, and made the Jews do,
when they rebuilt the Walls of Jerusalem. We read, that Corbulo, a great
Captain, and Reformer of decayed discipline, put two of his Soldiers Severe
Discipline.
to death, because he found them working at a Rampart, the one without either
Sword or Dagger, the other with a Dagger, but without a Sword. The same Corbulo
being commanded by his Tyrannical Master Nero, to make Peace with the Germans,
lest his Army should languish with idleness, caused them to cut a Ditch three
and twenty Italian miles long, between the Rivers of the Maes and the Rhine;
for it was a rule with them, That labor hardens and corroborates, whereas
idleness weakens and effeminates; the truth whereof is taught us by experience.

But truly, who will rightly consider the stupendous works of the Romans, made
by a few men, and in a short time, may (as one observes) say, they were those
Giants, who, as the Poets feign, cast one Mountain on another, so to climb up
to Heaven. For not to speak of their building Temples, Theaters, Castles,
Towers and Baths, their draining Marshes, cutting out Channels, Causeying
ways, and Paving streets, all which are the works of Peace, Who can read
without admiration, of their Works and Fortifications in the time of War, as
particularly either Caesar's Circumvallations at Alesia, Caesar's
Circumvallations.
which he made both exceedingly broad and high, wonderfully strong with Towers
and Castles, well Pallisadoed both before him and behind him, the first to
besiege Vercengentorix within the Town, the second to defend himself against
the united force of all the Gauls, who he knew were preparing to come and raise
the Siege, a work of sixteen miles circumference; or those works of his at
Dirrachium, whereby he had almost besieged Pompey, both stronger, and better
provided than himself. Spinola his Circumvallations at Breda in the years
Spinola's.
1625 and 1626, gives us ground enough to believe those of Great Caesar to be
true. But methinks the Nervians far surpassed them all, who (as you have it in
Caesar's Fifth Book of the French War) having learned something of Fortification
from some Prisoners or Fugitive Romans, besieged Cicero, one of Caesar's
Legates, in his Winter quarter, where they made a Circumvallation of fifteen
miles circumference, the Rampart eleven foot high, and the Ditch fifteen foot
broad or deep, without the help of any Tools, except their Swords, (wherewith
they cut the Turf and Sods) and their Head-pieces and Hands, wherewith they
cast up the Earth, and all this in the space of three hours. An action so far
beyond humane strength, that it would far surpass all possibility of belief, if
it were not warranted by the downright relation and authority of so renowned
an Author, and an eyewitness.

The Roman Novitiates or Tyrones were taught t their Military Exercises,
properly so called, by those who were named Campi Doctores, as Vegetius calls
them right, and not Campi Ductores, as Ste^echius (who comments on Vegetius)
misnames them, for they who taught them their Exercises were indeed their
Masters, so long as they stayed with them, but were not their Officers and
Commanders. They were as our Drill masters in Towns or Counties, and Campi
Doctores Drill-masters.
had twice as much Pay and Proviant as the common Soldier, which was indeed as
much as the Centurion had. After the Legions marched from Rome, every File was
Drilled and Trained by its Leader, who was called Decanus, and Caput
contubernii, because a whole File was lodged in one Tent or Hut: And Decanus, a
File leader.
this Decanus was also to have the inspection of their Arms, that they were
kept bright, clear, and sharp; and of their clothes, that they were kept in
good order; for all which he had some small allowance more than the Common
Soldier. I shall conclude this Discourse of Exercises, with what Josephus says
of them: The Roman Exercises in Arms are (says he) Battles without Blood, and
their Battles are Exercises with Blood.

Observe here, that Polybius speaks not one word of any of these three kinds of
Exercises, and Vegetius nothing of the second kind.

CHAP. VI. Of the Roman Infantry, and all its several Bodies, and their
Officers.
HOW the Ancient and Illustrious Romans divided their Foot into heavy and
light, and how both were Armed, I have sufficiently informed you. But there are
some who say, they had no light armed Foot, till Hannibal's time, I know no
authority for this. It is true, Livius says in his twenty sixth Book, that at
the Siege of Capua, when it stood for Hannibal, was the first time that the
Roman light armed Foot were mingled with the Horse; but this will not infer,
that the Romans had no light armed Foot before that Siege of Capua. The truth
of that affair was this: The Capuans at their Sallies ordinarily worsted
Velites mixed with Horse.
the Roman Horse, till one Navius, a Centurion, made a proposition, that in
such Rencounters the Horsemen should take Darters on the croups of their
Horses, which was done. Now when the Besieged Sallied, and came up to the Roman
Horse, the Velites alighted, and run before the Horsemen, throwing their
Darts, (whereof they were ordered to have seven) at the Enemy, and then retired
to their own Horse, having done (as may be supposed) so much mischief to the
Hannibalians, and brought them into such disorder, that the Roman Horse often
had a cheap Market of them. Navius might well have been the first Roman that
thought of this way of fight of Horse and Foot mixed together, but it was
practiced long before his time by the Great Alexander, and others. And Caesar
bears witness, that long after Navius, Ari^vistus, King of the Germans used and
practiced it, who learned it not from Navius, or any other Roman in the world.
Lipsius thinks, that in Caesar's time, there were no Velites, and I am content
to be of his opinion, for though it be certain enough, that when Caesar lived,
there were in the Roman Armies, Slingers, Darters, and Archers, (all which were
Velites) yet it may be said, these were but Auxiliaries; for after the Socii,
or Allies, were made Burgesses of Rome, and that Rome it self was Mistress not
only of all Italy, but many other places of the World, and so could for her
Money get Mercenaries when she pleased, it is probable, the Romans made no
election but of heavy armed or Legionaries. But the reason Lipsius gives for
his opinion will not prove the thing; it is this: Caesar sometimes interlin'd
his Cavalry with Antesignani, now these were heavy armed, therefore he had no
Velites; but this will not follow; for why might not the heavy armed Foot fight
among the Horse, as well as the Horse many times were brought to fight among
the heavy armed Foot, for that depended on the Consuls pleasure, to bring some
Foot from the Battle to the Wings, or some Horse from the Wings to the Battle,
a thing frequently practiced.

These Velites had their denomination a Velocitate, from Swiftness. In time of
Service or Battle, they were sometimes employed in the Rear, sometimes Velites
where marshalled.
in the Flanks, but for most part in the Van; and when they were over-master'd,
they retired to the intervals of the Legionaries. Some apprehend, that in their
Retreat they divided themselves into three Bodies, the first behind the
Hastati, the second behind the Principes, and the third behind the Triarii. But
assuredly they are mistaken, for after the Velites had quitted the field, the
heavy armed began the Combat, first the Hastati, and they being worsted,
retired to the Principes, but this they could not do feasibly, if a Body of
Velites stood between them and the Principes, nor could the Principes retire to
the Triarii, if another Body of Velites stood between them: And therefore I
think I have reason to conclude, that when the Velites were beaten out of the
field, they retired straight to the Rear of the Triarii, through the direct
intervals of all the three Classes of the heavy armed, and there attended the
Consuls further pleasure. Yet if you look on any Figure of a Legion, you shall
ordinarily see the Velites drawn up in three distinct Bodies, behind the three
several Batallions of the Legionaries, which might have been done when they
were marshalled, before the Fight began; but for the reason I have spoke of,
could not be after they had fought, and retired. They fought a la disbandad,
How they fought.
keeping no Rank or File, nor had they peculiar Officers, as the Grecian light
armed Foot had. Several fancy, nay positively affirm, they were to obey the
commands of the Centurions of those heavy armed Maniples, behind whom they were
ordered to stand, when the Army was marshalled. It is not pity, that neither
Polybius nor Vegetius would clear us of these doubts, considerable enough,
since they concern so considerable a member of the Ancient Roman Armies? And
since Lipsius, Terduzzi, and the Lord Preissa^, magisterially take By whom
Commanded.
upon them to marshal them in three distinct Bodies, and to be commanded by the
Centurions that stood in the Van of the Maniples of these Legionaries drawn up
before them; is it fair dealing in them, not to tell us who commanded these
Velites, when they were skirmishing, and fighting in the Van of the Hastati,
and when all the Centurions of the heavy armed were obliged to stay behind, and
attend their charges, in their several Maniples and Cohorts?

The Body of the heavy armed Infantry was composed of three several Classes,
those were, the Hastati, the Principes, and the Triarii.

The first Class was of the Hastati, who were, as I told you before, the
Hastati.
youngest in the election, and for most part Novitiates. I find no difference
of their Arms from those of the Principes, and what those were, I have told you
in the third Chapter, to which henceforward I constantly remit you, as to the
matter of Arms. But I conceive they had their name of Hastati, ab Hasta, that
is, a Spear, which probably they have carried in the Reigns of some of their
Kings; and though afterward they came to change their Weapon, yet they still
retained their name. These Hastati made the first Batallion, whatever Vegetius
say to the contrary, as shall be sufficiently demonstrated, when I come to
examine his Legion. The second Class was of the Principes, Principes.
who were the strongest and lustiest men, and had most of them served formerly,
and were in the strength of their age, and had their denomination,
peradventure, because they were the principal men for strength and vigor;
these made the second Batallion of the Legion. The third Class was of the
Triarii: Lipsius thinks they were called so, quasi Tertiarii, because they made
the third Triarii.
Batallion. I think the Etymology is far fought, but it is fit I admit it,
because I cannot give a better. Yet it is certain that their more ancient name
was Pilani, and their whole Body or Squadron was called Pilus, no doubt, Called
Pilan;
from Pilum the Javeline; and if so, then it is more than probable, that in
older times, neither the Hastati, nor the Principes carried Javelines, because
both of them in History are called Antepilani. In Polybius his time, the
Triarii carried no Javeline at all, and yet even then they kept their old name
of Pilani. All the difference of Arms that I find between them and the other
two Classes, both before, and in Polybius's time, is, that the Triarii carried
a short Spear, which they called Hastile, of nine foot long, and I have told
you in the Carried short Spears.
third Chapter, that the Pilum or Javeline, by Polybius his own description,
was near seven foot long. Why these short Spears were given them instead of
Javelines, Authors tell us not. Lipsius makes a conjecture, which in my opinion
is a very sorry one. He says, the Triarii being placed in the Rear of the
other two Batallions, their Javelines could have done them no service against
an Enemy at so great a distance. What a pitiful Reason is this? For the Triarii
were not bound to fight with either Javeline, short Spear, or any other Weapon,
till either the Principes and Hastati retired to them, or that they themselves
were brought up to the Van; and in any of these two cases, Javelines would have
served them to as good purpose, as they did the two Batallions marshalled
before them. And if these short Spears served the Triarii better when they came
to fight, than the Javelines, then they should likewise have served the other
two Classes better than the Javeline, and so the Pilum, or Javeline, should
have been laid aside as useless. And therefore, I think, Lipsius here has not
hit the mark. To me, it would rather seem, that in a Why they carried not
Javelines.
medley, when perchance an Enemy vigorously pursued the Principes, the Triarii
could not, without wronging their Friends (who were retiring) cast their
Javelines with so much advantage, as they could manage these short Spears. In
the Country now called Lombardy, then Gallia Cisulyi^^, the Roman Consuls,
Furius and Flaminius, met with a numerous Army of the Cisalpine Gauls, these
carried terrible long and heavy Swords, to avoid the fury whereof, the Romans
thought it fit to take the short Spears from the Triarii, and give them to the
Hastati, that either with them they might keep the Enemy at a distance, or
while the Gauls were slashing at those short Spears, and that their Swords (for
their weight not very manageable*) were at the ground, the Hastati with their
short Swords might get within them; and this succeeding as it was projected,
gained the Romans the Victory, as Polybius in his Second Book tells us. I would
he had told us too, whether these Hastati made use both of their own Javelines,
and the short Spears of the Triarii, which is not improbable; or if they
exchanged Weapons for that day. But here give me leave to ask Polybius,
Vegetius, L^psius, Terduzzi, and all others Observation.
who tenaciously prefer the Roman Arms to all others of the World, Whether a
long Grecian Spear of eighteen foot, would not have done better service against
the Gauls, than either a Javeline or a short Spear? Or if a Mac^donian
Phalange, strongly armed, carrying Pikes of one and twenty foot long, would
have much valued or feared the long and heavy Swords of these Cisalpine
Barbarians.

These Triarii were the eldest and most experimented of the Roman Foot, and
therefore were kept for the last Reserve, not at all fighting, if the other two
Bodies beat the Enemy, but if those were beaten, or ordered to retire, (as
sometimes they were) then they arose, and made a fresh and furious onset, and
if that prevailed not, the safety of the Army depended either on their Flight;
or on a fair and orderly Retreat. Hence in desperate cases they used to say,
Vsque ad Triari^s perventum est* History tells us, that while others were
fighting, the Triarii rested themselves, till the Consul or General gave
Triarii rest.
them either an Order or a Sign to rise. But in what posture they rested,
whether they kneeled or sat; or if they kneeled, whether they did it on one
knee or both; or if on one knee, whether on the Right or the Left, is not to me
very clear. Vegetius, in the twentieth Chapter of his first Book, seems to say
on But how, is a question.
both knees, genibus posu^s, are his words, and indeed this was the easiest
way. In the sixteenth Chapter of his second Book, he makes them kneel but on
one knee, and this, I believe, is the truest. But in the fourteenth Chapter of
his third Book, to my thinking, he makes them fit, which, I suppose, could not
be true at all, for at that posture they could not with any convenience make a
Pent-house of their Shields, which both he and Polybius say, and which Reason
teaches, they were bound to do, to save themselves from the Enemies missiles.

There is no doubt, the Triarii did often recover the honor of the day, when
it was well near lost. When Lucius Furius was well beaten by the Volscians
Ordinarily the Triarii kept for the last Reserve.
at Satricum, Livy tells us in his sixth Book, that Furius ^amillus advanced
seasonably with his Triarii, charged gallantly, and obtained the Victory. The
Latins after an obstinate fight at V^suvius, had fair hopes of Victory, when
they had wholly defeated the Lest Wing of the Roman Army, and in it killed the
Con^ul Decius, and forced both the Hasta^^ and Principes to give ground on the
Right hand: But Manlius with his Triarii fell freshly upon them, and recovered
the Battle. Polybius in his Second Book says, The Triarii were not only kept
for the last Reserve on the Land, but at Sea likewise in their Naval Battles.
Yet were they not always left for the last, for at or near Capua, the Consul
Petilius perceiving by the extent of the Samnites Army, that they intended to
out-wing him, (a danger to which most of the Roman Armies were obnoxious) did
not stay till the Hastati and Principes had fought, but presently called up
both the Principes and Triarii to the Van, and of them making a large But not
always.
Front, by a furions charge of all his three Bodies marshalled in Breast,
routed his Enemy. Neither do I make any doubt, but those six Cohorts which
Caesar called up to the Front of his Army at Pharsalia, were Triarii, for he
says, he called them ex ter^i^ agmine, out of the third Batallion. He did it to
assist his Horse against Pompey's Cavalry, which far surpassed his in number,
and to these Cohorts himself attributes the Victory. And if he had nor called
them up before the fight begun, but delayed (according to the ordinary custom)
till his Hastati and Principes had retired, perhaps he should have made use of
them too late; but he foresaw the danger of that well enough, and prevented it.

Since the Hastati, when overpowered, were to retire to the Principes, and
both of them, when over-master'd, to the Triarii; there is no question, but in
each of these Bodies there were distances and intervals prepared, wherein to
receive one another, whether by the Retreat of the first to the second, or of
both first and second to the third, or by the advance of the second and the
third to the first. That these Intervals were, is granted by all, but what
measure or podisme of ground for any of them, is not at all punctually set down
by any, for any thing I know; an inexcusable oversight t^ but I shall speak of
them all in my Discourse of Intervals. Here I shall only take notice of two
things. First, That Machiavel errs, when he says in the Third Book of his A^t
of War, that the Error of Machiavelli.
Hastati had no Interval, but fought in one Body, Spossi and f^rmi, Thick and
close. For, if so* the Principel could not advance to their assistance, or yet
conveniently and feasibly receive them (when they retired) within their
Intervals, if they had not been marsha^l'd in smaller Bodies. I suppose this
fancy had its birth only in Machiavel's Brain, whose Head, no doubt, was full
of more hurtful notions. The second thing I am to acqu^int you with in this
place, is, that whatever distance was allowed between the Maniples or Cohorts
of the Principes, for receiving the Ha^^^ti, the double proportion of distance
must have been given between the Maniples or Cohorts of the Triarii, in regard
they were to receive both the Hastati and Principes Poly^^^s in his fifth Book
avers, that though the number of the Hastati and Principes might vary, and be
greater or lesser, according to the strength or weakness of the Legion, yet the
number of the Triarii never altered, but they were constantly six hundred. Now
in his time the number of the Principes was twelve h^ndred, and that of the
Hastati as many. Achille^ Ter^^^zzi, not adverting to what I have said of A
mistake of Terduzzi.
distances, concludes first, that the two foremost Batellions were marshalled
twelve deep, (which I will not grant him) and next, that the Triarii were drawn
up but six deep, which I would not fail to deny him, though I had granted him
the first. His reason for the last assertion is, that the Triarii being but
half the number of the other two Batallions, could not make an equal Front with
the other two, unless they were drawn up but half their depth: But he does not
take heed, that if they had made an equal Front of men with the other two, they
could not have received both the other two in their Intervals, but only one of
them, and then they had not done that, for which purposely they stood in the
third Batallion: And if he had adverted, that the Intervals, between the
Maniples of the Triarii, must have been double that which was allowed to the
other two Classes, that stood before them, he would have marshalled six hundred
as deep as he did twelve hundred, for the double distance between the several
Bodies of six hundred, made six hundred of equal Front of ground with the
twelve hundred before them: so you may easily consider that notwithstanding the
disparity of their numbers, the difference of the several Intervals made the
Front equal, (as to the ground) of all the three Batallions of Hastati,
Principes, and Triarii.

The Reason, and the only Reason why we must believe, that the Triarii Triarii
but 600 in every Legion.
were constantly six hundred, is because Polybius said it was so; but I shall
suppose, it was neither so before his time, nor yet after his time, nor does he
offer to give any reason why it was so in his time. Lipsius (who is very ready
for such things) offers to give two Reasons for it, the first whereof is stark
naught, and it is this, That the Principes came back to their assistance; but
by this argument they needed not have been so many as six hundred, because both
the Hastati and Principes came back to their assistance, and by this Reason the
Principes should have been but six hundred, because the Hastati came back to
their help, before they were obliged to fight. But his second Reason speaks And
why.
better sense, which is, That the Consul (who ordinarily stood near the
Triarii) came with the Evocati of the Romans, and the Extraordinarii of the
Socii or Allies, and joined with the Triarii. What these Extraordinarii were,
shall be told you in my Discourse of the Allies, and what the Evocati were, I
shall tell you just now.

If you will believe Lipsius, the Evocati were only of the Roman Nation, but,
Evocati what.
I think, I am obliged rather to believe Caesar, who says, he had his Evocat^
out of Gaul, and at that time of his Civil War, the Gauls were either Enemies,
or Auxiliaries at best. Those of the Evocat^ who were Romans, were such as had
served out their time, and by the Laws of their Militia, were not bound to
follow the War; yet upon the Entreaty or Letters of the Consul, Pro-Consul, or
General, came without constraint, to wait upon him or them in that expedition.
Some of them sery'd on Horse, some on Foot, and were put in Troops and
Companies, and had their Officers and Pay, but were exempted from all manner of
Military duties, except fighting, and attending on him who commanded in chief.
A great many of them went with Scipio to Africa, three thousand of them went to
Macedon with Titus Flaminius, two thousand went with Pompey against Caesar. And
Augustus in one expedition had ten thousand of them. Besides these Evocati,
there were Volunteers, Roman Volunteers.
who having served out their time, were not ordinary Soldiers, and not being
called out by the Consul, were not properly Evocati; neither had they any pay,
but went to the War merely of their own motion and free will, either to do
their Country service, or to acquire Riches or Honor to themselves and
families, or for all these three respects together.

Now, there were, besides all these Foot, which I have mentioned, some of
Proletar^i what.
the poorer sort called Proletarii, and Capite censi, that were not admitted by
Servius Tullius, King of Rome, to be enrolled for the War, but were left to
serve at Sea, which at that time was esteemed dishonorable, in comparison of
the Land service. Yet in time of danger they were bound to take Arms (which
were given them out of the public Magazines) for the defense of the Walls of
the City. But in process of time, they came to be enrolled in Legions,
particularly with Marius against the T^ut^n^s and the Cimbrians.

Livius in his eighth Book, writing of that War which the Romans had with
Rorarii and Accensi.
the Latins, mentions Rorarii and Accensi, in two several Bodies, and he
places them behind the Triarii* they were called from the Rear, according as
the Consul or General had use for them: They were the light armed Foot, and had
those names till the Romans besieged Capua, in Hannibal's time; then and there,
it seems, they got the name of Velites, and that they kept. They were called
Accensi, because they were the meanest in the Cense, and Rorarii, a rore, from
Dew, because in skirmishing they scattered themselves, as Dew does on Grass. I
shall tell you more of them in my Discourses of a Roman Legion.

Each of these three Classes of the heavy armed Foot was divided into
Centuries. Two Centuries made a Maniple, three Maniples made a Cohort, and ten
Cohorts made up a Legion. A Roman Legion was of greater or lesser Legion.
number, according to the pleasure of the King, Senate, People or Emperor, who
was invested with the Sovereignty, or as the exigency of the present condition
of affairs seemed to require. Romulus ordained it to consist of three thousand
men, one thousand of each Tribe, whereof there were but three in his time,
though afterward they came to be thirty five. Whether the Kings who succeeded
Romulus kept the Legion at three thousand Foot, I know not; but after Monarchy
was banished the City, Legions came to be four thousand strong, sometimes five
thousand, and twice, (if I mistake not) six thousand and two hundred.

Let us now speak of the several Bodies of a Legion, and first of a Century. A
Centuriate and Centurion.
At the first constitution, I doubt not, but a Centuriate consisted of one
hundred men, and its Commander was called Centurion, both the words being
derived from Centum, a hundred. But thereafter that band of men called a
Centuriate, in Legions of four thousand, or four thousand two hundred (which
was most, ordinary) came to consist but of sixty men in the two Classes of the
Hastati and Principes, and but of thirty, in the third Class of the Triarii. In
the Class of the Hastati there were twenty Centuriates, at sixty men each of
them, and those were twelve hundred. Just as many Centuriates, and of that same
number, for the Principes made twelve hundred more. In the Class of the Triarii
there were likewise twenty Centuriates, but each of these consisted but of
thirty men, which made six hundred, in all three thousand heavy armed. The
other thousand or twelve hundred were Velites. But though each of those Bands
were but sixty or thirty strong, yet they, and their principal Commander kept
their ancient denom^nations of Centuriate and Centurion. There were sixty
Centuriates in a Legion, though Vegetius speaks of but fifty five, which shall
hereafter be examined. The Centurion was chosen by the Tribune (as I formerly
told you) and he had liberty to choose his own Sub-Centurion, A Sub-Centurion.
whose station was in the Rear, and was indeed nothing but ou^ Bringer up.
Polybius his Interpreter calls the Centurions, Ordinum D^ctores, Leaders of
Files, or of Centuriates, if Ordo be taken for a Centuriate, as perhaps it was;
the Sub-Centurion he calls Agminis Coactorem, and that is directly our
Rear-man. This will not make a Centurion and Sub-Centurion to be our Captain
and Lieutenant, (as some would have them to be) and if you will be pleased to
consider that a Roman Centurion commanded but sixty, some of them but thirty
men, and was himself no otherwise armed than the rest of the Centuriate, only
distinguished by his Crest, and that he stood in Rank and File with the rest,
either on the Right or Left hand of the Front of the Maniple: I suppose, you
will think with me, that the Roman Centurions, for the matter of either Power
or Honor, were no other than our Corporals, Centurions our Corporals.
and their Sub-Centurions such as Lancespesats, especially where Foot Companies
are (as in our own time they were in several places of Europe) three hundred
strong, and consequently every Corporalship sixty men. The Centurions badge was
a Branch, Rod, or Twig of a Vine, wherewith he had power to beat or whip those
of his Centuriate as they deserved. It is not half an age since a Corporal used
to carry a Musket-rest in his hand, wherewith he might beat those of his
Corporalship according to their Misdemeanors. Neither will the matter of Profit
or Pay make any difference between them, the Roman Centurion having but double
allowance of either Wages, Proviant, or Donatives of what the common Soldier
had, and so have our Corporals in all or most of our Modern Armies. Polybius
informs us, that the Centurion might nominate his Sub-Centurion, that in case
he should dye in Battle, the other should succed him; and by this it should
seem, that so long as the Centurion lived, the Sub-Centurion had no command at
all. But we do not Sub-Centurion his rise.
at all read of Sub-Centurion till before that great Battle was fought between
the Romans and the Latins, that a Roman Centurion, who was of a weak Body,
knowing he was to encounter with a Latin Centurion who was strong, desired to
have one joined to him as his helper or Sub-Centurion, to assist him, as Livy
at great length relates the story in his eighth Book; and this, it may be, gave
the rise to that despicable Office of a Sub-Centurion, who is called an Option
by Vegetius; a word, I do not remember to have read in any other Author, except
once in Polybius. The Tribunes very often used their Centurions as we do our
Marshals and Proforces of Companies, and worse, in causing them to lead the
Malefactors out of the Camp, and there either see them put to death, or do it
themselves. After Julius Caesar had usurped the State, his Centurions sometimes
Hang-men.
Successors, the Emperors, used their Centurions directly as their Hang-men,
in causing them to put to death with their own hands, such as they in their
Arbitrary Government had ordained to dye. So one of them with his own hand
killed the Empress M^ssalina, not by the Emperor Claudius his command, but by
the direction of his freed Bond-slave Narcissus. Another of them assisted at
the horrid murder of the Empress Agrippina, after he had basely struck her
over the head with a Battoon. Every Centuriate had a Banner or Colors, and the
Ensign-bearer was chosen by the Centurion; nor can I find, that this
Ensign-bearer was any distinct Officer, but only some one of the common
Soldiers, whom for his Courage and Strength the Centurion entrusted with the
Ensign; for his Command was none at all, and his profit as little, being no
otherwise paid than as other Soldiers were, only he was a step nearer
preferment than they.

Two Centuriates made a Maniple, so called from a wisp or handful of Hay, tied
A Maniple.
to a long Pole, which perhaps was the first Ensign that ever Romulus carried.
The Maniple had no particular Commander, the oldest Centurion commanded the
Right hand Centuriate, and the youngest the Left hand one. The Maniple had two
Ensigns, one for each Centuriate. And this Lipsius (convinced by History)
acknowledges in the first Dialogue of his fourth Book of his Commentary on
Polybius, yet in the third Dialogue of that same Book, he seems to allow but
one Ensign to the Maniple. But he does worse, for in the third Dialogue of his
second Book (speaking of that passage in Livy's eighth Book, where he makes
three Ensigns to be in one Maniple, made up of Triarii, Rorarii, and Accensi)
Lipsius says it might be so; for, says he, there may be Colors where there
is no Commander, whereof the Rorarii and Accensi had none. This is strange
Doctrine, Colors without Commanders. But observe more, that notwithstanding
the Authority of Livius, Polybius and Vegetius, who give an Ensign to every
Centuriate, Lipsius in the eighth Dialogue of his second Book, declares his
opinion to be, that a Maniple consisting of two Centuriates, had but one
Ensign. In what Roman Authors he Lipsius will allow but one Ensign for a
Maniple. His Reasons examined, and answered. First.
has read this I know not, but I am confident he saw neither of the two
practiced in his own Country, during the whole Wars between the King of Spain,
and the Estates of the Netherlands, which began a little before he began to
write. But it is fit we hear and answer the Reasons, wherewith he endeavors to
confirm his opinion: First, He cites Varro, who mentions but one Signum, or
Banner, in one Maniple. It is answered, That Varro in that place intended not
to inform us, whether there were two Ensigns or one, in the Maniple, that not
being the subject or matter of his discourse; and therefore when he spoke of
one, he did not deny but there might be two. Secondly, Second.
says Lipsius, Since there was but one Eagle in the Legion, there should be
but one Banner in the Maniple. Truly, he might as well have said but one Banner
in the Cohort, the Analogy would have held as well, if not better. It was the
Romans plreasure to have but one Eagle in every Legion, and one Colors in
every Centuriate, and the question is de re gesta, of the thing done, and not
of the causes and reasons of the deed it self. Thirdly, he says, Polybius
speaks of Third.
two Signiferi, or Ensign-bearers, but not of two Ensigns. Neither does that
which Lipsius adds, help him, that he thinks, the one Ensign-bearer was to
relieve the other when he was wearied. To the first part of this Reason, I say
it is of no force; for when Polybius said, there were two Ensign-bearers, he
said in these words, There were likewise two Ensigns. For if Lipsius should
say, In one Brigade there are two Colonels, would not any man infer, That there
were two Regiments in that Brigade. To the second part, That the one
Ensign-bearer served to relieve and ease the other; it is but a conjecture of
Lipsius, and he guesseth not always right. For why should there be two
Ensign-bearers for one Ensign, since there was but one Eagle bearer for one
Eagle, which was much heavier, and of more consequence than an ordinary banner.
Fourthly, he tells us that when Casar beat Pompey at Pharsalia, ^ourth.
he took nine Eagles, that is, says he, one for every Legion, but he took only
one hundred and eighty Ensigns; now, says Lipsius, if there had been two
Colors in every Maniple, he should have taken five hundred and forty of them.
I wonder why so grave a Man as Lipsius, would propose so ridiculous an
argument; for first Casar got not all Pompey's Eagles, for himself writes, that
Pompey had one hundred and ten Cohorts, these made up eleven complete Legions,
but Casar got but nine Eagles, and so he wanted the two belonging to the other
two Legions; and if he had got all the Ensigns that belonged to those nine
Eagles, (reckoning two Ensigns to every Maniple) he had got no fewer than five
hundred and forty, or yet (according to Lipsius his own account, reckoning but
one Banner to every Maniple) if he had got all, he should have got just two
hundred and seventy, yet Casar declares he got no more than one hundred and
eighty. What will follow upon all this, but that all the rest of the Ensigns
escaped, as well as the two Eagles, or that they were torn or destroyed by the
Bearers, as is usual in our own times for Ensigns to do. But he concludes, that
whatever the Maniples* of the Principes and the Hastati had, yet each Century
of the Triarii had but one Color, because of their small number, but his
conjecture is ill grounded, as not agreeable to ancient story; for it being
agreed on, that thirty Men of the Triarii should make a Century, that Century
ought to have had an Ensign as well as a Century of either the Hastati or
Principes, which, according to Polybius, consisted of sixty Men, and according
to Vegetius, of one hundred Men. And we see the like All Centuria^es had
Colors.
practice in our Modern Companies of Foot, which are ordained to be but of one
hundred a piece, they have Colors as well as Companies of one hundred twenty
six, or one hundred forty eight Men, or others of full three hundred Men.

I hope, if I question the truth of some things, which Lipsius avers either
here, or afterward, it shall not be esteemed arrogance in me, for I reverence
the memory of that great and learned Man, but it will, I suppose, be granted
Apology of the Author.
me, that he might easily err in things that belonged not properly to his
profession, though I believe, no one Man has given greater light, to the Roman
History, than he has done. In the fifth Dialogue of the fifth Book of his
Commentary, he himself gives free liberty to all Military Persons to examine
all he writes on a Military subject, provided, they be not omnium literarum and
artium rudes, that is not altogether rude, and wholly ignorant of all Learning
and Arts.

A Cohort consisted of three Maniples, but neither were these three Maniples A
Cohort.
all of one class, nor was the Cohort marshalled in one equal Batallion or
Front, but it was ordered thus: A Maniple of the Hastati, a Maniple of the
Principes, and a Maniple of the Triarii made a Cohort, and these were
marshalled so, that the Maniple of the Principes stood at a distance just
behind the Interval that was (I pray you observe it) between two Maniples of
the Hastati, and not directly behind one of the Maniples of the first class,
and the third Maniple of the Cohort, which was of the Triarii, stood directly
behind the How Marshalled.
Interval that was between two Maniples of the Principes. And to speak it once
for all, this was ever the Roman custom, of marshalling these three classes of
Hastati, Principes and Triarii; except once at Zama, where Scipio drew them up
in a direct and straight line, one just behind another, leaving one Interval
directly opposite to that, which was before it, to give way to the fury of
Hannibal's numerous Elephants, says Livius; of both his Elephants and Horse,
says Polybius: I shall neither busy my Reader, nor my self with the etymology
of the word Coh^rs, which may be a Greek word, that signifies a close or
enclosure; but I shall say, that though the centuriate was sometimes stronger,
sometimes weaker of Men, according as the Legion was appointed to be, yet still
a Maniple was the same, that is, a Band of Men consisting of two Centuriates
joined together, and a Cohort was still the same, that is, a Body composed of
three Maniples, though not joined together, till necessity forced either the
retreat or advance of some of them. And being a Legion consisted of ten
Cohorts, and the strongest Legion we read of (as to its number of Foot) was six
thousand two hundred, I admire, why in the description of the Ancient Roman
Legion, Vegetius makes his first Cohort to consist of one thousand Men and
more, and all the other nine of five hundred and Vegetius his Cohorts.
fifty apiece, whereas according to the number of his Legion, (which was six
thousand and one hundred) each Cohort should have consisted of six hundred and
sixteen Men, or thereabouts. Neither does his Commentator Steuechius defend him
well, by telling us, that there were Millenariae Cohortes, Cohorts of
thousands, for these were not Legionary Cohorts, but Bands, Batallions, or
Bodies of such Companies, Centuriates or Maniples, as the Praetor, Consul,
Imperator, or General chused and appointed to attend him in the time of War,
and were called Cohortes Pr^torian^, or Pretorian Guards, and were stronger
Pretorian Cohorts.
or weaker, more or less numerous, according to the power, or the pleasure of
the Commander in chief, and afterward they were the Guards of the Emperors, in
time both of Peace and War. The first we read of that had one of them was
Posthumous the Dictator mentioned by Livy in his second Book. The great Scipio
gathered a choice number of his friends and Dependers together, to attend him
in his Carthaginian Voyage, eased them of all Duties, but fighting, and allowed
them a third more of pay, than others had. Julius Casar had none of them.
Augustus had nine thousand of them, whom he called Emperor's Guards.
firmamentum Imperii, the firmament, and establishers of the Empire, but in
time they came to be the Electors of the Empire, the Murderers of the
Emperors, and the bane of the Commonwealth: some of them served on Horseback,
and yet still retained the name of Cohorts.

I believe Lipsius conjectures right enough, that in the time of the civil
Wars, where Armies were made up of many Legions, and these made weak by long
and continuated Marches, frequent Sieges and Battles, then I say, it is
probable, Cohorts were modeled in one Body, and used, as Maniples used to be
Cohorts marshalled as Maniples.
in more ancient times; yet for all that, I will not grant to Lipsius, that the
Cohort consisted of less than six Centuries, though they might be very weak,
nor yet will I grant, that every one of those six Centuries had not its own
Centurion, and Ensign: for as in our Modern Regiments, a Captain is still
Captain, though his Company be not twenty strong, and has Colors always, till
the Regiment is broken; so among the Romans every Century or Ordo had its
Centurion and Ensign, till the Legion was dismissed and disbanded, which was
frequently enough done.

In every Legion there were ten Cohorts, neither had a Cohort any particular
How many Cohorts in a Legion.
Commander over it, more than the Maniple had, so as yet, the Centurion was the
highest Officer, yea the only Officer in a Legion, except the Tribunes, whereof
for the most part there were six in a Legion, be the Legion of what strength it
would, yet the Legion was not divided among the Tribunes, nor had any one of
them a particular command of any part of it, but all of them, and every one of
them had the command of the whole Legion; but to shun both confusion and
contention, they commanded about a month by turns, for Polybius in his fifth
Book informs us, that two Tribunes had the command for one month alternatively;
his meaning certainly was, two Tribunes in a Consular Army, in which there were
two Legions of Romans, besides Allies, and Military Tribunes.
that is still one Tribune for every Legion, and so the Tribunes had their
turns, if it be true what Polybius supposes, that the Army staid in the Field
but six Months, and ordinarily they staid no longer, and sometimes not so long*
yet we find that sometimes they staid abroad all the Winter over, the first
practice whereof was at the Siege of V^ii, and then, no doubt, the Tribunes
took their turns of command, as they did in the Summer time. Here now, you see,
we have six Tribunes in a Legion, and but one Tribune in a Legion. The other
five had that same respect, service, and obedience paid them, with him who
commanded, and sat in the Council of War with the Consul, as well as he.

The power and authority of the Tribunes was great enough, they judged of all
causes, Civil, Criminal, and Military, but the last appeal was reserved for the
Consul, or General. They might impose pecuniary mulcta and fines, and Their
Power.
punish by defalcation of Pay, or Proviant, and by whipping likewise; yea
Polybius says, they might pass a sentence of Death, others say, not without the
Council. They received the Tessera, or Watchword from the Consul, whereof I
shall give you a more perfect account in another place. They went Their Duties.
before to see the Camp measured out, according to the form of the Roman
Castrametation, whereof hereafter.

But where these Tribunes had their Stations in the time of Battle (for sure
the other five were not idle then) neither Polybius nor Vegetius tells us one
Their station in Battle.
word; Doubtless they are to blame, for concealing that, and many other
considerable points of the Roman art of War. And here again, I am forced to
engage with Lipsius, who very frankly offers his conjecture, which is this;
That all the six Tribunes stood beside or near the Consul, and that was, says
he, beside the Eagle on the right hand of the Triarii; but if he had remembered
of some things, that no question he knew, he would not have vented this opinion
of his: For, first, the Consul could not be beside two Eagles, and Lipsius
erres in his conjecture;
therefore the Tribunes of both Legions could not be beside him. Secondly, The
Consul, as all History witnesses, was so far from being constantly at the
Eagle, that he was but very seldom beside any of the Eagles, except when he was
to lead the Triarii up to the assistance of the other two Classes, and many
times he did this by a sign, and not in Person. Thirdly, it had been great
shame for a knot of Colonels to have stood all of them beside the Triarii, when
the other two Batallions of Hastati and Principes were at hot work with an
Enemy. Now, the reason, which Lipsius gives for this guess of his, is as
extravagant as the conjecture it self, and I pray you, hear it. Because, says
he, the Tribunes in the Roman Camp quartered all very near the Praetorium, or
And in the reason of it.
Consuls Pavilion: and therefore, that in time of Battle, they should all be
beside or near the Consul, is an Inference not worthy the youngest Novitiate in
Logic: for, if this reason were valid, then all the Horsemen should have been
embattell'd in the rear beside the Triarii, because in the Camp they quartered
all beside them, as you shall hear afterward. But since guessing is in
fashion, why may not I guess too? yes, by Lipsius his permission, I think I
may. I shall lose but little. My conjecture then shall be grounded on two
undeniable truths, the first is, that the Tribunes had the command of the The
Authors conjecture.
Horse, as well as of the Foot: The second, that the Roman Horse were almost
constantly marshalled in one Wing, and for the most part, in the right Wing,
the left one being ordained for the Cavalry of the Allies, add a third truth to
the other two, that the Horse had no Officers to command them, but Decurions,
and these were Independent one of another: Let us then allow one of the six
Tribunes to command the Horse. In the next place let us order two experimented
Tribunes to stay with the Triarii, and the other two to command the Principes,
and the sixth with my consent, shall fight with the Hastati. If this conjecture
of mine please the Reader, as little as that of Lipsius pleases me, I shall
not break my heart for the matter, for I have met with greater disappointments.

As to any other Officer of the Infantry, in the old Roman Militia, I find
none. Vegetius tells us in the seventh Chapter of his second Book, of some mean
Office* bearers, who perhaps in his time had some small allowance of pay more
than ordinary: But in Polybius's time, and before it, they were nothing but
Gregarii Milites, common Soldiers; and we are now speaking of the ancient
constitutions of the Roman Militia. But with Vegetius I shall speak a word of
these meaner Office-beaters. Tesserarii, who received the word from the
Tesserarii, what. Metatores, what. Mensores, what. Clerks.
Tribunes. Metatores went before with the Tribune to measure out the Camp*
Mensores, who in the Field gave the Soldiers ground for their Huts and Tents,
and their several Lodgings in Towns and Villages, as our Quartermasters and
Fouriers do. Librarii were petty Clerks and Scriveners, who kept the accounts
of Pay, proviant, and donatives; all these in ancient times were appointed and
chosen by the Centurions, remaining still common Soldiers, and changed at
their pleasure. In that same Chapter Vegetius speaks of Ordinarii, Qui in
pralio primos ordines ducunt, who in Battle, says he, led the first orders.
But here, to me he is very obscure, for Ordines may signify Estates,
Ordinares, what.
which is not meant in this place; Ordines signifies Centuriates, and so
Casaubon in his translation of Polybius uses it, and Ordines is very often
taken for both Ranks and Files. If Vegetius had used Ordines here for
Centuriates, then assuredly he would have said the Ordinarii were the
Principes, or of them, for according to his account, the Principes made the
first Batallion, and so were Primi ordines, that is, the first Centuriates. But
if by Ordines he meant Ranks, as all along he seems to do, then his Primi
ordines, or first ranks, were nothing but File-leaders, whereof, indeed the
Centurion himself was one, and the Dignity he had, was, that he marched and
fought either on the right or left hand of his own Centuriate, as when two were
joined in a Maniple, the oldest Centurion stood on the right hand of the
Maniple, and the youngest on the left. It is there also, where the same Author
tells us, of some who were called Augustales, that were joined to these
Ordinarii, but he makes it not Augustals, what.
clear to us, what duty they did, nor could they at all belong to the Ancient
Roman Militia, having been but ordained by Augustus, from whom they had their
Denomination. The Flaviales, he says, were, tanquam secundi Augustales,
Flavials, what.
the second Augustals, being Instituted by the Emperor Flavius Vespasian, from
whom they had their name. What shall I say of these Augustals and Flavials, but
that these two Emperors, have bestowed, it may be, a little more allowance of
Pay or Bread upon some common Soldiers, than upon others, and as a mark of
their favor, have perhaps, appointed the second or third Rank to be next in
honor to the Front, or the Rear, and those who marched in them, to be called
by their names, Augustals and Flavials. Vegetius his Torquati, Torquati, what.
Simplares, and Duplares, were such as had received gold Chains, or Bracelets,
single or double, as rewards of their Valor, Virtue and good service, who
besides had many times given them a double allowance of Bread, Flesh, and Wine:
All these were nothing but common Soldiers, who enjoyed such benefits as these
we have spoke of; and perhaps were not privileged All of them common Soldiers.
from the Duties of those Soldiers, who were called Munifices, whereof I spoke
formerly. As to Vegetius his Trumpeters and Horn-winders, whereof he speaks in
that same place, I shall have a Discourse of them in a Chapter apart.

It is there likewise, where Vegetius speaks of the Creation of Tribunes,
Tribunes.
who, he says, were chosen by the Emperors, after they were vested with the
Sovereign Power, and had their authority given them per Epistolam sacram, which
I may english by an Imperial Patent, or Commission. But in my Discourse of
Election, I have shown you, who used to choose the Tribunes after the Ancient
Roman way. And in the same Chapter it is, that our Author qualifies those (whom
Livy calls Subcenturiones, and Casaubon out of Polybius, Agminis Coactores)
with the name of Optiones, they signify all one thing, and I think, Options,
what.
Bringers up: yet among these Rear-men there was one, who was chosen by the
Centurion to assist him, and this was the Sub-Centurion, our Lancespesate, if
he was so much. But I pray you, take notice how Vegetius describes these
Persons: Optiones ab optando appellati, quod antecedentibus agritudine
prapeditis, Vegetius his description of them.
tanquam adoptati eorum, atque Vicarii solent universa curare, Options, says
he, they were called from wishing, or adopting, because those who marched
before them, being hindered by sickness, they as their adopted and Vicars used
to have a care of all things. By this description, they were nothing but
Bringers up, and all Bringers up could not be Sub-centurions. And at best, the
Sub-Centurion had all his power from his Centurion, and was, as his adopted
Child to succeed him in his charge after his death, whether that happened by a
natural or a violent way. But so far as I can yet perceive, this Sub-Centurion,
this Agminis Coactor, this Optio, this adopted Child, signified nothing, nor
could officiate any way, till his Father the Centurion dyed, or at least, till
he either fell sick, or chanced to be wounded, and then this Adopted Son of his
might supply his place, as his Deputy.

I find in some Authors, that every Legion had a Physician, but whether every
Physicians and Chirurgions.
Centuriate, Maniple or Cohort, had a Surgeon, I know not, for I find
nothing of it in any Author I have read. But since nothing is more certain,
than that the Roman Soldiers and Officers were frequently wounded, and that we
read of Consuls and Dictators, who have made it a part of their work (as indeed
it was) to visit, comfort, and cherish the sick and hurt, in their Tents, and
Hutts, I think, we need not doubt, but their Armies were well provided of these
Artists, without whose help, the comfortable words of a General, nay of a
Prince, to a heavily diseased Person, could signify but little.

The Eagle was the Ensign or Banner of every Legion, it being the Arms The
Eagle.
of the Roman State, as it continues to be to the German Roman Emperors to
this day. It was carried on the top of a long Pole or Spear, and was entrusted
to the care and keeping of the first Centurion of the Legion, and that was he
who commanded on the Right hand of the Triarii, but whether he carried it
himself, or had only the inspection of it, and was to answer By whom carried.
for the loss of it, I have read no Author who clears me, nor does Lipsius
offer me any help. And therefore I shall be of the opinion, that the Centurion
who had the Command of the Legion next to the Tribunes, ought not to have been
hindered in the exercise of his function, (especially when he was both to fight
himself, and teach others how to fight) with so great a burden, as was the
Eagle, with its long Pole; and till I get better information, I shall think
that he had some other strong lusty fellow to bear it, for the defense whereof,
many Centurions at several occasions, lost their lives. I told you before, that
in ancient times the whole Batallion of the Triarii was called Pilus, and
themselves Pilani; hence it is, that the first Centurion of that Class (to whom
the Eagle was recommended) was called Primipilus, and Primipilus, and his
privileges*
was the first of the whole Legion, to which degree of honor (as being then
capable to be a Tribune) he ascended by many steps, as having been a Centurion
of, and in all the other two Classes before: He had some privileges, more than
other Centurions had; one whereof was, that he might sit in Council with the
Consul, Legates, and Tribunes. He who carried the Eagle was called Aquilifer,
or Eagle-bearer; who still, I think, could not be the Primipilus, of whom
Vegetius in the eighth Chapter of his second Book, says only Aquilae praecrat,
He had the care of the Eagle.

The other Ensigns or Banners, of which I said every Centuriate had one,
Ensigns.
and consequently every Maniple two, were called Signa, Signs or Ensigns; for
anciently Vexillum belonged properly to the Horse, and was that which we now
call a Standard, though some Authors in later times have confounded Vexillum
and Signum, and make them both signify one thing. In these Ensigns of old,
were drawn the Pictures of their Heathenish Gods, as likewise of some Beasts
and Birds, as of a Lion, a Tiger, or a Dragon, to stir them up to courage,
fury, revenge, and bloodshed; particularly, the Wolf was not forgot in their
Colors, to denote, I think, that the founder of their City was nursed by one
of them. After the State was changed into a Monarchy, ordinarily they had in
their Banners, the Pictures and Images of their Emperors: And Vegetius
speaking of them in the seventh Chapter of Images.
his second Book, calls them that carried them, Imaginiferi, qui Imagines
Imperatorum portare solebant: Image-bearers, who used to carry the Images of
the Emperors. The Images of those proud and ambitious Princes had a reverend
kind of Worship paid to them. So we read in Cornelius Tacitus, that Tiridates,
a Parthian Prince, when he had left his own, and came to Corbulo's Army, adored
Nero's Image. There was a great Banner, not heard of in Labarum the Imperial
Standard.
ancient times, that they called Labarum, which was never carried into the
Field, but when the Emperor was personally with the Army; this resembled our
Royal Standard.

But here is a question. Since all the Centuries in all the three Classes had
Antesignani.
Colors, why the Hastati in several Histories are called Antesignani, as those
who marched before the Colors; and the Principes, Subsignani, as those which
And Postsignani.
marched under the Colors; and the Triarii, Postsignani, as those who marched
after the Colors: which seems to import that none of them had Ensigns but the
Principes? To which is answered: The Colors of the Hastati and Principes*
Subsignani.
being before the Triarii, and their own Colors in the first Ranks, the
Triarii were properly enough called Postsignani. The Principes were Subsignani,
because with them, say some, were the principal Colors, and by this same Why
so called.
Reason they will have the Hastati to be Antesignani, because (though they had
Ensigns of their own) yet they marched before the Principal Colors. Indeed we
must be satisfied with this Reason, for lack of a better, and truly it is
better than that of some, who say, the Hastati were called Antesignani, because
in time of fight, they sent back their Ensigns to the Principes. This cannot
hold, if it be true what we read very often in History, that in time of Battle
or Assault, the Ensigns, sometimes the Eagle it self, was cast into the
Batallion or Camp of the Enemy, to animate the Soldiers to advance and charge
with greater courage and fury to recover their Banners. This differed far from
sending them back to the next Class of heavy armed.

Vegetius speaks of a Praefectus Legionis, the Colonel, Brigadeer, or Major A
Commander of the whole Legion.
General of the whole Legion, who had the command over the Tribunes; but though
it be undeniable, that such an Officer should have been, yet since neither
Polybius, or any Ancient History mentions him, we must conclude, he has come
in request long after the Emperors had possessed themselves of the Sovereignty
of Rome. If any think, the Legates were these Pr^fecti, I will tell them it was
not so from the beginning, as I shall show in my Discourse of a Consular Army.

Upon the whole matter, I cannot find that in the Ancient Roman Militia, there
were any other Officers in a Legion, but the Tribunes and Centurions; No Foot
Officers but Tribunes and Centurions.
I still except the Decurions of Horse, whereof I shall speak in the next
Chapter. All others were but Temporary Deputies, without Office or Pay, or else
privileged Soldiers, made free from some duties, or beneficed with some
Donatives, for some particular pieces of good service performed by them, which
did not at all make them Officers; and to aver, they were Officers without Pay,
is something ridiculous. Now that none* had Pay as Officers, but only Tribunes
and Centurions (I speak still of the Foot) and that all others had Pay and
Donatives only as Common Soldiers, shall be, I hope, cleared by me, in my
Discourse of the Roman Pay. That which, indeed, stumbles me most is, that the
Ensign-bearers were not reckoned to be Officers, and I conceive this has been
a neglect in both Vegetius and Polybius, that they have not given us right
information of that matter. For I cannot but suppose, the Romans did assuredly
give to their Ensigns some more than ordinary allowance for carrying the
Colors* especially, since the third part of the Soldiers Pay and Booty, and
of their Largesses and Donatives too, was deposited in the Ensigns hands, or at
the Colors, till the time of the Soldiers Dismission; of which hereafter.

Yet on the other hand, to my best understanding, Casar does not acknowledge
any Foot Officer or Commander in a Legion, or in the Army, but Tribunes and
Centurions. Hear himself in two several places: The first is, in his first Book
of the Civil War, where he says, The Chieftain swore first, after him the
Tribunes, after them the Centurions; and then, says he, the Soldiers by
Centuries. Not ^ne word here of Sub-Centurions, Options, Ensign-bearers,
Tesseraries, Measurers, Clerks, and the rest of that crew, who indeed were all
of them but Soldiers in these Centuries. The second place is in his third Book
of the Civil War, there he tells us, how an Oath was sworn not to desert Pompey
(very ill kept) first, says he, Labi^nus, as Chief, swore, then the Legates*
(whereof Labienus himself was one), then the Tribunes, next them the
Centurions, and then the whole Army.

CHAP. VII. Of the Roman Cavalry, and all its Officers.
WE have but a slender account given us of the Roman Horse by Vegetius. The sum
of what Vegetius says of the Horse.
All he says on that Subject amounts to this: In the fourteenth Chapter of his
Second Book, he says, As a Band of Foot is called a Century or a Maniple, so a
Company of Horse is called a Turma, that is, a Troop: That every one of these
Troops consisted of thirty two Riders, whereof the Commander was called a
Decurion, and he describes him to have been a person not only well Armed and
Horsed, and active and expert in all feats of Horsemanship, but able to teach
his Troopers to be so likewise, and to keep their Arms bright and clean, and
their Horses in good case. In the twenty third Chapter of his third Book, he
informs us, that the Cataphract Horsemen, or Cuirassiers, armed at all pieces,
are free from Wounds (how could this be, when their Faces were not covered?)
but were not able, says he, to* do great matters, because of the heaviness of
their Armor, yet good at close fight, either before the Foot, or mixed with
them, to beat a Batallion of an Enemy. This is all. So we remain ignorant (till
he come to marshal his Legion) of Omissions of Vegetius.
the strength of the Cavalry, and even then, for him, we know not how the
Horsemen were levied o^ elected, how they were paid, how they watched, or what
other duties they were bound to do, how deep they were marshalled, when and
where they marched, or fought, what distances were between their Ranks and
Files; and what Intervals between their Turmes, or Troops. Let us see how
Polybius will help us in all, or in any of these.

In his sixth Book he says, In old times two hundred Horse were assigned for
every Legion, and these were elected, after the Foot were levied; but in his
Election of the Horsemen.
own time, and long before it, three hundred Horse were appointed for every
Legion, and were elected before the Foot; and elected they were not by the
Consuls or Tribunes, as the Foot were, but by the Censor. This is all Polybius
says of their election. Out of History we find that the Roman Horsemen were
all of the Equestral Dignity, that is, Gentlemen; yet in ancient times they
served on Horses bought at the public charges, and when any of them committed
gross faults, their Horses were taken from them, which was justly accounted an
ignominy. Thereafter when they came to serve on their own Horses, (yet on the
public wages) there was a lustration, or muster of them* when the Censors
pleased, but ordinarily it was once in five years, of all those of that Rank,
who were able, both for their Persons and their Purses, to serve on Horseback,
and then they rode in State on the best Horses, and in the best equipage they
were able to procure, and past by the place where the Censors sat as Judges.
All those who could be accused of no Misdemeanour, rode on without
interruption, but such as the Censors could charge with enormous crimes, were
stopped, and commanded to sell their Horses, which was no small disgrace to
them. And this Muster, or Show, was called Transvectio. Transvectio.


Of the Duties of their Horsemen, their Guards and Watches, and of their Pay,
Polybius speaks not much, I shall say something of each of them in their proper
places. He speaks a little of the Distance between Troops, of which I shall
treat in my Discourse of Intervals.

The same Polybius avers, That the three hundred Horse, levied or elected First
difference between Polybius and Vegetius.
for each Legion, were divided into ten Troops, every one whereof consisted of
thirty Riders, which made up completely three hundred Horse. Here Polybius and
Vegetius differ, the last allowing thirty two Horsemen to a Troop, and the
first but thirty; for certainly in Companies of so small a number, two made a
considerable difference. Out of these thirty Riders, says Polybius, three
Prafecti were chosen, by whom he tells not, but lets us suppose by the Consul,
or some of the Tribunes. He on the Right Hand had the command of the Troop: In
his absence, he on the Left Hand had it; and he not being present, the third
did officiate. These three chose three others, to be Agminis, or Turmae
Coactores, for so Casaubon renders it in Latin. The first Elected Praefectus,
was called Turmae Ductor, the Leader of the Troop; the other two were called
Decuriones, and I suppose one of them carried the Vexillum or Banner, though
Polybius tells us nothing of it: And yet it should not have been omitted, since
every Troop had a Standard. Now by this reckoning of Polybius, so weak a Troop
was but a Caporalship, and he who commanded it but a Caporal: The two other
Decurions but Leaders of Files, and the three Agminis Coactores but Bringers
up. For we do not find that any one of them was supernumerary, but the
contrary, that all of them were members of the Troop, and elected out of the
number of the thirty; so that without those six, Polybius his Turmae were but
twenty four strong: Nor shall you find that any greater Pay was allowed to any
of these six, than to the other four and twenty. And this difference is also to
be observed between Polybius and Vegetius, that the first speaks of three
Decurions, and as many Sub-Decurions, the last only of one Decurion. Nor Second
difference.
indeed do I find at all any warrant in History, for Vegetius his thirty two
Riders, since all agree, that for most part three hundred Horse were levied
with each Legion, and these three hundred divided into ten Turmas, which made
thirty for each Troop. But we shall examine how he disposes of these two
supernumery Riders, when we come to speak of his Legion.

How deep, or how many in File these Troops were, none of our Tacticks Deepness
of the Roman Horse not told us.
directly write; no more than they do of the depth or the height of the Foot.
An inexcusable oversight: For without the knowledge of that, we can neither
know nor guess what ground a Maniple, Cohort, Troop, or Legion, could or might
take up. Vegetius gives us some ground to conjecture, that in his opinion the
Foot were eleven in File: For in the last Chapter of his second Book, (as I
observed before) he says, for every Carrobalist, Mules were appointed to draw
it, and to manage and have a care of it, a Contubernium of Soldiers, that is,
says he, eleven men. This will not positively make eleven in File, yet it
gives a strong presumption, that Vegetius thought so, which if he did, and that
it was so indeed, all Masters of the Military Art have taken up their measures
wrong, in appointing Foot Files to be of even and equal numbers, as sixteen,
twelve, ten, eight, and six. As to the Roman Horse, some may have mistaken
Polybius, who think he insinuates, they were marshalled eight in File: For who
will consider right what he writes, will find that in that place he spoke not
at all of the Roman Cavalry. The passage is in the twelfth Book of his History;
where he puts himself to much trouble, to demonstrate the vanity and absurdity
of Polybius against Calisthenes.
Calisthenes, his Relation of that great Battle fought in Cilicia, between
Darius and Alexander, where that Historian says, that the Persian King marched
with thirty thousand Horse in Battle, and called up his mercenaries to him, who
were as many: All this in a ground not above fourteen Stadia or Furlongs in
Latitude, which makes but one Italian mile and three quarters: As also that
Alexander marched in Battle with his whole Foot forty Stadia, five Italian
miles, in an uneven, woody, and broken ground. The impossibility of both which,
Polybius, as an experienced Captain, undertakes to demonstrate. And this he
could not do, unless he had first considered how deep the Horse were
marshalled; otherwise he could not know of what Longitude the front of thirty
thousand Horsemen would be, whether they would require more ground than the
fourteen Furlongs allowed by Calisthenes, as no doubt they did. And therefore
he agrees on eight deep; his words are these: In just Battles, says he, the
Horse Battalion is* so ordered for most part, that its deepness consisted of
eight Riders. Now first he says, for most part, Vt plurimum, not always; for
indeed I doubt not but he knew well enough, it was not always so. Secondly, he
speaks there of Persian and Gracian Armies, and what he says of the deepness of
their Horse Squadrons, cannot be appropriated to the Roman Cavalry. But he
concludes at eight deep, eight hundred Horse would take up in Persian Horse
eight deep.
front one hundred and twenty five Paces, which is one Furlong; and
consequently eight thousand Horse needed to have for their Front twelve hundred
and fifty paces, that is ten Furlongs: And therefore Darius his thirty thousand
Horse being eight deep, would in Front have possessed of ground four thousand
six hundred eighty six paces, more than thirty seven Stadia or Furlongs, and
these will make more than four Italian miles and a half; and as much ground
Calisthenes must have allowed to his Mercenaries. Observe here, that Polybius
allows for one hundred Horse in Front one hundred twenty five paces, which is
more than six foot for a Horseman to stand on, and for distance between him
and his side-man.

But if Polybius his meaning be, that the Roman Horse were marshalled eight We
know not how deep the Roman Horse were.
deep, then Vegetius his thirty two Riders will do better than Polybius his
thirty in a Troop, because thirty two will make four Files completely, whereas
thirty makes but three Files of eight, and a broken one of six. In such a mist
do these two great Masters of the Roman Art of War leave us, out of which
neither accurate Lipsius, or any other of my reading has offered to guide us.
I conceive, according to thirty in a Troop, ten deep might have done well, and
who can tell but Polybius meant so, when he appoints three Decurions to be
File-leaders, and three Agminis or Turma Coactores, to be Bringers up. But that
was indeed too many, it making the Longitude or Front so small, as rendered it
very easy to be environed or surrounded.

In these very ancient times, many Nations fought on Horses, neither Unbridled
and Unsaddled Horses.
Bridled nor Saddled, and some had Saddles, but no Bridles; hence we read, that
the Africans, especially the Numidians, divided their Cavalry in Fraenatos, and
Infranatos equos, into Bridled, and Unbridled Horses: And it is a wonder, to
read in Livy with what dexterity and agility these unbridled Horses were ruled
and managed by the Hand, the Foot, or Rod of a Rider. Some again had Bridles
for their Horses, but no Saddles; so had the Germans, who laughed at the
Romans, as soft and effeminate, for riding on Saddles; and yet these very
Saddles which the Romans used, were nothing but a covering made of some piece
of Cloth or Stuff, rich or mean, according to the quality of the Rider, or at
best, of some bundle tied together for the ease of the Horseman, without
either Iron or Timber in it, as our Saddles have; neither had any of them
Saddles not ancient.
any Stirrups, to ease the Riders Legs, for these came first in fashion in
Nero's time, if Lipsius his observation holds. Any thing of that nature that
was used before, was but a Ladder of Cords, Wood, or Iron, to help the
Horseman to mount his Horse, if he were aged, indisposed, sick or lame; and so
soon as he was on Horseback the Ladder was removed; perhaps not unlike to
those Iron Ladders of two or three steps high, used over all the Netherlands
for Passengers to get up to their Wagons. History tells us, that Masinissa,
King of Numidia, when he was fourscore years old, or near that age, could mount
his Horse, without the help of any Stirrup or Ladder. And certainly, not only
the Romans, but all other Nations were taught to get on Horseback without any
of them, as now youths are taught in Academies, and did ride (inured to it by
custom) with as much ease without Stirrups, as we do now with them.

The Romans sometimes caused their Cavalry to unbridle their Horses to To
charge with Unbridled Horses.
make a furious charge, which often succeeded well. Livy in his eighth Book
says, it was practiced against the Volscians with success: And in his fortieth
Book, he gives us the relation of a Battle the Celtiberians fought in Spain
against the Roman Praetor Fulvius, wherein the Romans were very near worsted,
the Enemy having cast himself in a Wedge (at which manner of fight he was
thought almost invincible) bore down all before him, till the Praetor told his
Horsemen, that charging desperately on unbridled Horses might recover the
Victory; for, said he, formerly such a practice has produced good effects. The
Cavalry obeyed his order, and by a furious charge with Lances, routed the
Celtiberians. Such a command in our time would be accounted both unpracticable
and ridiculous; yet we may believe, that Horses were so taught and managed
then, that they would obey their Masters without Bridles; and this we may
suppose not to be impossible, the Rider making use of his hands; but truly, I
think it something strange to read, that Julius Caesar could ride great Julius
Caesar an expert Horseman.
Horses, without a Bridle at the full gallop, with his hands clasped together
behind his back.

Sometimes the Roman Generals, when they saw an Enemy prevailing, have brought
their Cavalry, or a part of it, to the place of danger, and caused them to
alight from their Horses, and fight afoot with their Swords. This both
reinforced the Battle, and mightily encouraged the Foot, by seeing that those
who might have saved themselves by flight, resolved to live and dye with them.
Authors do not inform us how they disposed of their Horses when they came to
the Foot Combat; but I shall imagine they did not let them go whither they
pleased, but either appointed their servants (if they had any) or some of their
own number to look after them; and I suppose also, they alighted before they
came to the place where they were to fight, for shunning confusion, and putting
their own Foot in disorder. Caesar, before he began his Battle with the
Switzers, made all his Horsemen dismount, and appointed them their Horsemen
fight on Foo^.
stations, where they were to fight afoot; and to show them a good example, he
alighted first himself, and sent away all the Horses a good way from his Army,
thereby to encourage his Legionary Foot, and make his Horsemen know that their
safety depended only on their own valor. But I believe he gave order that the
Horses should be brought back so soon as the Enemy was perceived to fly; for we
find he and his Cavalry were soon remounted, and followed the chase very far:
And I know no reason why it may not be believed also, that he kept some on
Horseback by him, to carry all the Directions he gave, to the several Bodies
of his Army in time of the Battle, which himself fighting on foot, could not
perform. Gracchus (betrayed by his Host) being environed by an ambush of
Hannibalians, alighted, and fought well for his life, though he lost it: But I
think, he should rather have hazarded to break through on Horseback to get to
his own party, which was not far off, since death would still have been the
worst of it. This story you may read in Livy's twenty fifth Book. Though this
practice succeeded well sometimes, yet was it unfortunately attempted by the
Consul Aemilius, at the Battle of Cannae; for after Asdrubal had routed him and
his Horse on the Right Wing, he made his Horsemen alight, and fight on foot
among the Legionaries, as Livy tells us in that twenty fifth Book. And it would
seem that Hannibal, that great Captain, did not approve this custom; for the
same Author says, when it was told him what the Roman Consul had done, he
should have smiled, and said, He might as well have delivered them to me bound
hand and foot.

I know not, if in our Modern Militia, this could be advantageously practiced,
being the Arms of our Horse and Foot differ very much, whereas those of the
Romans were almost all one. I have indeed seen at the assaults of Towns,
Horsemen commanded to alight, and storm with the Foot: And this has reason
for it, in regard that with their Pistols, Carabines, and Swords, they were as
able for that service as the Infantry. Yet Machiavelli (who will needs
Machiavelli
reform the Modern Militia, and cast it in his own Mould) gives us an instance
that it was practiced in the Field, a very little before his own time, and long
after that Gunpowder had mightily altered the face of War. In the second Book
of his Art of War, The Count of Carmignola, General for the Duke of Milan, had
six thousand Men of Arms, and but a few Foot; with these he fought a Battle
against the Switzers, armed with long and strong Pikes, and is by them worsted,
and forced to quit the Field. The Earl finding what advantage a Pike had
against Horse, presented them once more Battle, but coming near, he ordered his
Cuirassiers to alight (in imitation belike of Julius Caesar, fighting against
the same Nation) and fighting on foot, then, says he, the Switzers ^^^es not
being able to pierce the Corslets of the men of Arms, they were totally routed
by Carmignola. Was it not well, that the strong Pikes of the Switzers, pushed
by their robust Arms and Bodies, did not overthrow the Earls Cuirassiers,
though the points of them could not pierce their Armor.

Philip de Comines tells us, that at the confused Battle of Montleberry,
between Lewis the Eleventh, King of France, and Charles the Warlike, Duke of
Burgundy: The said Charles commanded many of his Gentlemen, who were Men at
Arms, to alight from their Horses, and join in fight with his Archers of Foot.
Which action (says the Author) was honorable, and encouraged others; and this
custom (says the same Philip) the Burgundians had learned from the English,
when both of them, being Confederates, waged War together against France for
the space of thirty two years, without any truce.

The custom, which the Romans had to mix Foot with Horse, begun at the Horse
and Foot mixed together
Siege of Capua, was so frequent afterward, that I need not give many instances
of it. Caesar seldom failed to do it. When Vercingentorix had raised all Gaul
about his ears, he sent for German Horse and Foot, who were accustomed to fight
one in company of the other, as he tells us in the seventh Book of his Gallick
War. In Thessaly, finding himself far inferior in Horse to Pompey, he
constantly mixed some of his Antesignani (who were Legionaries, and heavy
practiced by Caesar,
armed, and of the youngest sort, and so more able to march and run) with his
Horse; who became so expert in that manner of fight, that, as himself
witnesses in his third Book of the Civil War, two hundred of his Horse joined
with the like number of these Foot, were not afraid to buckle with thousands of
his Enemies Cavalry. And it was with that manner of fight, that he made that
honorable retreat of his from Dirrachium, in spite of Pompey's whole Army that
pursued him. And it was with the assistance of six Cohorts of his Triarian
Foot, that his Horse beat his Competitors Cavalry at Pharsalia, and got him the
Victory, as himself both confessed and foretold. At Vzita in Africa, when he
offered to fight against Scipio, Pompey's Father-in-law, he drew up all his
Cavalry on his Left Wing, and with them mixed all his light armed Foot, who, it
seems, were Auxiliaries. The German Horsemen And by the ancient Germans.
used every one of them to choose a Footman, whom they knew to be stout,
strong, and swift: These Footmen either skirmish'd before the Horse, as the
Romans did at Capua; or fought in company with them; or stood at a distance
behind them, that the Horse might retire to them; and if both were forced to
quit the Field, then the Footmen laid hold on the Manes of the Horses, and
with that help run as fast as the Horse gallopp'd, till both came to their main
Body; of all which Caesar informs us in the first Book of the Gallick War. And
this manner of fight was practiced by Ariovistus, King of Germany, and by
Vercingentorix.

We find in History, that when the Romans were to give Battle, assisted by
Roman Cavalry how marshalled.
their Allies, for most part their Cavalry was marshalled on the Right Wing of
their Army, and the Allies on the Left: So at Cannae, Paulus Aemilius stood on
the Right Wing with the Roman Horse, and the Consul Varro on the Left, with the
Horse of the Allies. Once Scipio at Zama gave the Right Wing to Masanissa, King
of the Numidians, and appointed Lelius to command the Left Wing, composed of
Roman Horse. But when they fought without Allies, then their Horse were drawn
up on both Wings; and sometimes, as I have said, interlin'd with Foot; but
scarce, or rather never, did I read in any ancient History, that they were
marshalled by Troops among the Legionary Foot, whereof I shall tell you more
hereafter, when I come to speak of Vegetius his Legion. And how the same
Vegetius contradicts Polybius in the matter of the Roman Horse-mens Guards,
shall be spoke of in my Discourse of Guards, and Rounds.

CHAP. VIII. Of their Trumpeters, Horn-winders, and of the Classicum.
SInce we have now spoke of both Foot and Horse, it is fit we know to what
Martial Instrument or Sound both should hearken. I find Tubicines, these were
Trumpeters; Cornicines, these were Horn-winders; and Buccinatores, who, I
think, used the Horns of Cows and Oxen; and the Classicu^. All these were
common to both Horse and Foot, neither had the one any title to pretend to
either of these, more than the other had; nor were any of them peculiar to the
one more than to the other, though now the Horse Troops appropriate the Trumpet
to themselves, as the Foot do the Drum.

The Trumpet is an ancient Instrument of War; at first, and I believe, for
Trumpeters*
many ages, made of Brass; hence the Poet, Aere ciere Vir^s, though the luxury
of after-ages made their composition of Silver. We find they were common to
almost all Nations not long after the deluge, and frequently used by a very
ancient people; and which is more, by a people chosen and beloved of him, who
promulgated his Law to them by sound of Trumpet, as well as by the dreadful
noise of his Ae^hereal Cannon. But as it was used in the Temple to sound the
praises of the Highest, by the Priests, who all, or most of them, had the skill
of a Trumpet: So was it used in the time of War with their malignant
neighbors; but which was worse, too much made use of by them for Sedition and
Rebellion. To your Tents, OF Israel: Words, which with the preceding ones, have
sounded loud enough in our own ears, and in our own days.

The Grecians learned the use of the Trumpet from the Tirenians, and these
having their name and original from the Tirians, had their Trumpets also from
them. The Tirians being near neighbors to the Jews, learned many things of
them, and probably the Trumpet likewise. The Greeks had the use of the Trumpet
in Homer's time, for he speaks of it in his Poems: Yet it seems they knew
nothing of it at the Siege of Troy, else that Great Poet would have made
mention of it in his Verses. This famous War of Troy fell out to be in the days
of Jephte, Judge of Israel; and who knows but the fable of Agamemnon's
unwilling attempt to sacrifice his Daughter Iphigenia to Diana, in whose room
came a Heart to be a voluntary offering, was borrowed by Antiquity from the true
Story of Jephte's vowing to sacrifice the first thing met him without the doors
of his house; which chanced to be his only Daughter. But be that as it will,
certain enough it is, that the Israelites made use of Trumpets three hundred
years before either Jephte fought with the Ammonites, or the Grecians besieged
Troy.

The use of the Trumpet is still retained, and in probability will, till the
last Trumpet summon proud man to arise from the dust, and give an account to
his great Creator, why he made so much use of that Martial Instrument for the
destruction of his fellow Creatures. Vegetius says in the twenty second Chapter
of his second Book, that the Trumpet was sounded by the Romans, when they went
out to War, and when they were commanded to retire; as also when the Soldiers
were called out to any work or labor imposed upon them, whether it were to
fortify themselves by Ditch or Rampart, or to make their marches either
Ambulatory or Cursory. Briefly, The Trumpet required the Soldiers to move, but
not the Ensigns, Standards, or Baggage.

The Cornicines, or Horn-winders, were those who sounded on Instruments
Horn-winders.
made in the fashion of Horns, and, I doubt not, but in the Infancy of that
Empire, they were no other but real Horns, such, perhaps, nay, without all
peradventure, such as Swine-herds sound to gather together their herds. Yet
these Horns, we must confess, gathered these men together, who overcame Armies,
subdued Nations, subverted Kingdoms, and destroyed Cities; but the honor over
all Horns was given to that of the Ram, by the miraculous sound whereof the
Walls of Jericho were laid equal with the ground. At the sound of these
Horn-winders the Ensigns, Colors, and Standards moved. But in time of Battle
both Trumpeters and Horn*winders sounded: Pariter canunt, says Vegetius in that
same place; he might have said the Buccinatores too* if he had pleased. But
what difference was between the Cornicines and Buccinatores.
these Buccinatores I know not, for both sounded on Instruments of loud
Wind-Musick, bowed like Horns, unless that in the beginning of the Cities
increase, they were distinguished by the real Horns of several Animals. But
Vegetius in the eighth Chapter of his third Book, says that all the Roman
guards were set by the sound of Trumpet, and were relieved by the sound of the
Horn Instrument. His words are, A Tubicine omnes Vigiliae committuntur, and
finitis horis a Cornicine revocantur. Now what is this, but that both the
Trumpet sounded, and the Horn blew at the relief of the Guards? The Trumpet,
when four Soldiers went to the Post where they were to keep Sentinel a whole
Watch, (that was three hours) and the Horn when those that were relieved came
from their Post.

I should in the next place tell you what the Classicum was; and should be
Classicum* what it was.
glad if any Body would tell me what it was. I know Classicum commonly is taken
for a Trumpet sounding a charge, Classicum canere; and this has its rise from
the custom the Roman Consuls had; when they were to begin the Battle they
caused the Classicum to sound, which immediately was followed by all the
Trumpets and Horn Instruments of the Army. But for all this, I doubt still
whether the Classicum was an Instrument, or the sound of an Instrument, and to
speak according to our words of Art, a Point of War; or if it was the noise of
many Warlike Instruments all sounding one thing at one time: Let us hear
Vegetius, and I am afraid he will make the matter more obscure. Vegetius his
description of it.
He describes it thus: Classicum appellatur, quod Buccinatores per cornu
dicunt, hoc insigne videtur Imperii, quia Classicum canitur Imperatore
praesente, aut cum in Militem capitaliter animadvertitur. That, says he, is
called the Classicum, which the Horn-winders speak by the Horn. And this, says
he, seems to be an Ensign of Sovereign command, because the Classicum sounds
when the Commander in chief is present, or when a Soldier is to be capitally
punished. What shall we make of all this? If we understand not now what the
Classicum is, Vegetius will say he is not to be blamed; but for all that, I am,
for him, still in the dark. That which the Horn-winders speak by a Horn, is to
me very dark language; and yet that language of a Horn must be an Ensign of
Imperial power; and withal, if a Soldier be to be hanged, he must have the
honor of that Ensign of Imperial power. Lipsius, who seldom fails to guess,
Lipsius his conjecture of it.
and sometimes hits right, thinks the Classicum was not one Instrument, or yet
the sound of one Instrument, but the noise of many, whether these were Trumpets
or Horns, or both, which was one of the badges of Supreme Power; for where
there was but one Consul, there was but one of them; and where two Consuls were
together, there were two of them; and besides other duties, they sounded when
the Consuls were at Supper: for this reason the famous Carthaginian Asdrubal,
when he began to suspect that he had to do with two Roman Consuls, bid his
Guards, Foragers and Waterers of Horses, take heed* and acquaint him, if they
heard two Classicums; and having learned it was so, he concluded, that the
Consul (who he thought was diverted by his Brother Hannibal) was joined with
the other, with whom alone he conceived his work to be. For my part, I incline
to believe, that in History it is promiscuously taken for the sound, and
sometimes for the Instrument* one or many, either Trumpets or Horns. They were
made use of in all Banks and Proclamations. The Classicum was an Ensign of
Supreme* Command, for by it all the emergent and occasionary orders of the
General were promulgated; and by it both Officers and Soldiers were called
together to hear the Commander in chief's pleasure made known to them: And
hence it is like, it had its derivation, because by it the three Classes of
Hastati, Princip^s and Triarii, were called together to Whence ^^ ^^d ^ts name.
hear those Harangues and Orations, which frequently the Consuls uttered in
their Tribunals or Pulpits; whether they were for admonition, encouragement, or
punishment; and upon the account of this last, Vegetius is to be understood of
his capital animadversion.

Lest I forget to do it hereafter, I shall in this place take occasion to tell
you, Badges of Sovereign power.
that besides this Classicum, there were two other badges of Imperial power,
these were the Praetori^m, and the Bundles of Rods and Axes. The Praetorium was
a fair, and a large high Pavilion, wherein the Consul lodged, and kept his
Councils of War. The Rods and Axes signified he had power to scourge and
behead; these were carried by Lictors or Sergeants, whereof a Consul had
twelve, a Proconsul six, a Legate as many, a Praetor had I know not how many,
for it makes but little to our purpose. When Scipio, Pompey's Fatherin-law,
came with his Legions out of Asia, and joined with him in Thessaly, Pompey
ordered a Praetorium to be erected for him, and that he should have a
Classicum; I suppose, a knitchel of Rod and Axes too; though Caesar does not
mention the last in his Commentary.

As the Trumpet was of Brass, so in process of time the Cornu and Buccina were
made of Brass too, and all the three who sounded, or winded them, were called
Aeneatores. Every Troop of Horse, and every Maniple, if not Aeneatores.
every Century of Foot had one, either a Trumpet, or a Horn, or both. I find
not that these Trumpeters and Horn-blowers had any greater allowance of Wages,
Proviant, or Fodder, for either themselves or Horses, than other Horsemen and
Footmen had (for with the first they rode on Horseback, and with the second
they marched on Foot) at any time; perhaps having spent much of their breath in
sounding and blowing, they were eased from other works of toil and labor, and
those were not a few. Whether the Buccina was sounded, or rather winded, at the
relief of every guard, as Polybius says it was, shall be spoke of in my
Discourse of Guards and Rounds.

CHAP. IX. Of the Roman Pay, Proviant, and Donatives.
IT is reported of that brave Athenian Themistocles, that he affirmed, whoever
would shape or form the great Monster of War rightly, must begin with his
Belly; and therefore before we join our Horse and Foot together, we must see
how they shall be maintained. The Romans were a frugal people, till their
successful Wars made their City the Treasure-house of the Worlds riches. The
Pay they they allowed their Soldiers was sparing enough, but Vegetius tells us
not what it was. I find that three hundred years after the foundation of Rome,
the Horsemen served on their own charges; they might do it the better, for
though their achievements were often honorable enough, yet their expeditions
were but short, for either upon a Victory or a Rout, they hastened back to the
City. But after the Senate began to look far beyond their ancient limits, wages
were allowed out of the public Treasury for both Horse and Foot. Polybius in
his sixth Book informs us, that a Foot Soldier Roman Wages and Proviant.
had the allowance of two Oboli a day, both which (if I mistake not) make but
one English Penny; and a small measure of Wh^at: A Centurion had a double
allowance, and a Horseman the triple of a Foot Soldiers Proviant and Wages,
and a measure of Barley every month for his Horse. They allowed to the Socii,
or Allies, as much Wheat and Barley as they did to their own Soldiers, but
they were obliged to maintain themselves with their own Moneys. But he tells us
also, that what Proviant, Clothes, yea, what Arms were given to the Roman
Soldiers, had rates set upon them, and were defalcated from their wages.
Truly, I should think their pay, at two half-pennies a day, could hardly
furnish them with Meat, much less Clothes and Arms; Severe usage.
or if in that cheap world they could be furnished with all three at that rate,
they could not have much Money to seek, at least very little to deposite at
their Colors; for this defalcation would indeed make their Pay very
inconsiderable, and very unproportionable to the great duty and services
exacted from them. But Lipsius will mend the matter presently, by telling us,
that many times the State quit the Soldiers freely what they owed for either
Arms, Proviant, or Clothes; or if any thing was taken, it was so insignificant,
that the Soldier parted with it pleasantly, and without grumbling. I do not
care much to be of Lipsius his opinion, though he has not told us who were his
Informers; for Polybius is positively of another judgment, in that place which
I have cited: Nor do I remember, that in any other place of his History, he
speaks any thing of the Roman Wages.

Here you may observe, what I told you before, that in the Roman Infantry there
were no other Officers, properly so called, but Centurions and Tribunes,
because all others had but the allowance of common Soldiers, both in Wages and
Proviant. A Tribune had the quadruple of a Soldiers Pay. Nor can I find that
the Praefecti, or Decurions of the Horse, had any more allowance of either Meat
or Money than other Troopers had. The Grecian Pay, as to the proportion of it,
was like the Roman, a Centurion having a Soldiers double allowance, a
Horseman triple, and a Chiliarch quadruple.

But the Roman Soldiers had a greater encouragement to endure their hard
Pillage.
fatigue than Pay, and that was the Plunder and Pillage of a Country, a
besieged Town, Castle, or an Enemies Camp. This was not due to them, and many
times they got no share of it, in regard, for most part, it was brought all to
the Quaestor, or Treasurers quarters, and sold; and out of the Moneys made by
that sale, the Army was paid their wages, and the overplus was sent in to the
Treasury of Rome. But the Consul, or General, having the disposing of it all in
his power, very often gave it as a largess to the Army, either for some good
service done, or to encourage them to undergo some difficult and hard piece of
work to be done. Neither had any man liberty to take what he could catch, but
all was brought to a public heap, and sold by the Treasurer, and then
proportionably divided among all, according to every A good order.
man's quality; a Centurion receiving double that which a Soldier got, a
Horseman triple, and a Tribune quadruple: So that they who fought in the
Field, and they who stayed for the defense of the Camp, they who stormed a
Town, and they who stood in Reserve, shared all alike in the Booty.

The Romans gave all their Proviant to their Armies in Corn, and did not
trouble themselves to make it either into Meal or Bread; and in their strict
discipline, Bakers were all banished from their Camps, and the Soldiers
ordered to grind their Corn themselves, (Hand mills or Querns being allowed
them for that use) and thereafter to bake their own Bread. Many times they took
not the pains to do either the one nor the other, but boiled their Wheat with a
little Salt, and so eat it up for Pottage. They used to carry with them Their
ordinary Meat, And Drink.
Lard or Bacon, or some other fat, wherewith they smeared their Bread. A little
Bottle with Vinegar they bore also about with them, with a very small quantity
whereof they gave a relish to their Water, which was their ordinary drink,
though Wine was not forbidden them; for Mahomet had then not intoxicated the
World with his Doctrine, nor discharged the use of the juice of the Grape,
which cherishes the heart of God and Man. The Roman Soldiers then drank Wine,
for it was allowed them, when conveniently it could be got; though Drunkenness
was a crime seldom heard of among them. There were also sometimes Oxen, Sheep,
and Beeves divided among them, for preparing and making ready whereof, in the
strictest time of their Discipline, the Soldiers were permitted to carry a
Brass Pot, a Spit, and a Drinking Cup; but I suppose, one of every kind of
these utensils were not allowed to every one of the Soldiers, but to a
Contubernium, Utensils.
or Tent-full of them, whether that consisted of ten, eleven, or twelve. It was
not permitted to them to dine or sup when they pleased; but it being known by
the Classicum when the Consul went to Table, the Tribunes went to theirs, and
so both Centurions and common Soldiers went to dinner with sound of Trumpet.
May not a man say, that here was a great deal of more state, than good fare.
Those Generals who exercised strict discipline, appointed their Soldiers to
take their dinner standing; marry, They D^n'd standing, and Supped sitting.
they permitted them to sit at Supper; and I conceive, this was but a very
sober courtesy, to suffer a man who was weary with toil the whole day, to sit
down to his Supper at night.

Besides all this, the Roman Soldiery had reason to expect a Donative from
Donatives at Triumphs.
their Victorious Generals, when they entered the Imperial City in Triumph.
This custom was very commendable; for the Largess given to them, incited
others to carry themselves gallantly against an Enemy, since they saw that in
some measure, they would be sharers with the chief Commander, both in Honor
and Profit. What was given at that time to the common Soldier, was a rule to
the Officer, for a Centurion got double, a Horseman triple, and a Tribune
quadruple. Scipio the African, at his magnificent entry into Rome, gave four
hundred Asses to every Soldier, some say but forty: if the first, it was noble
enough, and no more neither; (for it would have amounted but to twenty five
shillings Sterling) if the last, it was contemptible, for it signified but half
a Crown. Lucius Aemilius, who subverted the Macedonian Monarchy, gave at his
Triumph to every Soldier one hundred Sesterces, (which might be about fifteen
or sixteen shillings Sterling) and proportionably to the Centurions, Horsemen,
and Tribunes. But besides the evil effects which many of the Consuls avarice
produced, their ambition to bring in great sums of Gold and Silver to the
Treasury, and their vanity to give their Armies Donatives at their Triumphs,
set them on to the committing many Insolences, perfidious, unjust and
disavowable Plunders and Cruelties, which makes the names of some of the
bravest of them infamous to posterity. Take one instance, instar omnium, of
that same Aemilius I just now spoke of: The desire he had to bring the vast
Treasure of King Perseus, and all he had scraped together in Macedon, into the
Roman Treasury; and withal, to give a Donative to his Army at A detestable
action.
his Triumph, tempted him (and the temptation prevailed with him) to plunder
the whole Towns of Epirus, the people whereof were no Enemies, nor ever had
wronged the Roman State: And this execrable act he did under trust, the
Inhabitants imagining no such usage; nor was plundering all the mischief he did
them, for he sold their persons, to the number of one hundred and fifty
thousand of both Sexes for Slaves; and with the Money of that sale he gave the
Donative we spoke of, to his Army. An action so full of baseness, inhumanity,
persidy, and injustice, that Sir Walter Raleigh says, If any History spoke but
one word to the contrary, no man would believe it could be true. You may read
the story of it in the last Book of Titus Livius.

The half of the Donatives were ordinarily deposited at the Standards Half of
Donatives deposited.
and Ensigns, to be kept there for the use of the Soldiers till their
dismission, lest they should idly or vainly spend it. This reason was
sufficient and strong enough; but there was another, and it was this, that the
Soldiers knowing a part of their stock and substance to be beside the Colors,
they should never desert them, but manfully fight for the defense of that, in
the preservation whereof they were so deeply concerned. Though this was
certainly a very prudent order, yet I cannot consent to what Vegetius says of
it in the twentieth Chapter of his second Book, that it was ab Antiquis
divinitus institutum: For he should have remembered, that he wrote of the
Heathen Romans, and himself having the knowledge of the true God, he knew
likewise, that the best of their Ordinances were but of Humane, and not Divine
Institution.

In that same Chapter Vegetius says, that every Legion had ten bags, for the
keeping this moiety of the Donatives; that is, a bag for every Cohort; and an
eleventh bag there was, in which every Soldier cast something once a month,
and that was reserved for the Burial of those Soldiers, who were able to leave
nothing for their Interment. A very laudable custom, for the Burial of the
Dead was ever in all Nations in high request. Burial of the Dead.
Truce for some days or hours to Inter the slain, was seldom or never refused
by the most embittered Enemy. Hannibal bestowed Burial on his Enemy Marcellus:
And his Brother Asdrubal, at the desire of Scipio, buried those Roman Tribunes
whom he had killed in Battle. And Justin in his sixth Book tells us, that when
the Grecians desired liberty to bury their dead, it was a tacit
acknowledgement that they were overcome. But Vegetius will have these Bags to
be kept by the Signiferi, the Ensign-bearers, whom therefore he will have not
only to be faithful and trusty men, but learned, that they might perfectly keep
the accounts of all that was consigned in their hands. And here indeed he is
(as Lipsius in another place calls him) solutus and negligens; having forgot
that in the seventh Chapter of his second Book he told us, that the Romans had
Librarii, Notaries or Scriveners, who kept the account of all that belonged to
the Soldiery; therefore not the Signiferi, or Ensigns, whose employment was to
attend their Colors.

Julius Caesar, after all his Victories, doubled the wages of the Roman
Soldiers Roman Pay augmented.
for ever: The succeeding Emperors, according as they stood in need of the
help of the Swordmen, especially of the Praetorian Cohorts, augmented their
Pay, and some of them for their bounty, were degraded and murdered by those
very same Soldiers.

CHAP. X. Of a Roman Legion, Marshalled according to Titus Livius, with Lipsius
his amendments.
THe word Legi^ has its name ab ^ligendo, from electing: It was a great Body
of men, divided not only into several small Bands, but into three distinct
Classes, Hastati, Principes, and Triarii, embattell'd one behind another; as I
have shown you in my discourse of the Roman Infantry. A Legion was not always
of a like strength, for sometimes it consisted of three thousand, sometimes
four thousand, or four thousand two hundred, sometimes five thousand, or five
thousand two hundred; and twice I find it was of six thousand, or six thousand
two hundred, once with Scipio in Africa* and the second time with Aemilius in
the Macedonian War.

Titus Livius, that famous Historian, in his eighth Book giving a particular
Livy his vicious description of a Legion.
account of the great Battle fought between the Romans, and their old Allies
the Latins, marshals the Roman Legion in such a confused way, that he is not
at all intelligible; and has given just reason to both Learned and Military
men, to think that place is corrupt, and a sense made of it, never intended by
the Author. To avoid prolixity, and that I be not at the trouble to give you
Livy's words, first in Latin and then in English, I shall give you the story
as it is translated by Philemon Holland, (except where he mistakes) and then
show the errors of that description of a Legion.

In former times, says Livy, the Roman Batallions stood thick, and close
together like the Macedonian Phalanx, but afterward they were ranged into
Bands more distinctly, and last of all they were divided into thinner
Squadrons, each of them containing threescore Soldiers, two Centurions, and
one Portensign. The Vanguard were Hastati, Javelineers, in fifteen Maniples
distant a little way from one another; such a Squadron had twenty light armed,
who carried a light Javeline, and some Darts to cast afar; all the rest were
Targeteers. This first front contained the flower of the youth, who grew up as
Apprentices in War-service. Then followed after them of men of stronger and
riper years as many Maniples, and these were called Principes* These were
followed (not hard at heels, as the Translator adds) by all the Targeteers in
gallant Armor. That Batallion of thirty Maniples was called Antepilani,
because the other fifteen Orders were placed under the Ensigns (not hard before
them, as Philemon very viciously translates it) and of these, every Order
consisted of three parts, and every one of them was called Primum Pilum: It
consisted of three Ensigns, and every one of these had one hundred eighty six
men. The first Colors had with it the Triarii, old Soldiers, and of approved
valor: The second had the R^r^rii, men of less experience, and younger years:
The third was of the Accensi, of whom they had least confidence, and therefore
cast them in the Rear. Thus far Livius, and Mr. Holland, who put him in
English. And indeed we have enough, and too much of this stuff. Let us now
observe the errors of this discourse.

First, It is questionable, if ever the Romans used the Macedonian Phalange,
The errors of ^t.
a Body composed purely of Pike-men; it is spoke of by none: and that this
great Body in after times was cast in Maniples, to me is fabulous; for
certainly Maniples were used by Romulus; and though this were true, we must not
for all that grant, that every Maniple had but sixty men (that being only true
of the Triarii) or if that were granted too, sure we will not acknowledge that
every band of sixty (except still the Triarii) had two Centurions, and one
Ensign. Secondly, That every Class of the Hastati, Principes and Triarii, had
fiftten Maniples, is against all Antiquity, and the current of most, if not all
Authors, who allow no more Maniples to a Legion but thirty, nor Centuriates but
threescore, except Vegetius, who reduces the number of the Centuries to fifty
five. Now Livy's description of a Legion makes it contain forty five Maniples,
and ninety Centuriates, and all this is point blank against himself in other
places. Thirdly, We are told* that each of the fifteen last Orders was divided
into three parts, and every part was called Primum Pilum. Is there any thing
more ridiculous, than to call that first, which was but second or third? And if
these forty five parts (for so many, if multiplied by three, it extends to*) be
all first, which of the forty five shall be last? Fourthly, Every one of these
parts had its Colors; and so in the third Class there were forty five Ensigns,
and but fifteen in each of the other two, a thing nothing probable. Fifthly,
Every one of these Ensigns had one hundred eighty six men. Assuredly this is so
extravagant, that it cannot plead for any show of truth; for multiply one
hundred eighty six by forty five, the product will be eight thousand three
hundred and seventy; and so strong by this account, must the Triarii have been,
joined with the Rorarii and Accensi; a thing so notoriously and palpably false,
that it deserves no refutation.

This passage of Titus Livius has been, no doubt, observed by many of his All
occasioned by the first Printers.
Readers, long before Justus Lipsius was born; yet for any thing I know, he is
the first man that offered him help; and indeed he has done gallantly, to
vindicate so renowned an Author from these injuries the first Printers of his
Decads have done him: For Lipsius says, that assuredly this rhapsody of
nonsense proceeded from the little understanding they had of the true Text. And
Steuechius on another subject says, that Printers in the printing old
Manuscripts have committed such gross faults, that he knows not whether that
admirable Art of Printing has done more hurt or good to the Commonwealth of
Learning. But to our purpose.

Lipsius helps the matter thus: Where we read, Prima acies hastat^rum Manipuli
Lipsius mends the errors.
quindec^^; We should read, Manipulique december: And so there were always ten
Maniples of H^stati, but not fifteen. For, Triginta Manipul^r^m agmen (which is
meant of both H^stati and Principes) read Vigi^ti, and so there were but twenty
Maniples of both these Classes. And where the vulgar Decads bear, Quia sub
signis alii quinde^im ordines locabantur, we ought to read, Alii december ordine
(not ordines) locabantur. Alii December, of what? Of Maples; and so being ten
Maniples of the Triarii, as there were twenty of the other two Classes, we have
no more but our just number of thirty Maniples in the whole Legion. Fourthly,
Where you find it written, Earum unamquamque (scilicet partem) primum pilum
vocabant: Lipsius desires you to read, Earum unamquamque primam, primum pilum
vocabant. Lipsius tells us all this by piecemeal, as I have told it you;
Terduzzi sums it up together in Latin, and then translates it into his
Italian language. I shall give it you in English thus: Every Ordo (that is
Centuriate) had sixty two Soldiers, one Centurion, and one Colors: The first
Acies or Batallion was of Hastati, in it were ten Maniples, distant a little
one from another; these were the flower of the youth: As many Maniples of a
more robust age followed, who were called Principes: Those who followed them
were all Targeteers, in brave Armor. That Body of twenty Maniples was called
Antepilani, because under the Ensigns other ten were placed in order, every
first whereof was called Primum Pilum. Assuredly Lipsius has very rationally
corrected this corrupted place of Livy, and has rendered it obvious to sense;
whereas before it was totally unintelligible: And I wish that this place of
Lipsius's amendment, were always inserted when Livy is Reprinted.

But I wish also, that Lipsius had mended another escape, which immediately But
not all.
follows; for in that same corrupted place of Livius, we read that every ordo
Triariorum tribus ex vexillis constabat; that is, Every Maniple of them had
three Ensigns; this impression Lipsius retains, and that brings him to the
necessity And errs himself.
(whereof I told you in my Discourse of the Infantry) to say, that Ensigns or
Banners might be without Captains or Leaders; the matter stands thus: Livius in
this Battle marshals the Rorarii behind the Triarii, and the Accensi behind
them: Which at that time was politickly done by the Consul Manlius; for having
to do with the Latins, who were perfectly well acquainted with the manner of
the Roman Embattelling, and who marshalled their Army in that same fashion; he
put those raw blades of the Rorarii and Accensi behind his experimented
Triarii; and when the Latins prevailed over the Roman Hastati and Principes,
the Consul subtly caused the Rorarii and Accensi to arise, whom the Latins
conceiving to be the Roman Triarii, caused their Triarii to come to the shock
with these Rorarii, and after some fight put them to flight; then did Manlius
advance with the true and fresh Roman Triarii, who easily overthrew the weary,
and something disordered Latins, over whom he gained a glorious Victory. Now
observe, that the Rorarii and Accensi were Velites, and so had neither Officer
nor Colors; and that every Maniple of the Triarii had two Centurions, and two
Ensigns; call them Signa or Vexilla, as you will: And therefore I admire,
neither can I wonder enough, why Lipsius for ex tribus Vexillis, will not
desire us to read ex ^uobus Vexillis; being every Triarian Maniple had two
Ensigns, and the Rorarii and Accensi none. Surely he might have changed three
into two, as easily as thirty Maniples into twenty, and fifteen into te^; and
by the bargain have saved himself from a Paradox, of Colors without a Captain,
and a Captain without Colors.

Neither can I pass, how the same Lipsius in that same place, thinks that Livy
Lipsius mistaken.
should be mended, for saying that the Roman Legions in that same War with the
Latins were five thousand strong; for Lipsius is of the opinion, it should be
read four thousand; and all this, I think, to cast all Roman Legions in
Polybius his Mould of four thousand, or of four thousand two hundred. The
reason he gives for his judgment is, I think, exceedingly weak: Because, says
he, Livy in that same eighth Book of his History confesses that ten years
before that War, the Legion was no stronger but four thousand Foot. An ill
consequence: For it might very well be true, that ten years before, the Legion
was but four thousand, and yet it might have been thought very fitting to add
one thousand to them in the time of that dangerous War with the Latins. The
year before Scipio carried the War out of Italy over to Africa, the Legions
were but five thousand apiece, yet he made some of them six thousand* The year
before Lucius Aemilius went to Macedon, the Legions were but five thousand, yet
in that expedition of his, they were made up to six thousand. If one year
brought forth such alterations, ten years might have produced greater.

CHAP. XI. Of a Legion, Marshalled according to Vegetius.
I May with much reason, desire that from my Reader, which Vegetius desires
from his; and that is, that what is writ by him on this subject, may be
attentively read, and read over again; because, says he, the description I am
to give is difficult and obscure. Indeed, what others who have perused him have
found, I know not; but I am sure I find his description of a Legion both
difficult and obscure, as he has made it. This he Prefaceth in the fourth
Chapter of his second Book, and in the sixth Chapter of that same Book he gives
us the ordering of a Legion, and the Marshalling it, in this manner:

You must know, says he, that in every Legion there are ten Cohorts, The first
Batallion of Vegetius his Legion.
but the first excells the rest both in number and dignity: It consists of the
choice men, and with it is the Eagle, which is the prime Banner in every
Legion. This Cohort has in it one thousand one hundred and five Soldiers of
Foot, and one hundred thirty two heavy armed Horsemen: It is called the
Milliary or Millenary Cohort, and is the head of the Legion; for from it, when
they are to fight, the rest of the first Batallion is marshalled. The second
Cohort consists of five hundred fifty five Foot, and sixty six Horse, and is
called the Cohort of five hundred. The third Cohort has the like number of
Horse and Foot, but in it, says he, there must be the ablest men, because it
stands in the middle of the Batallion. The fourth Cohort has five hundred
fifty five foot and sixty six Horse. The fifth has just as many, but it has
need, says he, to be composed of very stout Soldiers, because, as the first
Cohort is to stand on the Right Wing of the Batallion, so the fifth is to stand
on the Left hand. These five Cohorts make up the first Acies, or Batallion. Our
Author proceeds, and tells us, The sixth Cohort The second Batallion.
consists of five hundred fifty five Foot, and sixty six Horse; in it must be
those of the younger years (he means the Hastati) because the sixth Cohort has
its station behind the Eagle, and the Ensigns. The seventh Cohort has in it
five hundred fifty five Foot, and sixty six Horse. The eighth has as many, but
they must be courageous men, because they keep the middle of the second
Batallion. The ninth consists of five hundred fifty five Foot, and sixty Horse:
And so does the tenth, but the Soldiers must be good Warriors, because they
stand on the Left hand of the second Batallion. Now you see the first Batallion
consists of three thousand three hundred twenty five Foot, and three hundred
ninety six Horse. And the second Batallion of two thousand seven hundred
seventy five Foot, and three hundred and thirty Horse: Add these together, the
aggregate will be six thousand one hundred Foot, and seven hundred twenty six
Horse. And so the Legion is completely divided into these two Batallions,
without Reserve for a third Body; which, I pray you observe. And he avers there
should not be a lesser number (mark it) of armed men in every Legion, a greater
sometimes has been. And for a Corollary to this division of a Legion, he
says, in the eighth Chapter of that same Book, that there were in every Legion
fifty five Centurions. If any man be not satisfied with what he has said
already, he may read him in the fifteenth Chapter of that same Book, and there
he shall be sure to hear him speak that same language, with very little
difference.

Our Author says, By the example of one Legion he will declare how the The same
thing over again.
Field should be marshalled, when a Battle is to be fought. The Horse, says
he, are to be placed in the Wings; let us remember this. The Body of the Foot,
says he, begins to be ordered on the Right hand, where the first Cohort is
placed: To this is joyn'n the second Cohort; the third stands in the middle of
the Batallion: To it joins the fourth, and the fifth stands on the Left hand.
All, says he, that fought in this first Batallion, were called Principes; and
there he describes their Offensive and Defensive Arms, needless here to be
spoken of. The second Battle, says he, was of the Hastati, armed as the
Principes. After these were the light armed, with Plumbatae, Swords, Bows and
Arrows; Slingers there were likewise, who cast Stones out of Slings, and
Batton-slings; also Darters, who, he says, shot Arrows out of Manubalists and
Arcubalists. Thereafter he tells us, (forgetting what he said but seven or
eight lines before) that the second Batallion (O Memory, where art thou)
consisted of Hastati: And, says he, (not remembering he had told us the same
words in the sixth Chapter) In the second Batallion, on the Right hand, was
placed the sixth Cohort; to which was joined the seventh: The eighth kept the
middle Battle, accompanied with the ninth; and the tenth Cohort kept constantly
the Left hand of the second Batallion: And so our Author ends that Chapter.
Thus we have twice in two several Chapters the description of a full Legion
divided into ten Cohorts, and these ten marshalled in two Batallions or Classes
of the Principes and Hastati, without any mention Triar^i forgot.
of the Triarii, or leaving room for them.

But in the sixteenth Chapter of that same Book, as if some body had awakened
him out of his dream, he says, after all these Batallions, the Triarii were
placed, armed with Cataphracts, Head-pieces, Swords, Daggers ( Semispathis) two
Darts, and Lead-Bullets (Weapons given to that Class by none but himself.)
These Triarii, says he, kneeling on one knee rested, till, the first Battle At
length remembered.
chancing to be beaten, they might renew the fight. If any man think he has
done well to remember the Triarii at last, who were the Romans greatest
strength, I shall be content he enjoy his opinion, provided he let me keep
mine; which is, that he needed not now have mentioned them at all, since he
has already marshalled his Legion; all the ten Cohorts of it, and all the full
number of six thousand one hundred Foot, completely without them; whereof I
shall tell you more in the next Chapter.

In the seventeenth Chapter of his second Book he informs us, that in the
beginning Velites.
of the fight the Principes and Hastati stood still, and moved not; and the
Triarii kneeled or sat (for he speaks of both postures) till the light armed
had skirmished, and were beat in to the Legionaries; and after the Victory, the
heavy armed kept their ground, and stood like a Wall, leaving the pursuit of
the routed Enemy to the Horse, and the Velites.

But I cannot find in my heart to part with Vegetius, till I see how he will
Legion once more marshalled.
yet be pleased to dispose of the Triarii: And I find him in the fourteenth
Chapter of his third Book begin de novo to marshal the Foot, as if he had never
spoke one word of it before. It is, says he, the Law of embattelling, to place
the old and experienced Soldiers in the first order (here he confounds Ordo
and Acies) and these were called Principes. In the second were the Hastati, and
then he speaks of Distances between the Orders, whereof I shall tell you in my
discourse of Intervals. The third Order or Body was of the swiftest Velites, as
Darters, and the youngest Archers. The fourth was of the youngest Archers,
(Good Lord, again youngest Archers) and these, says he, who Strange
repetitions.
were called Lanciers, and were also called Martiobarboli, and were
Lead-casters: If these beat the Enemy, says he, they pursued him too; but if
they were beaten, they were received by the first and second Batallion; suppose
of heavy armed: You see how Vegetius loves to refresh his Readers memory. Well
then, the third and fourth Batallions fought before the first and second, or
any of them came to the shock. In the fifth Batallion our Author places
Carrobalists, Slingers and Batton-Slingers. But I must propose a question or
two by the way. First, Did the third and fourth Batallions, both which, as you
see, Two questions.
he makes to consist of the Velites, after they had fought with, and were
repelled by an Enemy, retire only to the Rear of the Hastati, or to the Rear of
the Army? I suppose the last, though Vegetius through inadvertency, says only
to the Rear of the two first Batallions; for if so, they ^ad undoubtedly
obstructed very much the advance of the Triarii, or the Retreat of both
Principes and Hastati; my next Query is, why Vegetius does not appoint the
Slingers, and Batton slingers to skirmish in the Van, as well as the Velites of
the third and fourth Batallions, since they were all light armed: and if it be
said the Slingers could cast their stones over the heads of the two Batallions
of heavy armed, I answer first, their stones would do less hurt at that
distance. Secondly, the Archers in the third and fourth rank could have done as
much. Thirdly, the keeping their station and place in the fifth Batallion
hindered the Triarii to advance. Now if these of Vegetius his third and fourth
Batallions were obliged to go to the Van, and fight or skirmish there, why did
he not appoint the light armed of his fifth Batallion to do so too, since they
were all liable to one Duty. But I hinder him to Marshall his sixth Batallion.
The sixth order or body, says he, consisted of (and now welcome Triarii)
Warriors furnished with all manner of Triarii.
Arms and Weapons, whom the Ancients called Triarii. These, says he, used to
sit (then they kneeled not) behind all the other Batallions, that being whole
and sound, and in breath, they might with more vigor attack the enemy; for if
any thing fell out otherwise than well with the Batallions that stood before
them, all hopes of recovery depended on them. Now if our Author has spoken
well of the ancient Roman Legion, I am sure he has spoken enough of it. He
has been at much pains to make up that Legion, but that you may the better see
the defects of it, I shall be at the trouble to take it down in pieces in the
ensuing Chapter.

CHAP. XII. Vegetius his Legion reviewed and examined.
WHoever has read, or shall be pleased to read Vegetius his Treatise De re
Militari, will believe with me, that he intended nothing less than to write the
Military constitutions and customs of Levies, Arms, Exercising, Marshalling,
Embattelling, Marching, or other Laws and Points of the Art of War used in his
own days; but in the contrary, the Roman way and method of War of the ancient
times. And this he professes all along, not only in his Prologues to his
Master the Emperor Valentinian, but almost in every Book of his Treatise. In
the Prologue of his second Book, he says, the Emperor had commanded him to set
down the Antiqua, the ancient customs. In the Prologue to Vegetius obliges
himself to write of the old Roman Militia;
his third Book, he avers, that the Emperor had commanded him to abbreviate in
one Piece all the ancient Military Customs and Constitutions which were
dispersed and scattered in several Books and Authors. And in one word he
Entitles his Epitome, Institutions of Military matters out of the Commentaries
of Cato, Celsus, Trajan, Adrian, and Frontinus. Now, none of these wrote, or
could write of any Military Customs practiced in Vegetius his time, as having
lived several ages before him, and he acknowledges himself that the Art of War
of his days was but a shadow, and scarce that of the ancient one. But by the
way I must tell you, that Steuechius thinks Adrian wrote no Military
Constitutions, since at his desire Aelian had composed that Piece de
Instruendi^ Aciebus, whereof we have spoken. But his reason is exceedingly
weak, for Adrian might very well have written the Roman Military Art, and yet
have dedesired Aelian to write the Grecian one. But to return, Vegetius in the
twentieth Chapter of his first Book having given us an account of the ancient
Roman Not that of his own time.
Arms, acknowledges that they were wholly worn out, and that in comparison of
them, the Foot of his time were naked, which had given so great an advantage to
the Barbarous Nations of the Goths, Huns and Allans. To the Eighth Chapter of
his second Book, he gives this title, Of those who were leaders of the ancient
Centuries and Files. And the Seventh Chapter of that Book he begins with these
words, Having expounded, says he, the ancient ordering of a Legion. And in
many other places he witnesses, that it is the ancient Roman Militia, that he
is to open to us, and no new one which had deviated from that old one.

This being premised by me to anticipate objections, I make bold to charge
Vegetius with seven gross Errors in the description of his Legion, yet all
seven Seven Errors in the Descrition of his Legion.
will not amount to one mortal sin, (which, they say, be likewise seven) nay,
nor to one capital crime. But if he be guilty of all these, or any of these,
then I say, he is not so good as his word in the fourth Chapter of his Second
Book, where he promises Ordinationem Legionis antiquae, secundum norman
Militaris Juris exponore: To expound to us the right ordering of an ancient
Legion according to the Rule of Military Law. But I shall endeavor to justify
my charge in this following order.

First, I question the number of his Legionary Foot, which he makes to be First
Error.
six thousand one hundred, and all heavy armed; mark that I read once of six
thousand, and once more of six thousand and two hundred, (and in that number
were comprehended the Velites) but never of six thousand and one hunhundred.
The truth is, Romulus made his Legion three thousand, after him it was
augmented and diminished according to the King, Senate, or peoples pleasure, or
the necessities of the State to 4000, to 4200, to 5000, to 5200, and sometimes
(but very seldom) to 6000, or 6200, as Regiments are now made stronger and
weaker in our modern Levies, according to the pleasure of the Prince or State
who makes them; but for most part the ancient Roman Legion was 4000, or 4200.
Livy in his Sixth Book says, four Legions were levied against the Gauls, each
of 4000 Foot. In his Seventh Book, he says, that in the Consulship of young
Camillus, four Legions were raised, each of 4200 Foot. In his Eighth Book he
tells us, that in the War against the Latins, every Legion consisted of 5000
Foot. In his Ninth Book he makes the Legion to be 4000 Foot, in the War against
the Samnites. In his 21 Book he speaks of six Legions, each of them 4000 Foot.
And not to spend more time in Instances, the same Historian (out of whom and
Polybius, I suppose Vegetius borrowed his greatest light of History) says in
his 22 Book, that every Roman Legion was 5000 Foot in the time of their
dangerous War with their redoubted enemy Hannibal; but after that was ended,
they were reduced to 4000 till the Macedonian War, except that some of them
were made 6200 by Scipio. Unless then once in Africa, and once in Greece, we
never find a Legion 6000 strong, but never at all to be 6100, as Vegetius would
have it to be constantly. He would have done himself much right, and his Reader
a great favor to have told who levied these Legions of 6100. if it was so in
his own time, or yet in the decadency of both the Roman Empire and Militia,
that makes, nothing to his purpose, it is the ancient customs we require of
him, for it is these he promised to us. But if we take in all these three
Bodies of light armed Foot which he so frequently mentions in the number of the
Legion, as Rolybius does the Velites in his Legion, and proportion 400 light
armed for every 1000 heavy armed, as the same Polybius does; then Vegetius his
Legion shall exceed 8500, of which we read in no story. Now if all these
Instances I have given out of Livius, and in another place shall give out of
Polybius be true, then Vegetius his assertion, that a Legion should have no
fewer than 6100 heavy armed Foot, can have no truth at all in it, and that also
which he subjoins in that same sixth Chapter of his Second Book must be false.

Secondly, I cannot believe him that either every Troop consisted of 32 Horse,
Second Error.
or that 726 Riders belonged to every Legion. If I trust either the one or the
other, I must give the lie to two more ancient Writers than himself, that is
Polybius and Livius. The last whereof in his Seventh Book says, four Legions
were elected, and for every one of them 300 Horse. In the dangerous War against
Hannibal, no more but 300 Horse for a Legion. Livy in his Ninth Book speaks but
of 300 Horse for every Legion in the War with the Samnites. In the great battle
of Cannae they were but 300, as that Historian witnesses in his 22 Book. In
his 29 Book he says, Scipio had no more in Africa but 300 Horse for every
Legion, the Foot whereof were 6200. And his brother Lucius Scipio had no more
in Asia but 300 for every Legion of 5400 Foot. Neither had the Consul Aemilius
more Horse for a Legion in Macedon than 300, though the Foot were 6000. Once I
read in Livy, it is in his 40 Book, and if I remember right, it was against the
Ligurians, that 400 Horse were ordained for each Legion; otherwise according to
Livius, the number was constantly 300. Polybius all along in his History allots
no more Horse to a Legion but 300, except once, (and I pray you observe it) it
is in his Second Book, where he says, the Senate sent two Legions to Sicily,
each consisting of 4000 Foot, and 200 Horse; and as this is the least number I
read of, so that of Livy's 400 Horse against the Ligurians is the greatest
number of Horse for one Legion. In the Wars against both the Gauls and
Carthaginians, Polybius gives but 300 Horse to every Legion. In the dividing
his 726 Riders, Vegetius errs twice, first for allowing 22 Turms or Troops to
the Cavalry, Ten being the ordinary number; next for allowing 32 Riders to each
Troop, whereas there were but 30: Both which assertions of mine are grounded on
History, and are likewise taken out of Polybius his Sixth Book, as I have made
it appear in my Discourse of the Roman Cavalry. Besides, our Authors error in
calculo may be charged on him as a Peccadillo, for though we should admit 22
Troops in every Legion, and thirty two Riders in every Troop, the number will
not amount to 726, for multiply 32 by 22, the aggregate will be but 704. But in
steps Steuechius, and lends Vegetius his hand, and says the Decurions must be
added, who being 22 in number, (one for every Troop) makes Vegetius his number
726 complete. But this shall not help him, for Decurions, Standard-bearers,
Trumpeters, or Horn-winders, (if Troops had any of the last) were all of the
number of the 30, and none of them Supernumeraries, as I have made it appear
out of Polybius in my Discourse of Cavalries, and therefore they must be of the
number of the 32 likewise. And if I should permit Steuechius to make the
Decurions supernumeraries, he will be obliged to give me leave to reckon the
Cornets and Trumpeters not to be of the number of the 32, and these being 44 in
number would increase the horse of every Legion to 770, and if he please he may
reckon the Turmae, Coactores, or Bringers up, who by Polybius his account were
three for every Turme, and consequently 66 in 22 Troops, and then an addition
being made of all, we shall find the aggregate of the Horse for Vegetius his
Legion to be 836.

The third complaint I make is that Vegetius Marshals two Troops of Horse Third
Error
with every Cohort and four Troops with the first Cohort. Observe that here it
is not the question whether this way of Marshalling be good or not, nor is it
the question, whether it be not good, that Foot and Horse should be near one
another when they fight, but the question is, whether the ancient Romans used
this way, or not, or if this be the right way of ordering or Marshalling an old
Legion, which Vegetius promised to give us. I aver it is not; and I know no old
Author will contradict my assertion. It will be lost labor to instance these
Battles described by ancient Historians, who mention nothing like this manner
of Embattelling. In my Discourses of both Infantry and Cavalry, I have shown
how Horsemen have fought on foot, how they have fought with horses unbridled;
and how Foot and Horse have been mingled together in Skirmishes, and Battles;
but I read not in any Author of this method of Marshalling, that Vegetius
speaks of; nay the current of History evinceth the contrary for most part, the
Horse were drawn up in the wings, and the Foot in the Battle. So it was at
Cannae, where the Consul Aemilius fought on the right hand with the Roman
Cavalry, and Terentius Varo on the left with the Horse of the Allies. The like
was done at the Battle of Metaurus against Asdrubal. In the two Battles which
Scipio fought in Africa, the very same was practiced. Sometimes all the Horse
were Marshalled in one of the wings as Caesar drew up all his in the right wing
of the army; and Pompey most of his Cavalry on the left hand of his army at
that great Battle of Pharsalia, where these two brave Romans fought for no less
wager than the Empire of the World. At Vzita the same Caesar being to offer
Battle to Scipio, Pompey's Father-in-law, drew up all his Horsemen on the
left-wing of his army, and mixed Foot with them. Polybius in his 14 Book
informs us that the Great Scipio being to fight against Syphax, Marshalled his
Roman Horse in one wing, and his Auxiliaries in the other. And which is very
observable against Vegetius, he says in that same place, that in doing so,
Romana Militia consuetudinem simpliciter servavit. He simply and purely
observed the custom of the Roman Militia.

Nor will it be one full step out of my way to tell you, that I think Horse do
not at all belong to a Legion, it being as I suppose wholly composed of Foot;
Horse belonged not properly to Legious;
for though most Historians tell us, that when Legions were levied, Horse were
also raised, and punctually for every Legion 300 Horse, yet must not that be so
understood as that these 300 horse were to be reckoned to be a member or part
of that Legion; nay, most Authors disjoin them, and say, so many Legions, and
so many Horse were raised. Let Caesar an Author beyond all exception be Judge.
In the Seventh Book of the French War, he says, he gave to his Legate* Labienus
(the same who afterward deserted him) four Legions, and kept six with himself;
and that you may be sure he meant only Foot, he subjoins that he ordered him to
take a part of the Cavalry with him, how many he tells not; but if every Legion
was to have a set number of horses, that great Captain (who loses no words in
his Commentaries) needed not have mentioned Horse; for Proved from Caesar,
when he said, he sent four Legions, we should have known that 2004 horse were
sent according to Vegetius his account of 726 Horse, for every Legion, or 1200
according to the true account of 300 for every Legion.

In his Third Book of the Civil War, he sent Cassius Longinus to Thessaly with
one Legion, and two hundred Horse, not with ^26, nor yet with 300. He sen^
Calvisi^s Sabinus to Aetolia with five Cohorts, and a few Horse, He sent C^eias
Domitius to Macedon with three Legions and 500 Horse. Hear him speak once more,
for he deserves to be heard, he tells us in that same Book, that S^ipio,
Pompey's Father-in-law, brought out of Syria to Greece, Omnes Legiones,
Equitesque: All the Legions and the Horsemen. If Horse belonged properly to
Legions, why did he distinguish them, who knew ^he Military Art, and the words
of the Art best of any? But Vegetius shall be invincible for me, unless he beat
himself, which he will presently do. For notwithstanding all he has said in
the sixth Chapter of his Second Book, yet in the 15 Chapter of that same Book
he confesses that Equites locantur in cornibus: Horsemen are placed in the
wings. And in the 17 Chapter he says, Equites ponuniur in cornibus, it a ui
lorica^^ amnes juncti sint peditibus: The Horsemen are placed in the wings, so
that all the heavy armed horse join with the Foot: What means that, join with
the Foot? It is that one part of them joined with the Foot on the right hand,
and the other on the left; and so himself clears it in that very Chapter, where
he says, If Horsemen be too weak, according to the custom of the Ancients,
Footmen who And out of Vegetius himself.
are swift, armed with light Targets, and exercised in that manner of fight,
are to be mixed with them; for Foot mixed with the Horse, and Horse joined to
the Foot, are two several things. And in the first Chapter of the same Book he
says the Horse are called the wings, because they protect the foot, ad
similitudinem alarnm, to the similitude of wings: Let now any man reconcile
Vegetius to himself, and he and I shall be very soon good friends.

But the Hastati make a terrible clamor, and cry they have wrong done them
Fourth Error.
by Vegetius in Marshalling the Principes before them. They say that being the
youngest and least experienced, it was some honor done to them to place them
in the first Battalion, for thereby they were exposed to the first fury of an
enemy, which many times they valian^ly repelled; if not, they served at least
(as the Great Turk's Asapi) to blunt both the Enemies Courage and Swords. The
Principes cry as loud, that Vegetius has robbed them of the dignity, they
always had to stand in the middle between the Hastati and the Triarii, and to
be looked on as the restorers of the Battle, when the Hastati were worsted. But
neither of them has so good reason to complain as the Triarii, whom we shall
hear anon. And assuredly to me it seems very strange, that not only in the
mentioned places, but all along in his whole Treatise, our Author Marshals the
Principes before the Hastati, against the universal consent of all History.
Livy in his Seventh Book tells how Lenus the Consul drew up his Hastati in the
Van, the Principes in the middle, and the Triarii in the Rear, against the
Gauls; and then was the Roman Discipline strictly observed. So were the Hastati
in the Van, when Marcellus fought at Canusium with Hannibal, Live. lib. 27. And
in his 37 Book he informs us that Scipio Asia^icus in the battle he fought with
Antiochus, ordered his Hastati in the Van, the Principes in the middle, and the
Triarii in the Rear. And that I may not weary my Reader with instances, I
believe, and upon good grounds, that in all Livies Decads that are extant,
Vegetius nor any for him shall not read, that the Hastati were placed behind
the Principes, except once that it is written (I suppose not by himself) in his
Thirtieth Book, that Scipi^ in his battle against Sip(...) Asarubal Marshalled
the Principes before the Hastati. And Lipsius has good reason to think that
this place is falsified, since Polybius (out of whom it is like Livy has the
story) writes the very contrary, that is, that Scipio Marshalled the Principes
behind the Hastati; and if this place were not corrupted, then Livius should
contradict himself, for in his Eighth Book he says once for all, Hastati omnium
primi pugnam inibant: The Javelineers, says he, first of all began the battle.
And sure the same Scipio at the battle of Zama against Hannibal, placed the
Hastati in the Van, by a good token; for they were so mixed with the enemy,
that he was glad to found a Retreat for them, that he might have ground to
bring his Principes up to the Medley, which the same Livy reports to us.

In the fifth place Polybius complains that Vegetius has murdered five of his
Fifth Error*
Centurions, for he in his Sixth Book appoints sixty for every Legion,
whereof Vegetius in the eighth Chapter of his Second Book produces but five
and fifty yet he needs not be afraid to be brought to any juridical trial for
this assassination. Truly it seems strange to me that Polybius his Legion
consisting but of 3000 heavy armed, should have sixty Centurions, and that of
Vegetius, which was a hundred more than twice as strong, should have but 55,
for all his 6100 were heavy armed, as he describes them in that same Chapter. I
can fancy no reason for this, but that it was his fancy to write so: I confess
indeed it is more than probable that at the first institution by Romulus, that
band of men which was called a Century, consisted of one hundred men; and so
the Centurions were no more but thirty, and in process of time in a Legion of
that same strength might be sixty* for as I told you in my Discourse of the
Infanteries, though the particular bands of a Legion came to consist but of
sixty men, and those of the Triarii perhaps but of thirty men, yet still the
denominations of Century and Centurio remained as before. But never was a
Centurio heard of that commanded more men than one hundred, except in Vegetius
his Legion, in the first Cohort whereof (consisting of 110^ men) every
Centurion commanded 184 men; if there were but six Centuriats in that Cohort,
as is to be supposed; for if you divide 1105 by six, the Quotient will be 184
with the fraction of, one; but till Vegetius his number of 55 Centurions be
made more clear to us, than yet it is, we may safely believe with Polybius,
that in one Legion though not so strong as that of Vegetius, there were no
fewer than sixty Centurions, to which Titus Livius does give his consent in his
Eighth Book, as the place is amended and corrected by Lipsius, according to the
true and genuine sense of the Author.

Sixthly, to my sense it is undeniable, since the Roman Militia was reformed,
Sixth Error*
and indeed almost instituted by Tullus Hostilius, that there were ten Cohorts
in every Legion, even when it consisted but of 3000; three Centuries at that
time making a Cohort, and afterward three Maniples, every one whereof was
composed of two Centuriats. If the Centuries consisted of full hundreds, then
each Maniple contained two hundred, and consequently the Cohort consisted of
six hundred. And so we may suppose Scipio and Aemilius their Cohorts to have
been, when their Legions were six thousand a (...)e. And this Cohort of 600 men
is the strongest we read of; for in my Discourse o^ ^oman Infantery, I have
distinguished the Pretorian Cohorts from the Legionary ones. But a Cohort of
1105 men, as Vegetius will have his first Cohort to be, is not to pass muster,
and as little warrant he had to make every one of his other nine Cohorts to
consist of 555 heavy armed. Sure he might with more ease to himself have given
to his right hand Cohort 700 men, and to every one of the other nine, 600; and
this had completed his ^egion of 6100, and by the bargain he had kept sixty
Centurions in it, by giving to the six Centurions of the first Cohort, 116, or
117 men a piece, and to every Centurion of the other nine Cohorts, 100. Or if
he had made his Legion completely 6000 and no more, he might have given equally
to every Centurion of sixty, one hundred men, and this had been the fairest and
impartialest dealing. But how the whimsie of his fractions of fives flew in his
head I cannot tell, unless to trouble both himself and his Reader.

But seventhly, Room, room, cry the Triarii, they can have no longer patience
Seventh Error.
either to kneel or sit, they are all on foot, Conclamant arma, they expect
neither Principes, nor Hastati to retire to them, but advance in full arms,
threatening they will be members of the Legion, and the principal members too;
and in the Legion they will be, though it were over Vegetius his belly. They
are very angry that in the sixth and 15 Chapters of his Second Book, he should
have mustered a complete Legion without them, their clamor is so loud, that to
pacify them, Vegetius in the 14 Chapter of his Third Book, assigns them place
behind three bodies of light armed, and ordains them to be the sixth Batallion,
and to give them some ease after the wrong he had done them, he allows them to
sit, whereas before he had ordered them to kneel, sometimes on one, sometimes
on both knees. But indeed they have no reason to be satisfied with such
favors, since he has wholly exterminated them out of the Legion, in both his
descriptions of it; for he divides the whole Legion, and all the ten Cohorts of
it, and every man of these ten Cohorts into two Acies, or Batallions; in the
first whereof he places the Principes consisting of five Cohorts, in which are
3325 men. In the second he rangeth the Hastati in five Cohorts, in which he
musters 2775 men, which make completely up his full number of 6100 heavy armed.
So you see in both these places there is no room left, nor mention made of the
Triarii. And though in his Third Book he appoints them to be in the Rear, yet
the Legion being made up of the Principes and Hastati without them, it must
follow that in Vegetius his account the Triarii were no Legionaries. Besides
all this, they accuse him of either theft or robbery, because in the beginning
of the 6th Chapter of his Second Book, he has either stolen or violently taken
from them the Eagle, and given it to the first Cohort of the Principes; for
they aver that it, being the prime Ensign of the Legion, was recommended to
their care, and the keeping of it to their Primipilus, or first Centurion. How
Vegetius will answer to all these accusations, I know not, but those who will
defend him had best do it out of his own Books; for I have consulted his
Commentator Steuechius, and find he pleads nothing at all for him, nay, nor
seems not to take notice, that he stands in need of his help, for Commenting on
that same Chapter I last spoke of: all he tells us is that there was but one
Eagle in a Steuechius* taxed.
Legion, wherewith he says he thought fit to acquaint Novitiates (a great
secret) and that there were many Ensigns, and is pleased to give us the figures
of those Images Vegetius speaks of, this is all. And indeed to tell it once for
all, Steuechius is large and prolix enough to explain things where no
difficulty appears, but where matters are debatable, I find in him nothing but
a profound silence.

I shall not need to tell my Reader how Vegetius repeats things over and over
Vegetius his Tautalogies.
again, nor how his Tautologies are obvious, Vsque ad nauseam, nor yet what
brave men, experienced Soldiers, and expert Warriors, he will have to be placed
in the Cohorts that stand on the right and left hands, and in the middle of
both his Batallions, of which he composeth his Legion. But I dare presume to
say that if any of the ancient Roman Dictators or Consuls, who Triumphed
gloriously over their enemies, had lived in the Emperor Valentinians time,
they would rather have chused to have submitted the fortune of their battles to
the doubtful Die of War once more, than to have Marshalled their Legions after
Vegetius his Model.

CHAP. XIII. Of a Roman Legion, Marshalled according to Polybius.
I Speak so often of Polybius, that I think it will not be amiss to tell you
what he was. His Father Licortas was a famous Citizen of Megalopolis, who by
his Valor and Virtue came to be the Supreme Magistrate (whom they called
Praetor) of all the Achaeans. This Praetor by his charge presided in their
Councils, and was their Chieftain in their Wars. Licortas succeeded to the
renowned Captain Philopaemon, who was cruelly forced by the Messenians (after
he was their Prisoner) to drink a full draught of deadly Poison. Polybius What
Polybius was.
was a Soldier in Greece, and as himself witnesses in his eleventh Book, was
a Commander in the Achaean Army, under Philopamon, at the Battle of Mantinea,
against Machanidas the Tyrant of Lacedaem^n, who was there overthrown and
killed. He was long after that a great favorite, yea, a Counselor of that
Scipio who was sometimes called Africanus Minor, and sometimes Numantinus;
because he ended the Carthaginian and Numantine War, with the destruction of
both Cities. There were some reasons why Scipio should be kind to Polybius,
because his Natural Father Lucius Aemilius, (for this Scipio was but the
adopted Grandchild of the great Africanus) was the Author of carrying many
hundred Achaeans Prisoners to Rome, (for no reason but suspicion) among whom
Polybius was one, who lay full seventeen years Prisoner there, where he had
leisure enough to learn both the Roman language and customs. Scipio was a very
great Captain, a strict reformer of the old Roman Militia, and a severe
Disciplinarian, from whom Polybius could not but know all the mysteries of the
Roman Art of War, being a person of so great abilities, as those parcels of his
History, yet extant, speak him ta have been; and truly we have reason to be
sorry that we are robbed of those Books of his, of which all-devouring time
has deprived us. Let us hear how he marshals a Roman Legion.

A Legion in that Scipio Minor's time, consisted of four thousand two hundred
men, as many times it did both before and after him; whereof six hundred were
Triarii, and made the third Batallion, obliged to kneel on their Right knee,
till either the other two Classes retired to them, or that the General
commanded them to rise and advance. These, he says, were never more than six
hundred, though the Legion chanced to be four thousand two hundred, as many
times it did. And for this we must take his word. Before the Triarii stood the
Principes, men in the flower of their age; and before them, the Hastati in the
Van; they were the youngest and rawest of all the heavy armed; each of these
two Batallions consisted of twelve hundred; and all the three were alike armed,
except that the Triarii, instead of Pila, carried short Spears; of all which I
have spoken sufficiently already. So you see all Polybius The Polyb^^^ Legion.
his heavy armed amounted to three thousand: The rest, which were twelve
hundred, were, says he, Velites; and these, he says, were levied of the
poorest and most inconsiderable sort of the people. Nor do I find, that he
divides these twelve hundred Velites, into three Squadrons; one whereof should
stand behind every one of the Classes of the heavy armed, of all which I have
already spoke, in my discourse of the Infantry; and yet Terduzzi, and the Sieur
de Preissack would father this upon Polybius: But indeed, in my judgment, he
leaves the light armed to be disposed of in the Flanks, Van or Rear, as the
General conceived they might be most useful. He appoints his Legion to be
divided into thirty Maniples (suppose still the heavy armed) each Maniple to
consist of two Centuriates; to every Century he allows an Ensign and a
Centurion, whom he permits to choose his Sub-Centurion; of all which I have
already spoke. The numbers of the Hastati, Principes, and Velites, might alter,
according to the strength of the Legion, but not the Triarii. He tells us, that
three hundred Horse were levied with every Legion; but says not, that they made
a part of every Legion. These three hundred Horse he divides into ten Turms or
Troops, and Officers them, as I have shown you in my Discourse of the Cavalry.
He leaves them to be marshalled, where the Commander in chief thought they
might do best service. And now we have the Polybian Legion.

No word here for all this, how deep, that is, how many in File, either of
Horse or Foot; or what, or how much ground was allowed for distance between
Files or Ranks; or yet how great the Intervals were between the several
Maniples of every one of the Classes, or what between the Classes themselves,
or between the several Troops of Horse. A great oversight, for of all these we
are forced to hear other men's conjectures, and make use of our own, as we shall
offer to do in the following Chapter.

CHAP. XIV. Of Distances, and Intervals of the several Bodies and Batallions of
the Foot and Horse.
BEfore we proceed to our conjectures, it will be fit, first to know what this
word Interval properly signifies, and how it is taken. In both Ancient and
Modern Fortifications, Towns, Castles, and Camps were defended not only with
Ramparts of Earth, and Walls of Stone, but also with great Logs or Stakes of
Timber, which we call Palli^adoes, these the Romans in their language called
Valli, and, I suppose, thereafter the Rampart it self got the Vallus and Vallum.
name of Vallus and Vallum; hence perhaps our Wall. These Stakes were, and are
of two kinds, longer and shorter; the first stood straight up from the ground,
the second had the one end of them fixed in the Rampart, and the other lying on
it, to hinder an approach to it; distinguished by the Germans by several names,
for they call the long* Stakes Palli^adoes, and the short ones Stockadoes, both
the one and the other sharp-pointed at both ends. The Ground, Earth, or part of
the Rampart, between two Pallisadoes or Stockadoes, is properly called an
Interval; but it is borrowed, and appropriated to Interval what.
any distance between Bodies greater and smaller; yea, to the space that is
between one time and another, an Interval of time is now language proper
enough, and Physicians borrow it, and call an Intermitting Ague, Febris
Intervallata, an Intervalled Feavor.

What distance or Intervals there were between Roman Ranks, and between
Deepness of the File not told
Files between several Bodies of either their Horse or Foot, no ancient Author
has cleared to us, but left us to grope in the dark. Nor can we well guess at
them, till we condescend how many in File both Horse and Foot were marshalled.
I told you before, that Vegetius in the twenty fifth Chapter By Vegetius.
of his second Book, seems to make the Foot eleven deep, because, as I told
you, he orders a Contubernium of Soldiers to manage a Carrobalist, and that,
he says, consisted of eleven men. But this does not prove that Vegetius his
File was precisely eleven, no more than what he says in the fifteenth Chapter
of his third Book (that ten thousand men drawn up in six Ranks, will take up so
much ground in Front) will prove, that the Roman Foot were drawn up six deep.
And so for Vegetius, we know not the deepness of either the Roman Foot or
Horse. Nor will we be one jot the wiser for Polybius for the discourse he has
in his twelfth Book, where he speaks of Horse Nor by Polybius.
eight in File, does not concern the Roman Militia, for he speaks there of
Macedonian and Persian Warriors, and is confuting Calisthenes his History of
the Battle of Issus, between Alexander and Da^ius, as I noted before. Achilles
Terduzzi imagines the Roman Foot to have been twelve in File, but that was to
make good his conjecture of the quantity of ground a Consular Army took up,
whereof I may chance to speak hereafter. But the common opinion carries me
along with it, that both the Roman Horse and Foot ordinarily were Roman Horse
and Foot te^ deep.
marshalled ten in File, but upon emergencies, Generals might alter it; though,
I confess, the strong reason for it to me seems very weak, which is, that the
Leader of the Horse was called Decurio, and he of the File of Foot Dec^nus; for
this last is appropriated to other Offices; and the first by Aelian's
Translator is given to the Leader of a Macedonian File, which consisted of
sixteen. But this supposition, as probable, we must make the basis or ground,
on which to build our most probable conjectures of the Intervals of several
Bodies and Classes, in which both our Authors give us small assistance, yet I
shall give you all I can pick out of them, or others, on that Subject.

When Polybius in his twelfth Book told us, that for most part Horsemen were
ranged eight deep (meaning, I think, the Persian Horse) he subjoins, that there
must be an Interval between several Troops; but what that Interval was, he
forgot to tell us: It is pity, he who knew things so well, should needlessly
have kept them up from us as secrets; the reason he gives for an Interval
between two Troops does not weigh much, because, says he, they Intervals
between Troops
must have ground for conversion; that is, to face to either Right or Left
hand, or by any of them to the Rear. If any of these be needful, whole
Squadrons of four, six or eight Troops joined together, may do it as easily and
conveniently as single Troops, which consist of three or four Files at most.
But conversions on that same ground are seldom necessary, never convenient.
But being left to guess, how many foot of Interval, Troops ten deep Conjectured
required one from another, I conjecture, eight Foot; which I ground on that,
the same Polybius says in that same twelfth Book, which is, that a Stadium, or
Furlong, contained eight hundred Horse drawn up in Battle. Then I say, First, a
Stadium, is the eighth part of an Italian mile, one hundred twenty five paces,
six hundred twenty five Foot. Secondly, eight hundred Horse, being at our
Authors rate eight in File, are one hundred in Front. Thirdly, For every
Horseman to stand on Horse* back, and room to handle his Arms; I allow, with
others, four foot of ground, and so for one hundred Horses, four hundred Foot.
Fourthly, According to Polybius, and, I suppose, the Out of Polybius.
Roman rule, the eight hundred Horse must be divided into several Troops, and
in each of them but thirty Riders; so there will be twenty ^^x complete Troops,
and twenty Horsemen for the twenty seventh Troop. Fifthly, Twenty seven Troops
require twenty six Intervals. Now allow with Polybius, a Stadi^m for eight
hundred Horsemen; that is, for one hundred in Front, and for these hundred
allow with me four hundred Foot for the Horsemen to stand on, you will have of
six hundred twenty five foot of ground for your twenty six Intervals, two
hundred and seventeen foot; and that will be eight foot, and near one half, for
every Interval. So my opinion is, (if I understand Polybius right) that the
Interval between two single Troops was about eight foot.

But let us fancy the Roman Horse to have been ten in File, and so every Troop
only three in Front, for so I probably think they were* and let u^ remember,
that in every Consular Army there were twenty Roman Troops, and forty of the
Allies; in all sixty. Fancy those sixty Troops drawn up in one Field, upon one
of the Wings of the Army (as several times all the Cavalry was marshalled on
one Wing) they must have fifty nine Intervals. Next, remember that sixty
Troops, at thirty in a Troop, were composed of eighteen hundred Too many
Intervals.
Riders; these drawn up, ten in File, made one hundred and eighty Leadders;
allow to every one of these four foot, that will amount to seven hundred and
twenty foot; then for fifty nine Intervals (which, according to Polybius, sixty
Troops must have) you are to allow four hundred seventy two foot (at eight foot
for each Interval) I suppose still that which I can scarcely believe, of so
many Intervals; but add four hundred seventy two foot, to seven hundred and
twenty, the aggregate will be eleven hundred ninety two foot. How these sixty
Troops, marshalled so thin, so few in Front, with so many Intervals, could
stand out the brisk and furious charge of a numerous and courageous Enemy, is
beyond my fancy* unless they have been interlin'd with wellarmed Foot.

As to the Distances between Bodies of Foot, Polybius in the twel^th Book
Over^ight in Polybius.
so often cited, allows expressly six foot between Files, but he is to be
understood in that place of the Macedonian Phalanx, conf^ting the impertinent
relation of Calisthenes; but he speaks not there or elsewhere o^ distance
between Roman Files: And yet here is an inadvertency in that great man, as we
shall see another immediately in Vegetius of the same nature. Polybius allows
six thousand foot of ground for the Front or Longitude of sixteen thousand men
sixteen deep, and so we have one thousand Files; between every one of the Files
he allow^ six foot of distance, so the distances do completely take up his six
thousand Foot, and so no ground is allowed to stand on; to which, if he had
adverted, he would have allowed one foot to each man whereon to stand, and
consequently seven thousand foot for one thousand Files in Front. But I shall
not question the six foot of distance between Files, being I have told you in
the Grecian Militia that much was necessary for their Pike-men between Ranks on
their march, though not between Files; and that in standing in Battle, they
used Densatio, three foot* of distance, and in fight, Constipa^^^, one foot and
a half. Vegetius is more inexcusable than Polybius, for he allows for the Ranks
one foot Two in Vegetius.
of ground to stand on, in these words, Singuli Bellat^res stantes singulos
obtinent pedes, Every Combatant, says he, takes up one foot of ground. But that
he allows none for them to stand on, when he speaks of Files, I prove thus: In
the fourteenth Chapter of his third Book, he allows three foot of distance
between Files; and in the next place says, that ten thousand men, marshalled
The first in distance of Files.
six deep, made a Front of sixteen hundred sixty six: and so it does with a
fraction only of four; hitherto he is very right, but concludes very ill, that
these sixteen hundred sixty six Files took no more ground up in Front but one
thousand paces, that is five thousand foot. A thing purely impossible, for
three foot of Distance is allowed by himself between File and File; and next,
sixteen hundred sixty six Files require sixteen hundred sixty five distances;
multiply sixteen hundred sixty five by three, the product is four thousand nine
hundred ninety five; these want but 5 foot of Vegetius his one thousand paces.
Where shall then the sixteen hundred sixty six Combatants stand, certainly they
had sixteen hundred sixty six foot of ground to stand on; add sixteen hundred
sixty six to four thousand nine hundred ninety five, the aggregate is six
thousand six hundred sixty one foot; a third more than Vegetius allowed to
sixteen hundred sixty six Files: In imitation of him, Terduzzi commits the very
same error in his fifth and sixth Chapters. In the next place, Vegetius allows
six foot of distance between The second of Ranks.
Ranks, because men must run* when they throw their Darts and Javelines, for so
they cast them with greater ^orce; Vehementius, says he, I think he speaks
reason, but not at all sense; when he avers, that six Ranks of men (having one
foot of ground allowed for every Rank to stand on, and six foot between one
Rank and another) took up forty two foot of ground, from the Van to the Rear;
that is, as I think, from the toes of the Leaders to the heels of the Bringers
up; for by his own account and allowance, six Ranks can take up no more from
Van to the Rear than thirty six foot; as thus, six foot for the six Ranks to
stand on, and thirty foot for the five distances* The error seems to have
proceeded from a fancy he has had, that six Ranks must have six Intervals,
which is not only false, but ridiculously childish: In regard, in six Ranks,
there is one distance between the first and second Rank; the second between the
second Rank and the third; the third between the third and fourth Rank; the
fourth between the fourth and fifth rank; and the fifth distance between the
fifth and sixth Rank. And for his first error, that sixteen hundred sixty six
Files take no more ground in Front than five thousand foot, it will be a folly
to defend him by ^aying, three Foot were but allowed both for Files to stand
on, and distance between them, for a distance (as Lieutenant Colonel Elt^n,
Definition of a Distance.
in his complete Body of the Military Art discribes (it well) is a place or
Interval of ground between every particular File and File, and Rank and Rank,
and therefore no part of that ground on which the Files o^ Ranks stand. When I
looked upon these places of Vegetius, and considered them, I could not but
approve of Lips^^s for qualifying him (but on another account) with the Titles
of Solutus and negligens.

The same Lipsius, in the fourth Book of his Commentary, quarrels with
Polybius, for not informing us what distances the several Maniples kept one
from another, nor what Intervals were kept between the three great Classes; and
if that piece of Polybius be not lost with others of his works, assuredly it
was an inexcusable oversight. I dare not accuse Vegetius of this neglect,
though Lipsius seems to do it; for I am apt to believe, that what he speaks of
Vegetius (...) to be understood.
the distances between Ranks (as I have understood him, it is in the fourteenth
and fifteenth Chapters of his third Book) he may have meant Intervals between
the greater Bodies; for in these places he uses the words Ord^ and Acies
indifferently, and though Ordo be sometimes taken for a Rank, sometimes for a
Band or Company, yet Acies is ever taken for a Battle, or Batallion. And to me
it is clear enough that in the ment^^n'd places he takes Ordo for Batallion,
and makes six of them, the first of Principes, the second of Hastati, the
third, ^ourth and fifth of light armed, the sixth of Triarii. Now it is
palpable, these great Bodies were not Ranks (for every one of them, if I
mistake not, consisted of ten Ranks) but were all several Batallions, whereof,
as I told you before, he composed his Legion. But whether he meant Ranks or
Batallions, the error I mentioned was still the same, in making six several
Bodies (be they Ranks, Files, Squadrons or Batallions) to have six distances,
for they cannot possibly have more than five. But if in these places he allowed
but six foot of Interval between these Classes, and great Bodies; it speaks him
to have been almost out of his wits when he wrote it, as the Reader may collect
from the ensuing Discourse.

But being neither Polybius nor Vegetius help us much in the matter of
Intervals, Lipsius in his fourth Book comforts us, and tells us, he will not
suffer so profitable Lipsius undertakes much,
a business as is the knowledge of Intervals to remain in darkness; In finibus
noctis, are his words, In the Borders of Night; and therefore promises out of
the plentiful Magazine of his own reading, to clear the whole matter to us. But
I am afraid he will not be a man of his word, for the greatest undertakers, are
seldom the best performers: However it is fit we hear him, for he deserves it.

First, He tells us, that he conceives, that the Interval between the Hastati
But perform^ ^^ttle.
and the Principes was fifty foot, and between the Principes and the Triarii
one hundred. Next, concerning the Intervals between the Maniples of any of the
three Classes (which the Romans called Via Directa) he says, if the Velites
were to stand in them, the Interval might be of twenty or thirty foot; if not,
ten foot was enough. This is briefly all he says on the matter. But assuredly,
if this learned man could convenlently have left the University of Louvaine,
and followed the Spanish Armies but one Summer, or, as we call it, one
Campaign; he would have seen, under the conduct of the famous Dukes of Alva and
Parma, (the greatest Captains of that age) who lived at the time that he was
writing his Books, how pitifully simple that School-speculation of his was. I
must confirm my opinion with Reason, for authority of Writers I have no more
than he, and that is none at all.

Each of the two Classes of the Hastati and Principes consisted of twelve
hundred men, which being marshalled ten deep, made one hundred and twenty
Files; Vegetius allows three foot distance between Files, these make three
hundred and sixty foot in Front, add one hundred and twenty foot for the Files
to stand on; the ground that either of these Batallions stood on, was four
hundred and eighty foot in Longitude* but to shun debate, I shall be content to
allow but one foot for every File to stand on, and two foot of Interval between
Files, and so the Front of the Hastati, (though they had been all marshalled in
one Body, as they were in several Maniples) took up three hundred and sixty
foot. A less space of ground cannot rationally be given for an Interval between
them and the Principes, than the three hundred and sixty foot they took up in
Front; for when they either fled or retired to the second Batallion, they must
have had sufficient ground to cast themselves in some good order, by Maniples
to take up their places in the Intervals of the Principes. Now three hundred
Interval between Hastati and Principes*
and sixty foot is but seventy two paces, which certainly are soon traced by
men either flying or retiring hastily. For to imagine that the Romans
punctually kept Rank and File, when they were necessitated to a speedy Retreat,
is a vain speculation. If this be allowed me, then it cannot be denied me, that
the Interval between the Principes and the Triarii must have been twice as
great, that is seven hundred and twenty Foot, because the third Batallion was
in time of need to receive both the other two. Here then were two great
Intervals, one between the Hastati and Principes, and the other between the
Principes and the Between Principes and Triarii.
Triarii, both of them called by the Romans, Via transversa. This conjecture of
mine may seem rational enough to those who have observed in our modern Armies,
the Intervals between the Brigades Marshalled in the Battle, and these of the
reserve, for less ground for them than what a Brigade takes up in front, is not
usually given.

But to support my own opinion, and convince Lipsius of the vanity of his, I
Supported out of Polybius;
shall pick something out of the 15 Book of Polybius, where he tells us that
Hannibal marshaled his third Batallion more than one Stadium behind his second
one, and in doing so, says he, he followed the Roman custom; observe this. Now
a Stadium is six hundred and twenty five foot, and this wants but ninety five
foot of my allowance of seven hundred and twenty for an Interval between the
Principes and the Triarii; and for that remember that he said more than a
Stadium, and you may believe without heresy, it was the fourth part of another
Stadium; and if so, Hannibals Interval between his second and third Batallion
was seven hundred and eighty one foot, that will be sixty one foot more than I
required between the second and third Roman Batallions.

But Lipsius would maintain his conjecture with two Instances out of Caesar,
but when they are examined, they may happily make more against him, than for
him. The first is, when Afranius was to fight with Caesar in Spain, the ground
between the two Camps where the two Armies were ranged was but two thousand
foot, whereof says Caesar, every Army took up a third, the third Third being
left for the Charge. Will Lipsius infer from this, that the Interval between
Lipsius his first Instance consuted.
the first and second Batallion was but of fifty foot, and that between the
second and the third only of one hundred? No such matter, for where the ground
was so scarce, three foot between ranks was enough; and I doubt if ever more
was allowed to the heavy armed, nay nor so much, after their Pila were cast; a
third part of two thousand foot will be six hundred sixty-six. Draw up all the
three Batallions one behind another, make each of them ten deep, they will make
in all thirty Ranks, for which allow twenty nine distances, each of three foot,
will make eighty-seven foot, and thirty foot being allowed for the thirty ranks
to stand on, will amount to one hundred and seventeen foot, on which ground all
the thirty ranks could conveniently enough stand. Now we have five hundred
forty nine foot for the Transverse Intervals, which were two. Of the five
hundred forty nine foot, allow two hundred to the Interval between the first
and second Batallion, and three hundred forty nine for the Interval between the
second and the third. But here you will say, the two Transverse Intervals had
not so great a space of ground as I required for them; I grant it you, and what
then; I did not oblige Roman Generals to allow so much ground when they had it
not, but to give as much when conveniently they could. And even here I have
demonstrated, that though Caesar and Afranius were pinched for want of ground,
yet both of them might have allowed more by fifty foot to the least of the
Transverse Intervals, than Lipsius does to both the Intervals.

The second Instance is, when Caesar says, Pompey drew up his army in Thessaly,
so near his Camp, that darts could have been cast out of his fortifications
over the heads of all his three Batallions, and therefore he concludes the
Intervals between them must have been of a very small extent. To this I give a
twofold His second Instance confuted.
answer: First, I suppose these Darts were to be cast out of Scorpions,
Onagers, and Catapults, and if these, or any of them could shoot Spears (as it
is written of them) over the Danube, where it is broadest, then I believe
(though I never saw that River) they could throw Darts more than four Stadiums,
or Furlongs, which will be two thousand five hundred foot, and all the ground I
require for a Roman Army Marshalled in three Batallions one behind anther,
allowing six foot between Ranks, and three hundred and sixty between the first
and the second Batallion, and seven hundred and twenty between the second and
the third, amounts to no more but twelve hundred and seventy two foot.

My second answer is, that at that time Pompey had no mind to fight, and
therefore drew up near his Camp, that he might fall back to it, when he
pleased, (as he then did) and so in Marshalling needed not keep the ordinary
custom of Intervals.

But the Intervals Lipsius gives between one Maniple and another in all the
three Roman Classes of Foot which were called the direct ways or streets, not
these Transverse ones whereof I have spoken, are yet more irrational, and his
Lipsius his direct Intervals examined.
conjecture of them less obvious to sense, as of the other. He says if the
Velites be to stand in these Intervals, they may be of twenty or thirty foot,
if not of ten. But I say first, if the Velites stand there, they are no
Intervals at all. Next, if they be ordered to stand between the Maniples of the
heavy armed, as much of ground must be allowed them, as wherein they can
conveniently stand and fight; now that cannot be certain, but according to
their number, as suppose them twelve in front, (whether ten, six or four deep,
it matters not) Lipsius must allow them twelve foot for their twelve Files to
stand on, and thirty three foot for eleven distances between Files, and that is
forty five foot: Where are then Lipsius his twenty or thirty foot. But Lipsius
knew well enough that the Velites were not to stand in the intervals of the
heavy armed, but only either to advance to the Van, or retire to the Rear
through them; and he knew too that the intervals between Maniples were
principally for the Maniples of the first Class to fall in the intervals of the
second Class, and the Intervals of the third Batallion for the Maniples of the
other two to full back to them: and therefore to allow but ten foot for every
one of these Intervals is an inexcusable error in him, and a conjecture which
has no coherence with sense, nor can ever be justified by reason. That General
never breathed that could draw up a band of men consisting of twelve Files in
ten foot of ground. Now every Maniple of the P^^^cipes and Hastati, according
to Polybius whom Lipsius follows, consisted of one hundred and twenty men, and
these being ten deep, constituted twelve Files, these have eleven Intervals,
every one of which being three foot, make thirty three foot; add twelve to that
for the twelve Files to stand on, the aggregate True Intervals between]
Maniples.
is forty five foot, and if you allow but two foot for every Interval between
Files, the Interval between two Maniples must be thirty four foot, for it is
not possible you can allow less ground for an Interval than that which a Body
possesses, that is ordained to stand in that Interval. Hence I think it is
obvious to common sense, that all the Intervals between the Maniples of the
Hastati and Principes, were of forty five foot, or thirty four at least. And
those of the Triarii of ninety foot, or sixty eight at least, in regard they
were to receive the Maniples of both the Hastati and Principes.

In the clearing this point of Distances I have been perhaps too prolix, and
have used repetitions, which I condemn in others; but being it is almost
impossible to have so much as a general notion of a Roman Army, how it was
Marshalled, (or of any other Army) unless you know the Intervals, I have not
thought it amiss to spend a little paper on that Subject. And indeed we are
left as in many other Points (necessary to be known) so in this, to grope in
the dark. Nor have I been so severe to the learned Lipsius for his extravagant
conjectures of Roman Intervals, but I shall be ready to accept (and desire
others to do so too) of his own excuse, which I shall give you in his own
words, as I find them in the fourth Book of his Commentary. H^^ (...) as me as,
^^ rer^^^^ veter^^^, quas Lipsius excused.
revera per leves conjecturas, and fallacia vestigia (...). Ah, says he, my
darkness, or that of ancient things, which indeed we must hunt after with
uncertain conjectures, and through fallacious footsteps.

CHAP. XV. Of the Roman Allies, and Auxiliaries, and the mistakes of some
Authors concerning them.
YOU may read very frequently in Roman story of Socii, Allies, and
Confederates, who were obliged by Covenant and Stipulation to send out such an
assistance of men for the City of Rome as the Senate or the Consul required,
till a little before Julius Caesar's time; after that you shall read no more of
them, for then they were all made Citizens of Rome, and reckoned to be of one
Incorporation. The difference between Allies and Auxiliaries was, the first
could only be Italians, the second were of any other Nation. Hence it is that
though we read of no Allies that joined with Lucull^^, Sylla, Pomp^y, Caesar,
Anthony, Vespasian, and his Son Titus, yet we find their Armies mightily
strengthened by Auxiliaries. But indeed the Romans did but fool some of the
Italian Towns and Republics with the goodly show of Alliance, and the
honorable title of Socii, whereas truly they used them no better than Vassals,
obliging Roman Allies ill used.
them to follow them in the pursuance of their ambitious designs, with as many
Forces of Horse and Foot, as the Senate pleased to impose on them, and to serve
at their own charges, except a little Proviant, which with the help of these
same Allies they took from an enemy. Hence came these many grievances of the
Confederated Towns, mentioned in the Roman Histories, and once a total rupture
of the Latins from them, till after much bloodshed they were reduced to their
former condition.

Till the Romans had over-mastered Hannibal, Philip of Macedon, and the great
King of Syria, Antiochus, we shall seldom read of any of their Armies that were
not puissantly assisted by their Allies; the number either as to Foot or Horse,
Number of the Allies,
of which that assistance consisted, may be collected from the several times of
their conjunction; but that they were determinately and constantly stinted to
such a number, can never be proved out of ancient story; yet I find Vegetius
very positive in it, and in the first Chapter of his Third Book, he offers to
assure Mistaken by Vegetius,
his Reader that neither Allies nor Auxiliaries were ever in one army stronger
than the Romans. Take his own words, Illa tamen ratio servata est ne unquam
ampli^r multitudo Sociorum Auxiliaxiumve ^sset in Castris, quam Civium
Romanorum: That care, says he, was taken that no greater number of Allies or
Auxiliaries, should be in the Camp, than of Roman Citizens. And Machiavelli in
the Third Mistaken by Machiavelli;
Book of his Art of War, says that every Consular Army consisted of two
Legions, which were eleven thousand Foot, and two Legions of Allies, which made
also eleven thousand Foot. I shall first speak a word to both of them together,
and then severally to each of them. Both of them had read Livy, and till they
had produced a more Authentic Historian, none of them should have given him
the lie so broadly. This Author in his Twenty first Book tells us, that after
Hannibal came to Italy, Cor. Scipio, and Sempronius levied six Legions of
Romans each of four thousand Foot, and for every one of them three hundred
Horse, and in that same place he casts up the total of them to be twenty four
thousand Foot, and eighteen hundred Horse, and of Allies says he, forty four
thousand Foot, and four thousand Horse. This wanted but four thousand of the
double number of the Roman Foot, and four hundred more than double the number
of the Roman Horse. In his Thirty fifth Book he informs us that in the War
against Antiochus the Consul Quintius raised two Legions, each of five thousand
Foot, in all ten thousand, and six hundred Horse; and of the Allies, says he,
twenty thousand foot, and eight hundred Horse. The number of the Foot was
double the Roman Infantry, and the Horse exceeded Proved out of Livius.
the Roman by two hundred. In the Istrian War, a little before that of Macedon,
Livy in his forty first Book says, ten thousand Roman Foot, and three hundred
Horse were levied, and of the Allies twelve thousand Foot, and six hundred
Horse. And to make short, hear him once for all in the Third Book of his
History. It was agreed and concluded, says he, that the Army should consist of
two parts Confederates, (these then were the Latins and the Hernicks) and one
third part Citizens. If these Instances evince not the rashness of that
assertion, that the Allies were never stronger than the Romans, then Livy has
basely cozened us. But Vegetius will perhaps bring Polybius to support him, who
in his Sixth Book says, The Allies Foot were for most part equal with the Roman
Foot, but their Horse were double the number of the Roman Cavalry. To this I
answer first, that by this account the Allies were stronger than the Romans,
their Horse being double the number of the other, and therefore they were not
of equal strength. Secondly, what if Polybius had said that both Vegetius and
Polybius defended.
Machiavelli aver, Quandoque bonus dormit^^ Homerus; and indeed if he had said
so much, he had nodded to the height of a perfect sleep, and might have been
said to have dreamed. Thirdly, he says not that the Foot were always of equal
numbers, but ut plurimum, for the most part, and I question the truth of that
too. And lastly, if he had meant they were always of a like strength, he had
foully contradicted himself; for in his Second Book he has these words: Before
Hannibal, says he, invaded Italy, the Romans levied against the Gauls four
Legions, each consisting of five thousand two hundred Foot, which were twenty
thousand eight hundred Foot, and for every Legion three hundred Horse, which
were twelve hundred; and of the Allies, says he, were raised thirty thousand
Foot, and two thousand Horse. And in that same Book he says, that the Roman
preparations (I suppose against Hannibal) amounted to seven hundred thousand
Foot, and twenty thousand Horse, a third part whereof (considering the sense of
that time) could not be Romans; and yet (says this Historian) Hannibal invaded
them with few more than twenty thousand men.

To Vegetius I shall say particularly, that when he avers the Romans suffered
Vegetius wrong in the number of Auxiliaries;
not their Auxiliaries to exceed their own strength, he did not remember what
Livy told him in his Twenty fifth Book, how Ch^i^^ Scipi^ trusting to the aid
of thirty thousand Celtiberian Auxiliaries, was betrayed by them when he was to
fight with Asarubal, for they left him every man, and joined with the
Carthaginian. A Caveat (says the Historian) for the Romans, and all other
States and Princes, to take no more Auxiliary strangers in their Camps than
they c^^ld well overmaster. In the next place I shall make ^old to ask
Machiavelli, what he meant in the Third Book of his Art of War, where he says,
though the Confederates Foot never exceeded the Roman Foot (the contrary
whereof I have proved) yet their Horse, says he, were permitted to be some
more. Say you, And Machiavelli of the Allies.
some more, yes indeed, some more, if it be true, what your self said a little
before* that the Roman Horse of a Consular Army were but six hundred, and these
of the Allies one thousand four hundred: This is a some more indeed. But it is
probable I may meet with him upon this very same subject in the next Chapter.

But we shall not be able to make an estimate of the marshalling, marching, or
encamping of a Roman Consular Army, till we condescend on the number of the
Allies, without whom few or none of them in ancient times went, to the fields.
Let us therefore without further contest follow the authority of the famous
Historian We must follow Polybius for the number of the Allies.
and Captain Polybius, who (as I have cited his words already) says, the Allies
for most part were equal in Infantry with the Romans, and double the number of
their Cavalry. Then it will be clear, that not only in our Authors time, but
often both before and after it, every Legion of the Allies consisted of four
thousand two hundred Foot, and their Horse for every Legion were six hundred,
because we may conjecture probably out of Livy, the Roman Legion was of that
strength, and that the Horse were three hundred.

Out of the number of the Allies, by the Consuls appointment, were taken those
whom the Roman Historians call Extraordinaries, and these were not a few, for
they were the fifth part of the Foot, and the third of the Horse; as suppose
out of two Legions, consisting of eight thousand four hundred Foot, one
thousand The Extraordinaries of the Allies.
six hundred and eighty were taken, which was the fifth part, and out of twelve
hundred Horse, four hundred were taken, which was the third, and these were the
gallantest, best armed, best mounted, and of the greatest repute. There be some
such as Lipsius and Terduzzi, (who would gladly make us believe they have
conversed with the Ghosts of the old Roman Politicians, and so know their
Arcana and secrets) who say this was done under the mask of an An idle
conjecture.
honorable employment, to keep them at a distance from their friends, that
they might not combine to the prejudice of the Roman State; and they say that
upon this same account the rest of the Socii and Allies were in March, Camp and
Battle, kept asunder by the interposition of the whole Roman Infantry: I may
believe it was so, because I never heard any ancient Roman say any thing to the
contrary. But if these Confederates had intended to have betrayed at any time
their Imperious Allies, the Romans, they might easily have contrived the matter
either in Camp or Battle, to have joined with an Enemy to the evident
destruction of as many Romans as were then in the Fields: For in Battle the
left hand Legion of the Allies, and all their Cavalry being marshalled
together, might without any stop have stepped over to an enemy, as in the
discourse of a Consular Army will appear. And in a Camp the two sides of it
were recommended to the care of the Allies, (as you will see in their
Castrametation) and soon may a man be deceived who trusts the Aphorism, Disce
diffidere, Learn to distrust. If all this might have been true, where Roman and
Allies Legions were of equal strength, sure in Armies where the Allies were far
more numerous than the Romans, they might if they had intended it, have done
mischief enough.

Out of these Extraordinaries were some chosen both of Horse and Foot, and
these were called Selecti, as Polybius his Interpreter renders it, or Ablecti,
as Selecti of the Allies.
Lipsius will have it to be. These, says Polybius, did not only lodge in the
Camp behind the Tribunes, and near the General, but also in Battle, and on
other occasions they used to attend the Consul, and the Questor, but of what
number these Selecti, were, neither Polybius, or for any thing I know any for
him, does inform us.

These Legions and Horse-Troops of Allies were Officer'd, Marshalled, Encamped,
and Disciplined according to the Roman custom, only with this difference, that
those who commanded Roman Legions were called Tribunes, but those who commanded
the Legions of the Allies were called Prafecti. I conceive the reason of the
difference of the title was this, the Tribune was elected for most part by the
Tribes, whence he had his name Tribunus; but those of the Roman Consuls power
over the Allies.
Allies were nominated by the Roman Consuls (for the Allies had no power to
appoint or Commissionate their own Praefecti; that had intrencht too much upon
the Lordly power the Romans still kept in their own hands) and were bound most
strongly to obey that Consul with whom they joined. So we see how little
difference the haughty Romans made between their Confederated friends and their
vassals, which I hinted in the beginning of this Chapter; and in this point the
Consuls had more power over the Allies than over the Romans themselves; for the
Roman people for most part chose the Roman Tribunes, and not the Consuls.

CHAP. XVI. Of a Roman Consular army, and some Mistakes concerning it.
I Know not from whence this denomination of a Consular Army is come, unless it
be that Polybius in his Sixth Book says, that ordinarily every year four
Legions were levied for the States service, two for every Consul, and this Livy
does witness to have been done often. But neither the one nor the other has
asserted that a Consul never had more or fewer Legions in his Army than two.
Polybius means that a Consular Army consisted for most part of two Roman
Legions; six hundred Horse, with two Legions of Allies, and twelve hundred
Horse. But he never said that it was constantly so, for then he had
contradicted his own History in many places. But I rather conceive Authors call
that a Consular Army which had in it the above specified number of Horse and
Foot, by the authority, and upon the word of Vegetius, who describes both a
Pretorian and a Consular Army in the first Chapter of his Third Book. I shall
Vegetius describes a Pretorian, and a Consular army;
faithfully English his words thus: The Ancients (says he) having by
exrerience learned to obviate difficulties, chused rather to have skilful than
numerous Armies ^ therefore they thought in Wars of lesser moment, one Legion
with the Auxiliaries, that is ten thousand Foot, and two thousand Horse might
suffice, which the Praetors as lesser Chieftans often led in Expeditions. But
if the enemy was reported to be strong, then a Consular power with twenty
thousand Foot, and four thousand Horse was sent, with a greater Captain. But if
an infinite multitude of the fiercest Nations did rebel, then too great
necessity forcing them, two Chieftans with two Armies were sent, with this
command, that either the one Consul, or both should look to it, that the
Commonwealth should receive no damage. In fine (says he) since the Roman
people was to make War almost And contradicts himself,
every year in several Countries, against diverse enemies, they thought these
forces might suffice, because they judged it was not so profitable to entertain
great Armies, as those that were well exercised and trained in Arms.

Thus far Vegetius: let us take his Discourse in pieces, and examine it
according to his own writings, and no man's else.

First, In the sixth Chapter of his second Book, he avers, there should be no
First in the Pretorian army,
fewer in a Legion than six thousand one hundred Foot, and seven hundred twenty
six Horse: in this place, he says, a Praetorian Army, (wherein there should be
a Legion of Romans, and another of Allies) should have ten thousand Foot, and
two thousand Horse; the Foot two thousand two hundred fewer than in his own
account there should be in two Legions, and the Horse five hundred forty eight
more than himself allows to the Cavalry of two Legions. And to let us see, that
he will keep a proportionable way in contradicting Secondly in a Consular army,
himself, he says, against a strong Enemy a Consul was sent with twenty
thousand Foot, and four thousand Horse; and that is, as he explains himself in
the fourth Chapter of his second Book, two Legions of Romans, with the help of
the Allies; now I beseech you hear him speak for himself; and first, in the
sixth Chapter of his second Book he says, that the Legion must consist of six
thousand one hundred Foot, and seven hundred twenty six Horse. Secondly, In
this first Chapter of his third Book, he makes four Legions of the Roman and
Allies Foot to be but twenty thousand, which by his own rule should have been
twenty four thousand four hundred; for his words formerly were, that no Legion
should be under six thousand one hundred, and those heavy armed too; and
whereas by his own appointment, in the sixth Chapter of his second Book, every
Legion should have had seven hundred twenty six Horse, more than any other
Author allowed: In this Chapter he increased their number to one thousand, for
he orders the Horse of four Legions to be full four thousand, the Foot of a
Consular Army four thousand four hundred below, and the Horse one thousand
ninety six above his own allowance. You see how Vegetius clasheth with
Vegetius, it is not I that quarrel with him.

In the second place, he says, if an infinite multitude of fierce Nations
rebelled; Rebelled, against whom? Certainly he means against the Romans; but
how could they rebel, before they professed to be subject? Assuredly, these
fierce Nations he speaks of, swore neither fealty nor homage to Romulus, nor
Rome when His inadvertency,
he first founded it. If they defended themselves, so long as they could, from
the dominion of strangers, they did what nature commanded them, and were no
Rebels. He will find Spain it self, after long and bloody Wars, never reduced
to a Province till Augustus's time. You see what words his Inadvertency prompts
him to utter. In this case of a great Rebellion, he says, two Consuls with the
Armies were joined together, with a command to look to it, that the
Commonwealth suffered no damage. But this command was given many times when
two Consuls did not, nor needed not bring their forces together.

Thirdly, You have heard him aver, that in the great wars, which the Roman
State managed, their greatest Army consisted of twenty thousand Foot, and four
thousand Horse, twenty four thousand in all; and that two of those Armies
joined together, making of both forty eight thousand Combatants, did suffice in
the greatest danger. Truly Vegetius, if Hannibal had been alive His
contradiction of Roman story.
when you wrote this, he could have informed you, that he forced your Masters,
the Romans, to join two such Armies and more, before ever they had to do with
those fierce Nations you speak of; except a few Spaniards, and the Cisalpine or
Italian Gauls; unless you take the Sicilians and Carthaginians to be those
fierce Nations; with the first whereof they quarreled and invaded them, and
with the second broke Peace, without either regard to Justice, or sense of
Honor. But tell me, had the two Consuls at Cannae, no more but forty eight
thousand Romans and Allies? read Polybius his fourth Book, you will see they
had eight Legions of Romans, and as many Allies, at five thousand Foot each
Legion, and three hundred Horse, and these extended to eighty thousand Foot,
and seven thousand two hundred Horse, reckoning the Allies Cavalry double that
of the Romans. Read Livy's twenty second Book, you will see Hannibal killed at
that same Battle, forty five thousand Roman Foot, and two thousand seven
hundred Horse, besides Allies; and the same Historian will tell you in plain
language, that the Roman Army at that place consisted of fourscore and seven
thousand fighting men. And before Hannibal entered Italy, had the Romans no
stronger Armies against the Gauls than forty eight thousand men? Yes, both
Polybius and Livy will tell you of far greater numbers, read in other Histories
whether Marius had but forty eight thousand Romans against the fierce Nations
of the Cimbrians and the Teutones. How vain a thing it is then for an Author of
Vegetius his reputation to aver, that against the mightiest Enemy, two Consular
Armies, each of twenty four thousand men, were sufficient, against the current
of History.

Fourthly, He lays it down for an unquestionable truth, that one Consul A bold
assertion of Vegetius.
had never more than two Legions of Romans, and as many of the Allies, against
the most powerful Enemy. Be pleased to hear his own words, in the fourth
Chapter of his Second Book: In omnibus Auctoribus invenitur, singulos Consules
adversus Hosts copi^sissimos, non amplius quam binas duxisse Legiones, additis
auxiliis seciorum: In all Authors, says he, it is found, that every Consul
never led more against the most numerous Enemies than two Legions, with the
assistance of the Allies. And that it should not be said, he had writ so
manifest an untruth, without a reason, he adds, Tanta in illis erat
exercitatio* tanta fiducia, ut cuivis bello, dua legiones crederentur
sufficere. They were so well trained, and had so great confidence, that two
Legions were thought to be sufficient for any War. Did ever man write so? If
two Legions were sufficient in any War, why were four Legions and two Consuls,
employed against the fierce Nations, he just now spoke of? But I will come
nearer him, and tell him, that it is very often found in Authors, that one
Consul or General had the Conduct of more than two Legions, and therefore
Vegetius his words that I cited last must either be false, or those Authors
whom I shall cite, do grossly abuse us. I shall not repeat the business of
Canna; but be pleased to take these other Instances.

When Caesar heard of the dreadful preparations of the Helvetians, to stop
Instances of later times to the contrary: Of Caesar,
that inundation, he posts to Italy, and raises two new Legions, joins them
with three Veterans, brought them to France, and with one he had there already,
he made six in all, and with these fought the Helvetians, and thereafter,
Ariovistus, all in one Summer. This he writes in the second Book of the Gallick
War. Here were more than two Legions, yet but one Consul. In his fifth Book he
says, he invaded England with five Legions, besides a vast number of Gauls,
Numidians, and Balearians, having left his Legate Labienus in Gaul with 3
Legions, and three thousand Horse; here a Consuls Legate commanded more Legions
than two. The most part of the time Caesar stayed in Gaul, he had ten Legions,
till Pompey and the Senate cheated him of two of them. Petreius and Petreius
and Afranius, Pompey,
Afranius had seven Legions in Spain, Pompey had eleven at Pharsalia, besides a
world of Auxiliaries; and there Caesar had eight, and at Brundusium, when he
was in pursuit of the flying Senate, he had twelve Legions. Thus we see, that
Great Caesar, the most daring Consul that ever was, thought not two Legions
sufficient against any Enemy, or in any War. Before his time, the two Consuls,
Marius and Scipio joined their Armies together against the Cimbrians; and,
Marius and Scipio,
as Florus tells us, lost in the Battle eighty thousand Romans, and forty
thousand Servants and Baggage-men. Sure in these two Consular Armies there were
four Legions four times told. And the same Author says that Mark Anthony the
Triumvir, entered Media with eighteen Legions, and sixteen thousand Horse, all
these Consuls and their Legates lived long before Vegetius, and I doubt not but
he has read all their stories: but I shall lead him up to those times, when
his Of more ancient times,
Romans were not so powerful as to raise so numerous Legions, and yet in them
we shall see that the Consuls were not stinted to two Legions a piece, as he
has very confidently declared, they were: Polybius says, that before the
second Before the second Punick War,
Punick War, the Romans had several hundred thousands in arms; I hope then no
man (except our Author) will say, that every Consul had but two Legions
allotted him. In the Consulship of young Camillus, the City being environed
Young Camillus.
with enemies, ten Legions were levied; two of them were left for defense of
Rome, four were given to the Prator, and Camillus took four to himself, each
consisting of 4 thousand two hundred Foot, and three hundred Horse. Thus we see
not only that a Consular Army had four Roman Legions in it (a thing denied by
Vegetius) but a Pretorian one had four, to which our Author allows but one. You
may read this in Livy's Seventh Book, and in that same place he tells us, that
the Consul Popilius Lenus marched with four full Legions against the enemy,
Popilius Lenus,
leaving a considerable army at Rome to wait on all hazards. In his Sixth Book,
he says old Camillus (who defeated the Gauls) marched with four Legions
against Old Camillus,
the Volscians. One instance more, which may serve to decide the question if
there were any, the same Historian in his Second Book informs us, that the
Dictator Marcus Valerius, levied and enrolled ten Legions, whereof he gave
Marcus Valerius.
three to every Consul, and kept four to himself. Observe, that at that time
the Latins were Allies, and levied their proportions, as many Foot as the
Romans did, and twice as many Horse, if not more of both the one and the other.
Observe also, that in those times the Roman Seignory was of no large extent;
for Livy speaking of these Levies of Valerius, says, so many Legions were never
levied before; he means, never at one time. These are sufficient enough to
prove Vegetius to have been too confident, when he said that never Roman Consul
conducted more than two Roman Legions, even against the most numerous Enemies.

But he is in no danger for all this, because he is supported by one, who by
his other writings has made himself well enough known, and that is Nic^l
Machiavelli, who in the third Book of his Art of War, very magisterially tells
Machiavelli his assertion
us, that the Allies Foot never exceeded that of the Romans, but their Horse
were some more; I have spoken to both these in the last Chapter: But he adds,
that the Romans in their greatest necessity never used more than two Consular
Armies, and that each of them consisted of twenty four thousand Combatants. I
hope, the instances I have used against Vegetius in this same cause, may serve
sufficiently to confute Machiavelli. But here I must observe the Florentines
presumption, in the modelling his Roman Consular Army. First, He makes every
Legion to consist of five thousand five hundred Foot, a thing we never heard
from any other Author, nor he from Vegetius; who is constantly for six thousand
one hundred Foot. Next, he makes the Cavalry of the Allies to be seven hundred
for every Legion, contrary to most Authors, who make them but six. But we shall
let that pass with him, that thereby he may make up his Consular Army of twenty
four thousand men, thus: Two Confuted.
Roman Legions, eleven thousand Foot, Allies Foot as many, these amount to
twenty two thousand; then six hundred Roman Horse, and fourteen hundred of the
Allies, are two thousand Horse; in all twenty four thousand. Let this, I say,
be given, but not granted him; why concludes he positively, that two Consular
Armies consisted of fifty thousand fighting men? Where did the Secretary of
Florence learn this Arithmetic, to make fifty the aggregate of twice twenty
four? Yet if he be not guilty of more dangerous errors, we may pardon him this.
But to return to Vegetius, he gives me too often just occasion to think that
Lipsius wronged him not much, when he said of him, that he was, Veterum rerum
parum firmiter sciens, Not thoroughly acquainted with ancient matters.

CHAP. XVII. Of a Consular Army, Marshalled in the Field; and of some general
Officers belonging to it.
IN so important an affair, upon the right or wrong managing of which, depended
the conservation or ruin, not only of the Roman Armies, but of the State;
Polybius affords us no more light than what he has done in marshalling the
Legionary Foot; and if he be right in that, we are to look for little or no
help from Vegetius, whose ordering of a Legion we have rejected; only we admit
what he says in the fifteenth Chapter of his second Book (though thereby he
contradicts himself) that, Equites locantur in cornibus: The Horse are placed
in the Wings. But having in the several foregoing Chapters shown you how (as
far as any Authors have given us light) the Foot were marshalled; of what
number both they and the Horse were, and how they were drawn up; of what number
the Allies were, and how they were divided: I suppose, our business now is, how
to join them in one Body or Army, and when it comes to a battle, to observe
what customs were used by the Romans, and other Ancients.

Though as either occasion offered, emergency required, or necessity forced,
the Roman Captains used several figures and forms of Battles, yet that which
was most ordinary, and most used, was the quadrate or square; but I do not at
all mean an equilateral one, as Terduzzi would gladly have it to be, to which
purpose he puts himself to more trouble than he needs; and in doing so, he
shows Terduzzi over nice.
himself more an Engineer (as I believe he was to Basta the Emperor, Rodolph
the Second's Captain General in Transylvania) than a Marshal of a Field needs
to be. But I mean such a Quadrate or Square, as the General of the Roman Army
imagined, that either the ground, the posture of the Enemy, or his own designs
did or might prompt him to make. But in regard we can say but little to
Marshalling, till we condescend, of what and how many members ordinarily the
Roman Armies were composed, and though the numbers of both Roman and Allies
Legions varied often, yet because for most part the Legion consisted of four
thousand two hundred Foot, and the Horse were three hundred, and that
ordinarily two Legions, and six hundred Horse were sent to the Field with a
Consul, and that also for most part the Foot of the Allies was equal to that of
the Romans, and almost constantly they were double their number in Horse; let
us follow Polybius, and say the Consular army consisted of sixteen thousand
eight hundred Foot, and eighteen hundred Horse, in all eighteen thousand six
hundred.

Neither do I think I can tell you better how a Roman Army was Marshalled, when
it was to fight, than to inform you how Scipio the Great, or the African Roman
Army Marshalled by Scipio.
drew up his Army when he was to fight against Syphax and Asdrubal, and that
out of the Fourteenth Book of Polybius. There the Historian tells us that the
Roman Consul drew up his Foot in the Body or Battle, first his Hastati, next
his Principes, and thirdly his Triarii; on the right wing were his Roman Horse,
and on the left his Numidians. And here our Author in one word, and once for
all tells us, that it was the constant custom of the Romans to Marshall their
Armies in that fashion: His words are, Et in hoc Romanae Militiae consuetudinem
simpliciter servavit. And when the same Scipio fought against his redoubted
enemy Hannibal, he did the very like, only with this alteration, that he
commanded his Legate L^lius to command the Roman Cavalry on the left wing, and
set King Masanissa with his Numidian Horse on the right.

This one example may teach us how the Roman Armies were ordinarily Embatteled.
But here is no word of the Allies. I suppose, if Scipio had any, as likely he
had, their Horse were joined with the Roman Horse in one of the wings in both
those Battles, since the other wing at both times was given to the Auxiliary
Numidians. But where an Army was purely composed of Romans and Allies, they
Army of Romans and Allies Marshaled together in the Field.
were Marshalled (as we may gather out of Polybius his Sixth Book, and other
Authors) in this manner, the Roman six hundred Horse were placed on the right
wing, upon their left hand the first Legion of the Allies Foot, consisting of
three thousand four hundred (for eight hundred of it was taken out for
Extraordinaries) upon the left hand of the Allies first Legion, stood the first
Roman Legion, and next it the second; and upon the left hand of it was
Marshalled the second Legion of the Allies; and upon the left-wing stood the
Confederates Cavalry to the number of eight hundred, for four hundred of their
twelve hundred were culled out for Extraordinaries. Now those eight hundred
Horse of the Allies were divided into twenty Turmes or Troops, as the Roman six
hundred Horse were likewise, but with this difference, that in every Troop of
the Allies there were forty Riders, but in the Roman Troops there were only
thirty. Thus was the gross or bulk of the Roman armies Marshalled. As to the
Evocati of the Romans, and the Extraordinarii of the Allies, Polybius has told
us no more than Station of the Extraordinaries uncertain.
what I have told you in my Discourse of the Allies, that they were Encamped
besides the Consul, and were to be near him in the field, and to wait on the
Treasurer also. But we are left by him and others to conjecture how, in what
particular place or places, they were ordained to fight. And truly I shall be
easily induced to believe that sometimes the Consul placed three hundred of the
Allies Extraordinary Horse on the right hand of the Roman Horse in the right
wing, and so made that wing stronger by one hundred than the other, for
otherwise the left wing had been two hundred stronger than the right. The
fourth hundred of the Extraordinary Horse, Terduzzi will have to stay with the
Consul, and probably they did so. The Allies Extraordinary Foot were divided
into two great Squadrons, one whereof stood between the first Legion of the
Allies, and the first Legion of the Romans, on the right hand of the Battle;
the second Squadron stood on the left hand of the second Roman Legion, between
it and the second Legion of the Allies.

Thus Lipsius and Terduzzi will have it to be, and I think it may be probable
enough that it was so, yet I doubt none of these two can tell me, who told them
that it was so. In another place Lipsius thinks that both the Evocati and
Extraordinarii, at the Consuls command, joined with the Triarii to reinforce
the Battle, and truly this is not improbable, but the question is where they
stood before they were commanded to join with the Triarii? for as Lipsius
Marshals them in the Intervals of the Triarii, they would hinder the Principes
and Hastati to join with the Triarii. What Terduzzi says on this subject, I
suppose he has out of Lipsius; for though they were coetaneous, yet I find
Lipsius often cited by Terduzzi. But I shall wrong none of them, if I say that
neither of them in this particular had more warrant than their own Leves
conjectur^, and fallacia vestigia, as Lipsius calls them. If you will believe
Vegetius in the eighteenth Chapter of his Third Book, the Consul should have
made use of the Extraordinarii both Horse and Foot to environ and surround the
Enemies left wing: if you ask me why the Consul might not as well have
surrounded the enemies right wing as his left? I must answer you that Vegetius
has kept up the reason from us as a secret.

In that same Chapter Vegetius says, that the Commander in chief should stand
between the right wing of the Horse and the Foot, as a fit place from whence he
might take up his measures, and encourage and relieve both his Horse and Foot.
Lipsius and Terduzzi fix him to the Aquila, or the Eagle on the right Station
of a Roman Consul in Battle.
hand of the Roman Legion. But Polybius says in that Battle I just now spoke
of, Scipio gave the right wing to Masanissa, and the left to L^lius to command.
It would seem then that himself staid with the Foot, and so indeed he did, for
he caused a retreat to be sounded to the Hastati, that he might advance with
the Principes. But since I may guess as well as others, I suppose he stood
between the two Roman Legions, and consequently besides the Eagle of the second
Legion, and assuredly that part being directly the Center of the army, it was
in my opinion the only proper place for a Captain General; but when two Consuls
were joined together, it was not so, for ordinarily the one commanded the right
wing of the Horse, and the other the left. So it was at Cannae, where the
Romans were beaten by Hannibal; so it was at Vesuvius, where Manlius got the
Victory over the Latins, after the death of his Colleague Decius; so it was at
Metaurus, where Nero and Livy defeated and killed Asdrubal. But indeed where
there was but one Consul or General, he seldom tied himself to one place, but
rode where he saw his Presence was most needful. So did that Manlius I just now
mentioned, so did Caesar, and so did many others of the ancient Roman Captains.
And it had been no prejudice either to Lipsius or Terduzzi to have suffered a
Consul in a Consular army to have stood where he pleased, either besides the
first Eagle, or the second, or besides none of them.

Vegetius in the ninth, tenth, and eleventh Chapters of his Second Book speaks
of some more Offices in a Consular army than Polybius does, and these were
three, Praefectus Legionis, Praef^ctus Castrorum, and Praefectus Fabrorum. It
is strange we do not read of these three great Commanders among the ancient
Romans, and yet in my opinion they had the two last, as by the description of
their Officers, the Reader will quickly conceive. As to the first, Polybius
makes no mention of Other General Officers in a Consular Army.
him, and if there had been any such Officer in his time, he neither could or
would have past him, when he gave us the particular description of a Legion,
and all its Officers; and more especially when he tells us, that the Tribunes
received the word or Tessera from the Consul, and gave it to the Centurions,
and that the said Tribunes took on them to judge and give definitive sentence in
their Legions, which they could not have done if there had been a Praefectus
above them. So it seems he has been a new Officer created after the Emperors
came in play.

This Fraefectus Legionis, this Brigadier, or this Legionary Colonel, (for I
Praefectus Legion^,
know not how to English it) according to Vegetius his description in the ninth
Chapter of his Second Book, was an Officer of great experience, was obeyed by
all the Tribunes, Centurions, and Soldiers; the care of Men, Horses, Clothes,
Colonel of the Legion.
and Arms belonged to him. By his order they were drilled and trained, and by
his authority the Soldiers were punished for their misdemeanors by the Tribunes.
But mark it, he had only this power in the absence of the Legate, and as his
Deputy; Legato absente, and tanquam ejus Vicario, says Vegetiu^. Now if every
Legion had a Legate, I should believe the Legate was Colonel, the Praefectus,
Lieutenant Colonel, the Tribunes were Captains, and the Centurions, Corporals,
as I observed before in my Discourse of the Infantry. Polybius indeed speaks of
Legates, but of no Praefecti, except among the Allies.

The Praefectus Castrorum, says Vegetius, had the care of the Position of the
Praefectus Castrorum,
Camp, the ordering the depth and breadth of both Ditch and Rampart, the care
of the Sick, and of the Physicians who were ordained for their cure. He had the
oversight of the Chariots, Carts, Wagons, and Pack-horses, of all the
Mechanic Instruments for cutting and preparing Timber and Wood, and
Lieutenant General of the Ordnance.
other matter for making Warlike Machines, and the Engines themselves. All this
seems to make this Officer to be the Lieutenant General of the Roman Artillery.

The Praefectus Fabrorum was he who most resembled our Modern Master of
Praefectus Fabrorum, or, General of the Artillery.
the Ordnance, or General of the Artillery; for it was he who had the prime
care of the Armamentarium, or Magazine, in which was ordinarily not only store
of all kind of Arms and Engines for Expugnation and Propugnation of Towns, and
strong Holds, but also of all kind of Instruments and Materials for making
them, and more particularly for the making up and defending their Hibern^, or
Winter Quarters, in which were Shops for making all manner of Arms and Weapons
both for offense and defense, and under his Conduct were also all manner of
Materials for making Bridges, (for which purpose little Boats were carried
along with their Armies) with Smiths, Carpenters, Joiners, and other
Artificers, with those who had skill to work in Mines; for though the Soldiers
not only helped, but also perfected most of those works, yet there were some
deputed, who had skill both to work themselves, and to direct others. Neither
will this prove that the Roman Armies carried Pioniers along with them, (for
these were the Soldiers) but only that some Companies were deputed, to whose
more special care all these works were recommended, and these were of a very
old Institution, in the reign of Servi^^ Tulliu^ King of Rome, for he appointed
two Companies of Carpenters and Smiths for that purpose.

We read also frequently of Legates in Roman Armies; at the first Institution
there was but one, and he was sent with the Consul to represent the Senate and
people, by whom he was chosen, and sometime the Consul had power to ^huse his
own ^^gate. He sat in Council with the Consul, and gave his advice, but neither
he nor the whole Council might impose on the Consul, who constantly kept a
Negative voice, and the Sovereign command over all. In the Consuls absence the
Legate commanded absolutely, and before him went fix Lictors, or Sergeants,
with Axes and Rods. But when the Consul returned, the Legates command ceased.
In process of time there were two Legates ordained Legates.
for each Army, and thereafter as many Legates as there were Legions, over
which they had the command, according as Lipsius in the Second Book of his
Commentary declares, in which I shall not oppose him, though I find no such
thing in History, I am sure neither Pompey nor Caesar had so many Legates as
they had Legions, either when they were present themselves, or when they were
absent; Pompey had seven Legions in Spain, and with them but two Legates, these
were Petreius and A^ranius. When Caesar was in England, he had but one Legate
with three Legions, and a great Cavalry in Gaul, and that was Labienus. Nor do
I find, that either of those two great Captains had a Legate for each Legion
that fought at Pharsalia. In the time of the Emperors (and perhaps in the
reign of Augustus) there was a Legate for every Province; and it may be a
Legate or more for every army besides.

In every Army there was a Questor, he was the Treasurer, kept the Cas^^*
Questor, or Treasurer.
paid the Army, distributed the Wheat to the Men, and the Barley to the Ho^ses.
To him was delivered all the Pillage that was taken from the enemy eitherin
Villages, Towns, or Camps. He sold it all, and out of the money gave either the
Army their Wages, or Donatives, according as he had order from the Consul,
whose directions he was bound punctually to obey.

Though the power and command of a Dictator was uncontrollable in matters
Dictator.
both of Peace and War, yet in the fields his Authority was no greater than
that of a Consul; but yet there was this difference, the first could not be
called in question afterward, whereas the second might. Where a Dictator was,
he chose his own Master of the Horse, and though this title seems to import,
Master of the Horse.
that he who had it, had no power over the Foot; yet it was not so, for under
the Dictator he commanded both Horse and Foot, and was in effect his
Lieutenant General. Thus you have in this Discourse, and in those of the
Infantry and Cavalry, a full account of all the Officers that I have read of in
any Author that belonged to a Roman Army.

Though the Army which we have described in this and the foregoing Chapter, had
the name of a Consular Army, and that Vegetius makes a Praetorian Army to be
but half the number of the Consular one, yet it is needless to bring Instances
from History, to prove that greater ar^^es than these consisting of four
Legions have been commanded not only by Confuls, but by ^ro^^^^uls, Pr^tors,
and Proprators, in several of the Roman Wars.

The chief Commander of the army, when he was to march from the City, The
Consuls state when he went to any Expedition.
was obliged to sacrifice in the Capitol, and there to take his Auspices, the
foreboding Omens, or (as Philemon Holland calls them) the Osses of his good
fortune in that Expedition, and then he rode out of the City in great state and
splendour, Paludatus, in a glorious and rich Embroidered Coat of Arms, convoyed
by a gallant company of his choicest friends, with his Lictors, or Sergeants
before him, with Axes and bundles of Rods, the ordinary number whereof (if the
General was a Consul) was twelve. These solemn Rites, Ceremonies and Customs
might not be neglected; if they were, the Generals had neither the prayers and
good wishes of the people, nor the willing obedience of their armies. Caius
Claudius going to Illyria, went from Rome in the nightime, without any
solemnity, but so soon as he came to his army, he found his Soldiers in a
mutiny, which though he punished severely enough, yet he found himself
necessitated not only to go back to Aquileia, but to return to Rome it self,
there to make his Vows, sacrifice, and go out of the City in pomp, according to
the accustomed manner.

But for all we have said of Roman armies, we see not yet where the Velites
Velites neglected.
were marshalled, nor how they fought; we must believe that which is most
probable, that they were marshalled behind the Triarii, and that they marched
through the Intervals of the heavy armed, to the Van, and fought there till
they did either beat the enemy, or were beaten by him back to the Rear. If any
desire to see the figure of a Consular army, he may meet with one of them in
Terduzzi his Book of the ancient and modern Machines, and another in Lipsius
his Commentary on Polybius, each after the fancy of the Author, but since I
intend not in this Treatise to present my Reader with any figures of my own, I
shall not trouble him with any that belong to another.

CHAP. XVIII. Of several Figures of Armies used by the Ancients in their
Battles.
IF a General or Commander in chief have not the choice of the ground where he
is to fight, he must marshall his army according to the advantages or
difficulties of it. But if he may make choice of the place of Battle, then no
doubt he may model his forces as he pleases, without tying himself to any
other prescripts or precedents of others. Notwithstanding which he must be very
wary, not to cast his army in such a figure as carries along with it intricacy,
such as may make both the ordering and observing it difficult, and more
especially he was to be very shie of changing the Figure of his army in the
time of action, Dangerous to alter the Figure of an Army in time of action.
in regard that the bulk of an army is composed of such members as are for most
part rude, gross, and of so dull understandings, that they are not able in an
instant to apprehend the reasons of sudden alterations, or to dive into the
designs of their great Commanders; and therefore a change of the form of a
Battle, after an army is engaged, may cast it into confusion, which may quickly
render it a prey to an attentive and vigilant enemy.

The Figures of Armies used by the Ancients, not only Grecians and Romans, but
even of those Nations, likewise whom both these were pleased to qualify Five
Figures of Batallions.
with the title of Barbarians, were for most part of five kinds. These were the
Quadrate or Square, the Wedg, the Tenaille, or Tongs, the Saw, and the Globe.

The Quadrate or Square they subdivided into three sorts, to wit, the Turrite,
the Lying Lateritial, and the Simple Lateritial. The Turrite was that Battle
Quadrate Turrite.
whose height or depth was much greater than its front; As, draw up a thousand
men six deep, let them face either to the right hand or left, you shall see
them but six in front, and a hundred sixty six deep, it is the Quadrate
Turrite, so called because its height or depth makes it look like a Tower; it
was but seldom used, and indeed it is very useless.

The Simple Latrice is where all the Latera or sides of the Battle, that is
front, Simple L^teritial Quadrate.
rear, and both flanks are of a like extent. One hundred men drawn up ten deep,
gives you the Simple lateritial Quadrate; because it is a Battle equal on all
sides, it is also called the Aequilateral quadrate, of this form were the
ancient Egyptian Battles, as I have told you in the Grecian Art of War: ten
thousand of their men Marshalled a 100 deep, made them a 100 in front, a 100 in
rear, and a 100 in each flank, so that face them any way you please, still they
were a 100 in front.

The lying Lateritial square, or quadrate, is a Battle in which the front is of
a Lying Lateritial Quadrate.
greater extent than the flank, or where there are a great many more men in the
rank, than in the file as 16000 men (after the Grecian way) Marshalled 16 deep,
gives you a front of 1000 men, and the flank but of 16. And this was usually
both the Grecian and Roman way of Embattelling, and continues so still in our
Modern armies. So when you read in story that an army marched in a Quadrate
form, as Livy speaks both in his Second and Thirteenth Books, and Salust also
says, that Marius marched against Jugurtha with a Quadrate army; you are to
understand it, that they marched in order of Battle, ready to fight, and that
the form of their Batallions was Quadrate, but do not imagine they were
Aequilateral, or Simple lateritial. It is from the Quadrate form (which the
Romans called lying lateritial) consisting of four angles, that our word
Squadron has its denomination; a word used now (for any thing I know) in all
Europaean Languages. By what I have said it appears, that though it were
granted to Terduzzi, as it is not, that the Romans drew up their Foot twelve
deep; yet that will not conclude their Terduzzi nicely curious.
Batallions, whether lesser Bodies or greater, to have been Aequilateral
quadrate, as he would have them to be, for in their Maniples drawn up, as he
would have them twelve deep (since every one of them consisted of an hundred
and twenty men) they could make but ten Files; now ten in front, and twelve in
file, makes no more an Aequilateral Batallion, than a hundred twenty men
Marshalled ten deep, and twelve in front can represent that figure. This lying
lateritial quadrate, whereof I now speak, is that form of Battle whereof
Vegetius is to be understood, when he speaks of a quadrate army with a long
front.

The Wedg I have spoke of in my discourses of the Grecian Militia, but I would
not have my Reader to imagine that these Wedg-battels spoken so much of in
ancient Histories, were such as are painted to us, beginning with one man, then
Wedg-figure.
two, next three, and so to the end of the Chapter (though that method might be
well enough observed in a small body either of Horse or Foot) but they were
Batallions condensed, and at close order, the point consisting of a good many
men, yet pointed, because the Body grew broader and broader, till you came to
the Rear where it was broadest; for to imagine that in the heat of the fight,
any Batallion of the most experienced Soldiers, can be suddenly cast into so
punctual a form, (as first one, then two) by the readiest General that ever
was, is a Speculation never reduced, or reducible to practice. And so you are
to understand the Wedg in which the Theban Epaminondas cast some of his
Infantry at the Battle of Mantinea, whereby he broke the Laconians, was not a
flim-flam of one, two, three, and four, (he had no time to tell straws) but a
good massy body of men, perhaps of fifty, sixty, seventy, or a hundred in
front, growing greater till it came to the end. This Wedg-battel consisted of
three angles, the foremost point making one, and the broad end furnished the
other two* and indeed it is a Triangle, but not an aequilateral one. I told you
in another place out of Livius, how the Celtiberians had well near routed the
Praetor Fulvius by their Wedg-battel, till he defeated them with a desperate
Charge of unbridled Horses. He who thinks that this Wedg-battel of these
Spaniards How it is rightly to be understood.
began with one man at the point, and by equal degrees came to a great many at
the end of the Wedg, has a strong imagination. Livy in his twenty second Book
calls that Batallion of Macedonians, (who stood ranged in Battle within the
Walls of Cenchrea to receive the Assailants, when the Roman Consul was to
storm) a Wedg, and yet it was a Phalange condensed, only smaller at the point,
than at the rest of its dimensions. And he might have called it a Testud^, or
Tortoise, if he had pleased, for they stood all covered with their Shields and
great Targets, which representing the Tortoise covered with its shell, gave
that figure of Battle its denomination.

The Globe-battel was a Batallion that appeared to be of a round figure, and
Globe, or Ring-figure.
if it was perfectly round, the English have worded it well, in calling it a
Ring, I find it oftener mentioned in modern than in ancient stories. I should
think those who use it, were on the defensive, for men standing in a perfect
Globefigure, can neither pursue, nor run away without breaking their order, and
figure of their Battle, and so unglobe or unring themselves. Mr. Elton gives us
its figure, and tells us right ingeniously how it is made; but sure it is not
feasible for great bodies to cast themselves into that figure. I incline to
their opinion who think it was but a Wedg of a lesser body, and being smaller
seemed more Circular. And I the rather think so, because Caesar in his Books of
the Alexandrin^ War, says, that Domitius one of his Legates saved a Legion by
casting it in a Ring, when the rest of his Army was routed at Nicop^lis by
Pharnaces; for if that Legion had been in a perfect round figure, it could not
have retired as it did, from him who by his victory was master of the Field.

The Tenaille, Tongs or Shears, was nothing but the reverse of the Wedg,
Tenaille, or ^ongs.
and was to be used only against it; for whereas the Wedg was sharp at the
point to pierce any Batallion that stood against it* so the Tenaille opened its
arms to receive and embrace the Wedg, having its bulk notwithstanding behind to
oppose it, if it could not be broke by the arms of the Tenaille. And a Squadron
may very soon cast it self in a Tenaille, either by advancing its two flanks
(the Body standing ^ied ferme) or yet by making the middle part (against which
the point of the Wedg prepares) retire a little* both the flanks standing
still, either the one or the other way makes the Squadron a Tenaille.

The Saw was a great Batallion composed of several Squadrons, all marshalled
The Saw.
in the form of Wedges, the angular points of which Wedges represented the
teeth of the Saw; and the Bodies of the several Wedges standing in a direct
line represented the body of the Saw. Some have writ that the several Maniples
of a Roman Legion did represent the Saw, taking the Bodies of the Maniples for
the Teeth, and the Intervals for the body of the Saw.

But how could that be, for the Bodies of the Maniples, and the several
Intervals between these Bodies, were all of one equal front, and so are not the
teeth and body of a Saw; and unless these Maniples had been made a little
sharper at the front, than of either ten or twelve men, the resemblance would
not have holden. We do not read that the Romans used it at all.

CHAP. XIX. Of some Customs used by the Romans, and other Ancient Nations,
before, in the time of, and after their Battles.
THe Gr^cians sung a Hymn and a Paan, both before and after their Battles; but
before they begun, unless they were surprised, they offered Sacrifices
Sacrifices.
to such of their Gods and Goddesses, as either they hoped would be for them,
or feared might be against them: The inspection of the Entrails of the
sacrificed Beasts, was an ordinary thing with the Greeks, as all their
Historians tell us; nor was this custom peculiar to them, for the Enemy of
Mankind* was worshipped by the Romans, and other Nations, as well as by the
Grec^ans. Before the Romans came to the Battle, they were somewhat nice in
observing how the Sacred Pullets did eat their allowance; which furnished a
fair occasion to the Chicken-masters to usurp a power to persuade or dissuade
the Consuls from fighting, when they pleased. Instead of these, in our Modern
Wars, before the Battle, the Turk with great devotion, attends the sight of the
new Moon; and both he, and other Mahometans, howl loud enough to their
Impostor, who is otherwise so taken up, that he has no leisure to hear their
habblings. Christians either humbly offer, or should humbly offer the
Sacrifices of their Prayers to the True God, who gives Victory to whom he
pleases. In the Primitive times, they sung a Paan, and a Hymn, Crux V^cit.

After the Heathens thought they had made their Deities propitious, their
Chieftains labdured to encourage their Armies with good Words, Speeches,
Orations, and Promises of Rewards: Their Speeches were sometimes premeditated,
and sometimes extemporary. The Roman Generals used to harangue Harangues.
their Armies, when they were to promalgate new Ordinances, to punish grievous
Crimes, or to fight with an Enemy; sometimes in the Camp, and sometimes in the
Field. And all this was also done by other Nations, though it may be not so
well.

When the Roman Generals resolved either to fight or offer Battle, they caused
The Scarlet, ^r Purple Coat of Arms.
a Scarlet or Purple Coat of Arms to be hung upon the point of a long Spear at
their Praetorium, or Pavilion; and this was Signum Pugna, the sign of Battle;
and then every one prepared himself for his proper work. But before that, for
most part, the Soldiers had direction to refresh themselves with Sleep and
Meat, and this indeed was well done of them, but they were not the only
Refreshment.
men who did it; other Nations used it, particularly, we read, that Hannibal
practiced it at Tre^ia; for there he ordered his Army, the night before he
fought, to take their rest and refreshment, and next morning set upon the
Romans when they were fasting; to which Livy in his twenty first Book, mostly
attributes his Victory. After these things the Army was marshalled in the
Field; whereof I have already spoken sufficiently.

Being ready to come to the shock, the Tessera, or Word was given, which The
Tessera, or Word.
all, both Officers and Common Soldiers received, that by it they might know
one another, and so discern an Enemy. The Tessera was either one Word, or one
Sentence, as Foelicitas, Libertas, Venus Genetrix, (one of Julius Caesar's)
Optima Matter, given by Nero, The worst of Sons. Among the Emperors, after
their conversion to the Faith, Deus Nobiscum, God with us, was ordinary; and so
it continues to be often used among the German, Danish, and Swedish Armies.
Next to the Word, was the Shout, and this either was not, or should not be
raised, till the Armies were at that distance, that they could immediately come
to blows: This was done to encourage their own men, Baritus, or shout.
and terrify their Enemies. Livius in his fourth Book informs us, that where
this cry or shout was very loud, shrill, and continued without interruption; it
was interpreted to be a certain sign of Victory: but if it was dead, cold, and
unequal, often begun, and often interrupted, it bewrayed fear and
discouragement, and portended ruin and destruction. It was used by all
Nations, as well as the Romans, and the word Baritus, whereby Historians
express it, was borrowed from the Ancient Germans, whose cry, they say, sounded
like the pronunciation of that word. They cried no more after they came to the
medley, else it would have hindered them from hearing the Commands of their
Officers, either by word of mouth, or the Trumpet. Though the loud noise of
Cannon and Musket in our Modern Wars, may seem reason enough to suppress this
ancient custom of shouting, yet it neither ought to be, nor yet is it banished
out of our Armies. The Germans, French, Danes and Swedes, in their advance, and
before they give Fire, have their ca, ca, o^: And no doubt, with an advance, a
stro^t heats and inflames the Blood, and helps to encourage. The late Usurper,
and his Armies, made but too good use of it. These things were previous to a
Battle; First, The Purple Coat of Arms at the Consuls Pavillion. Secondly, The
Exhortation or Harang^e. Thirdly, The Marshalling the Army. Fourthly, The Word,
or Te^^^^a, Fifthly, The Classi^^^: And Lastly, This Shout or Baritus. Of the
first five that were ordinarily practiced, Caesar speaks in the Second Book of
his Gallick War, as necessary; for when he was almost surpised by the
Nervians, he writes thus: Caesar, (says he of himself) had all things to do at
once, the Standard to be set up, (that is, the Scarlet Coat) his Army to
marshal, his Soldiers to exhort, to cause the sign to be given by the Trumpet,
and to give the Sign; this last Sign signifies the Tessera, otherwise the
words had been superfluous, of which that great man cannot be taxed. As to this
last Sign, which was the Word, the Ancients found that same difficulty, with
which all Armies are still troubled, and that was, that by the often requiring
and giving it, the Enemy came to the knowledge of it, and then it was useless.
Lips^^^ tells us, that he reads in P^li^^nus, that one A^ues an Arcadian A
pretty story.
Captain, being to fall on the Laced^monians in the night time, or, as we now
call it, to beat up their quarters* instead of a Word, he commanded his Army to
require no Word at all, but to use all those who sought a Word, as Enemies; so
that the demanding the Tessora, bewrayed the demander to be a Lacedaemonian,
who at that time received a notable overthrow. The Roman Consul, when Classicum
a sign of Battle.
he was to fall on, caused the Classicum to sound, which was seconded by the
nearest, and immediately by all the Trumpets, Horns, and Horn-pipes of the Army.

And now the Battle begins, concerning which an old question is not yet perhaps
decided, Whether it was better to give or receive the charge? The A question,
whether to give or receive the charge?
Roman Dictator Cossus (as Levy has it in his sixth Book) being to join Battle
with a powerful Army of the Volscians, commanded all his Foot to stand still,
and fix their Javelines in the ground, and so receive the Enemies charge; which
being violent, put them out of breath, and then the Legionaries closed with
them, and routed them. Great Pompey gave the like order at Pharsalia, but not
with the like success, for he was totally beaten. But Machiavelli with
Machiavelli's opinion.
his accustomed confidence (to give it no worse name) in the fourth Book of his
Art of War, takes upon him to give the definitive sentence, and awards the
Victory to him who receives the charge: And says also, that most Captains
choose rather to receive than give it, yet he instances only one of the Fabii,
who, by receiving the charge of the Sanonites and Gauls, was Victorious. But we
must listen to a greater Captain than any he has named, and himself to boot,
and that is Julius Caesar: who by giving the charge in the Thessalian Plains,
gained the Sovereignty of the Roman Empire, and blames Pompey for following the
bad advice of Triarius, to wait till Caesar charged him. His words, whereby he
seems to void this difference, you have in the third Book of his Civil War,
which are these in English: But on the contrary, says he, I think this was done
Caesar's judgment of it.
by Pompey, without any show of reason, (meaning his keeping his Soldiers from
advancing to the charge) because there is, says he, I know not what galant
vigor, and natural inclination to courage born in all men, which Captains
ought rather to cherish, stir up, and augment, than any way mollify, or
restrain. Thus far Great Caesar. But on the other hand, if an Army be drawn up
in an advantageous ground (suppose a Hill, or fenced with Marish, River, To
keep advantages.
or Rock) the quitting of which may prove prejudicial (as the loss of all
advantages, especially in matters of War does) it alters clearly the case, and
those who have done it either in Ancient or Modern Wars, to the irrecoverable
loss of their Masters, have much mistaken Caesar, who never practiced it; and
assuredly those who do it, had need of good fortune, otherwise they may be sure
to be branded in true Histories with either perfidy, or inexcusable folly; and
even in Romances, with too much generosity.

In the time of Battle, all, both Commanders and Soldiers did their duties, by
punctually, obeying the commands of their Generals, though to the certain and
inevitable loss of their lives; if not, they were sure to incur those
punishments, whereof I shall speak hereafter. Nor were they obliged to obey the
commands given them before the Battle only, but all those orders and signs that
were given them in the time of Battle: These Vegetius in the fifth Chapter of
his third Book, calls Signs, and divides them into three Signs in time of
Battle.
sorts, Vocal, Semi-vocal, and Dumb. The Vocal were the verbal commands of the
Officers, especially the Consul, and Tribunes. The Semi-vocal were the several
sounds of Classicums, Trumpets, and Horns; as March, Charge, Retire. The Dumb
signs were the Ensigns, Standards, and Eagles; as also the elevation of the
Hand, of a Colors, or a Lance, or the shaking of a Spear by a Consul, or
General: But these were agreed on before the fight began, and were either given
to the whole Army, or but to a part of it; as, when you see such a thing done,
then you are to do so and so. These Dumb signs would not do much good in our
Battles, where the smoke of Powder would render many of them imperceptible.

And now the Battle is ended, and the Romans are either Victorious, or have
lost the day: If the first, they were to pursue the Enemy to his Camp, To
pursue a Victory,
or clearly out of the Field; and not only so, but to follow him so close, that
he might have no time to rally, and to force him out of his strong holds,
before he recovered breath to gather strength. But we shall find not only
Hannibal defective in this so important a Duty of a Great Captain, but many of
the Romans themselves, even against this Carthaginian Arch-enemy of theirs.
Livy informs us in his twenty seventh Book, that at Canusi^m, Marcellus beats
Not always practiced by the Romans:
him; Hannibal gets to his Camp, and in the night time marches out of it;
Marcellus not pursuing him, got work enough to do with him afterward. The same
Author tells us in his twenty ninth Book, that the Consul Sempronius, and
Pro-consul Licinius fought with the same Hannibal in the Br^tian Country, and
defeated him; but they not pursuing, he got the rest of his Army safely to
Croton next day. In his thirty first Book he says, Philip of Macedon was
worsted by the Romans in two Horse fights, but not being pursued by the Consul,
and leaving great Fires in the Camp, he escaped to the Mountains. Caesar defies
all his Enemies to challenge or charge him with this oversight; for he never
Never omitted by Caesar.
beat one of them in the Field, (which he did very often) but he was sure to be
Master of his Camp before he slept. But you may read all along in Livy, when
the Roman State was but beginning to grow, that when their Dictators or Consuls
had beaten any of their Neighbors, Tuscans, Veians, Volscians, Samnites or
Latins, for most part, they made no more ado, but marched back to the City,
which, I suppose, the ambition of a Triumph frequently led them to.

But if these very often Victorious Romans received the foil, as sometimes they
did, they did even that which many more ancient people did before them, and
many younger have done since; and that is, they either fled, or retired: If
they fled downright, without taking notice of their Camp, either their speed
carried them away, or they saved their lives, by submitting to such conditions
as themselves often imposed upon those, who by the chance of War, came to be
their Captives; of which I shall speak in my discourse of Prisoners. Of what
advantage or disadvantage flying or retiring to a Camp was, Of a Retreat to a
Camp.
shall be touched, when I come to view Lipsius his comparison of the Ancient
and Modern Militia. In this place I shall only say, that the Romans did not
always leave their Camps fortified and manned, when they went out to Battle. At
Ciminia, the Consul Fabius made his Baggage-men demolish the fortification of
his Camp, and fill up the Ditches, while he put his Army in Battle array, in
which he issued out, fought the Enemy, and beat him, as you have it in Livy's
ninth Book. And it is in that same Book, where he tell you, that the Dictator
Q. Fabius ordered C. ^abius to fall upon the Samnites with his new levied Army,
while the Dictator himself, at another quarter sallied out of his Camp with his
whole Army, and did not only not leave any to defend the Camp, but ordered
likewise all his Tents and Baggage to be burnt, that by taking away all hopes
of a Retreat, he might force his Soldiers to fight courageously, both for the
safety of their lives, and the recovery of their goods, or the equivalence of
them, by the plunder of the Enemies Camp, all which came to pass. The ^^^salus
victis, nullam sperare salutem.
like of this action of the Roman Dictator, History tells us, has been
practiced by others, particularly by William the Conqueror, when he invaded
England, who after his landing, caused them to burn all his Ships, which were
not so few as eight hundred.

CHAP. XX. Of the March of a Consular Army.
SUpposing that, which very often fell out, that the Romans gained the Victory
in their last Battle, and had again nestled themselves in their Camp, let us
see in what order they marched out of it, either to pursue an old Enemy, or to
find out a new one. In this point of the Roman Militia, Lipsius puts himself
Li^sius officious.
to some needless trouble to comment on Polybius, for I think he is so clear in
it, that Lisius does him dis-service, in offering him his help, where he needs
it not at all. I shall therefore tell you, how Polybius orders the march of a
Consular Army, without staying for Lipsius his tedious explications.

At the first sound of the Trumpets and Horns, every man gathered his
Preparations to a March.
Baggage, Burdens, and Fardels together, and had them ready to truss up, if
they were Officers, on their Pack and Sumpter horses; if common Soldiers, on
their own Backs: At the second sound they loaded either themselves, or their
Beasts: And at the third sound they marched. Now, though Polybius mentions it
not, nor Lipsius, (who will comment on him) yet we are to believe, that all
Consuls were so discreet that they made no great Interval of time between the
second and third sound, because it could not be very pleasing to either Man or
Beast, standing under heavy burdens, to lose any of that time which they might
have saved in making their Journey.

After the third sound, they marched in this order: First, marched the
Extraordinaries Order of the Roman March.
of the Allies, as being nearest the Consuls Pavilion, and near to the
Praetorian Port. These were follow^d by the first Legion of the Allies, and
after it, the Baggage of the Extraordinaries, and of that first Legion. In the
third place marched the first Legion of the Romans, and its Baggage after it.
Fourthly, The second Roman Legion, followed by both its Baggage, and the
Baggage of the second Legion of the Allies: Which in the fifth place was
followed by the second Legion of the Allies, that was in the Rear of the
Infantry. The place where the Cavalry was to march, was uncertain; sometimes
both Extraordinary and Ordinary Horse marched all in the Van, sometimes in the
Rear, sometimes on both the Flanks, without the Baggage, according as the
General resolved to make use of them; taking up his measures by the nearness of
an Enemy in either Van, Rear, or Flank: And sometimes the Cavalry marched
divided into Van and Rear. Polybius shows us also, that if there were ground
enough, and great suspicion of an Enemy, then the Baggage of the Hastati of
every Legion was sent before them, which they followed themselves, after them
came the Baggage of the Principas, and then themselves followed in the third
place, by the Baggage of the Triarii, which themselves followed. If an Enemy
appeared in the Van, the Baggage of the Hastati, was immediately turned to a
side, and the place where it had been, was possessed by the Hastati themselves;
the same was done by the Principes and Triarii. And we may suppose, that if an
Enemy appeared in the Rear, the Baggage of the Triarii was turned aside, and
its place possessed by conversion; or facing to the Rear by themselves, and the
other two Batallions in that same manner were to second them. What I have said
of one Legion, is spoken of all the four of a Consular Army, the two Roman
Legions, and the two of the Allies.

But in Polybius his description of the march of a Consular Army, there arise
Some difficulties and doubts concerning the march of the Baggage.
to me some difficulties, which Lipsius has not at all cleared, nay, nor
spoken ^f; though he speak enough of that, which may be well enough understood
without him. As first, consider how it can be imagined, that the ground would
always allow the Romans to march in the order I last spoke of, that is, every
great Batallion of a Legion to have its Baggage in the Van of it: For by such
Not at all cleared by Polybius, or any other.
a March, in a Country full of Hedges, Ditches and Enclosures, it is not
possible, but their Legions would be wonderfully embarass'd with their
Servants, Horses, and Baggage; neither could the three Batallions of every
Legion, or of all the three, upon the attack of an Enemy make their evolutions
from among their Baggage so dexterously and readily, but they might by an active
pursuer, be brought to inextricable difficulties. I am therefore of opinion,
that Time has robbed us of a page or two of Polybius his Writings, which would
have explained this, and have made us know his own sense, better than either
Lipsius or T^rduzzi does. The last of these two does wonderfully please himself
in affirming, that an Army should always march in that very order, wherein he
who commands it, resolves to fight. Here he fights with his own shadow, for, I
suppose, none will deny, that an Army should march in Batallions, great Bodies,
Brigades, and Squadrons, yea, all in Breast, if the ground will permit it. But
if not, then I hope, Terduzzi will permit a General to march in such Bodies,
small or great, as with convenience he can. But what if I deny to Terduzzi the
thing it self, for I dare aver, never Roman Chieftain intended to fight an
Enemy in that order, as Polybius makes the Consular Army to march: For who will
fancy the Hastati fought with their Baggage before them, or that the Principes
advanced to the relief of the Hastati, through their own Wagons and Carts? But
grant him all he says, to be true, what is that to the thing in question, which
is, whether the ordering the Baggage to march between the several Batallions of
a Legion, was conducible to obtain the great and main end and scope of all
Armies, which is to overcome an Enemy? And since I think it was not, I am still
of the opinion, that Polybius his right meaning is not yet fully elucidated to
us, either by himself, or any other person whatsoever.

And I will deal yet more freely, I do not well, or rather not at all
understand, Roman Soldiers carried all their own Baggage.
what is meant by the Baggage of the several Batallions of Hastati, Principes,
and Triarii; for what belonged to the Soldiers was carried on their own backs,
(if all be true that we have told you formerly) except their Tents and their
Hand-mills, and these, I think, might with little loss have taken their hazard
in the Rear of every Legion, nay, of the whole Army, if the Enemy was expected
in the Van; or, they might securely enough have been sent to the Van, if the
Enemy was in the Rear. So as still Polybius his dividing the Baggage of a
Legion into three parts, and putting a third before every Batallion, is
mysterious to me.

Lipsius stands gazing and admiring at the excellent order of the Roman march,
and cries out, Mira eorum hic Providentia and Dispositio: Their Providence and
Order here, says he, was wonderful. But I wonder much more, that this Order of
theirs did not sometime bring mischief upon them. For first, you are to
believe, that the daring Romans for most part sought their Enemies, who in that
case could not but be in their Van, either marching to mete them, or marching
away from them: If the Enemy marched to meet them, the Roman Baggage, either
before the Legion it self, or between the several Bodies of it, could not but
give them those inevitable embarasses, and inconveniences, whereof I have
spoken. If an Enemy marched from them, why did so prudent a people as the
Romans were, make their own Baggage a hinderance to them in overtaking that
Enemy, in whose pursuit they marched? For let any man consider it right, the
Great Baggage, that is, the Artillery, Engines, and Machines, or the stuff
whereof they were to be made, their spare Arms, the Shops where, and Utensils
wherewith they were made; the Consuls Pavilions and great Baggage, the
Treasurers train of Moneys and Proviant, and many times of Plunder, would take
up so much ground between the several Legions and Troops, that without these
hindrances, a Consular Army might have joined an Enemy in less time by half
then it could do with them; which Caesar's speedy march from G^rg^via after the
Aeduans, without Baggage, did sufficiently demonstrate.

What advantages the Nervians proposed to themselves, by the manner of the
March of the Roman Baggage between Legions (and sure these advantages had been
greater, if every Batallion of a Legion had had its Baggage in the Van of it)
will be known to any who will attentiv^^y read C^sars Second Book of the
Gallick Wa^; for they having learned how the Romans used to march, resolved to
set upon his first Legion, whilst its Baggage gave a stop to the ^est to come
up to its assistance: C^sar, who was as happy as prudent, and as prudent as
fortunate, learned their design by his Spies, and presently altered the manner
of his Countries March: He commands his Cavalry to set forward, and after it
six Legions, and after them the Baggage of his whole Army, and in the
Rear-guard two Legions more. If he had not done so, he might have received a
notable, yea, an indelible affront from that stout and warlike Nation; which as
it was, left him not the Field without a very bloody resistance. Nor was this
the only time C^sar did so (though it is the only time mentioned by Lipsius and
Terduzzi) for when he advanced with four Legions against the Bell^vaci, he
caused three Legions to march first, then the Baggage, which his fourth Legion
followed. Perhaps he practiced this more frequently, though it is not* often
mentioned: And in all his Retreats, he ever sent his whole Baggage to the Van
of his Army. Thus you see Great C^sar, (who lived long after Polybius) did not
tie himself so strictly to the custom of the Roman March, but he both could,
and did alter it, according as he thought it stood with the convenience of his
affairs; and so should all prudent Captains do.

But I cannot get one view of the Velites* in all this March, and here our
Authors We cannot tell how the V^lites marched.
leave us again to our conjectures. Certainly, if the whole sixth Book of
Polybius his History be extant, and if some parcels of it are not lost, (as I
shrewdly suspect there are) he forgot himself, when he forgot to tell us, where
and how the Roman light armed (who made up more than the fourth part of the
Infantry) marched; for to tell us (as Lipsius does) that they marched where the
Consul appointed them, is to tell us just nothing; for neither heavy armed
Foot, nor Horse marched where they pleased, but where the General ordered them.
Yet it is a probable, and a very rational conjecture, that the Velites marched
nearest that place where the Enemy was, whether that was in the Van, Rear, or
Flank of the Army, since they were by their skirmishes to begin the Fight. But
I fear in the next Chapter we shall have more groping, before we find the
quarter where they lodged.

Observe, that the Legions of both the Romans and Socii did change Van and Rear
daily by turns. I have told you before, the Roman ambulatory March was twenty
Italian miles in four hours, and the cursory twenty five. But I suppose,
without Baggage; and with it twenty miles was Vnius diei justum iter; The just
march of an Army for one day.

CHAP. XXI. Of the Quartering, Encamping, and Castrametation of a Consular Army.
AFter a long, and it may be, a hard and tedious March, it will be time to
Quartering i^ Towns and Villages.
lodge our Consular Army; and lodged it must be in Towns and Villages, or in
the Fields. If in the first, they had nothing to demand from their Hosts, but
Bed and Lodging, and were to pay for all they spent in meat, drink, or fire. In
the time of the Emperors, the Legates and Presidents of Provinces, caused them
to furnish the Armies (as they marched through their jurisdictions) out of the
public Magazines (which was discounted from their wages by the Treasurers) or
caused the Country people to bring in provisions of all kinds, as to open
Markets, where they were sold to the Soldiers for ready money, at the ordinary
rates of the Countries, in which the Armies chanced to be; the contraveners and
disobeyers of orders being severely punished. The way in which Officers and
Soldiers used to be quartered in Houses (to avoid strife between them and
their Hosts) was this: The whole house was as equally divided as might be, into
three parts, whereof the Master of the house chose the first, the Soldiers the
second, and the third and last returned to the host, who by this means had two
thirds.

When the Army was to be quartered in the Field, which we call Encamping,
Soldiers hard labor in Encamping.
(and which consists of two parts, Castrametation and Fortification) the
common Soldiers had a harder labor than in their days March, in regard,
(beside the measuring the ground) they were to Fortify the Camp, with Ditch,
Rampart and Pallisado, and to pitch the Tents of all their Commanders, and
cleanse their quarters, before they got leave to take notice of their own
Tents, or Huts.

In the matter of Castrametation (which is one part of Encamping) after the
Roman way, we are to borrow all our light from Polybius, and our own
conjectures; for Vegetius speaks but very little of it, and that little is in
very general terms. But for the Fortification of the Camp, we are more obliged
to Vegetius than Polybius. The first spends five full Chapters on Encamping, to
wit, the twenty first, twenty second, twenty third, twenty fourth and twenty
fifth of his first Book; and either for fear that he had forgot something in
all these Chapters, or else, according to his custom, to refresh his own or
our memories, he falls again to his Castrametation in the eighth Chapter of his
third Book. The sum of all he says on that Subject will amount to this: Sum
of what Vegetius says of Castrametation.
He laments that in his time, the ancient custom of fortifying Camps was worn
out, for want whereof, says he, we have known many Roman Armies afflicted by
the sudden incursions of the barbarous Nations: Besides, says he, if they be
worsted in any Battle, having no Camp to retire to, they fall by the edge of
the Sword unrevenged, like brutes; neither does the Enemy make an end of
killing them, till he is weary of pursuing them. He says, The Army is to Encamp
where it may have store of Fuel, Wood, Water and Fodder, where the air is
wholesome, and free from Marshes; and if it be to stay any time, it must be
well looked to, that no Hill be near, from whence an Enemy may infest it, and
that the place be not subject to inundations of Waters. The Camp is to be of
such an extent, that neither Men, Beasts, nor Baggage, be pinched for want of
room; nor must it be so large, but that the Fortifications of it in all its
circumference, may be sufficiently defended by the men that are within it. This
is all he says of Castrametation. As to the Fortification of the Camp, he tells
us one and the same thing of it, in the twenty fourth Chapter of his first
Book, and in the eighth Chapter of his third Book, and it is shortly this: That
there were three several sorts or ways of fortifying a Camp: First, if there
was but little danger, the Rampart should be made but three foot high* (suppose
above the line) and this Rampart was to be made of Turf cut out of the place*
where the Ditch should be, and the And of fortifying the Camp.
loose earth of the same, the which Ditch should be nine foot broad, and seven
deep; and this was called Fossa tumultuaria, or a Ditch suddenly cast up, and
it seems was used when the Army was to stay but a night or two, and no enemy
near it.

Thus far Vegetius is clear, but in describing the other two ways of
fortifying, he is extremely confused, both in his first and third Book. But if
I guess right at his meaning, he intends to tell us that the second way of
fortification was when an imminent danger of an enemy appeared, then the Ditch
was nine foot deep, and twelve broad, and the Ramp^rt above the line four foot
high; ^^d thirdly, when they found themselves in the greatest hazard, the
Rampart was planted about with these Stakes and Palisado*s, which the Soldiers
were oblige^ to carry about with them. So that reckoning from the top of the
Rampart to the bottom of the Ditch, it was thirteen foot high, and the Ditch it
self twelve foot broad. I would he had said either eleven or thirteen, for then
he had not contradicted himself, for he told us before that in Fortification
the Romans were accustomed to observe an odd number. The Turf whereof the
Rampart was made, used to be half a foot deep, one foot broad, and one foot and
a half long.

Thus far Vegetius concerning the Fortification of the Roman Camp.

But that which he adds in the eighth Chapter of his Third Book, is not to be
omitted, That all Generals who Encamp their Armies for any time, as the Romans
did frequently whole Summers, and whole Winters, (the first whereof were called
Aestiva, and the last H^berna) should have a provident care, and should make it
their great work, that not only fuel, fodder and water be supplied near hand,
but that all manner of necessaries for back and belly, and all munitions may be
brought safely, and without ^^peach of an enemy to their quarters. To which
effect, if there be not fortified places all along the Country through which
these provisions are to be transported, then some ought to be builded, one
whereof should second another; these Vegetius calls Castles, Cast^lla, Cast^lla
what,
a Diminutive, as he tells us from Castra.

The Ancients either in their own Territories, or in those of their Conquests,
did even so as is practiced to this day, and that was, They built Forts,
Towers, Sconces and Castles in these places where it was tho^ght they might be
For what use built.
most useful, either for the preservation of the Country from the sudden
irruptions of ill affected neighbors, or to put such a restraint o^ the
Inhabitants themselves as to keep them from rebel^ion* for this purpose long
and strong Walls were sometimes built with excessive cost and labor, we may
yet see some* relics of Severus walls, built for the safety of the Britains
from the Incursions of the Scots and Picts.

The Castles which they intended to keep constantly guarded, were for most*
part built round, of thick and strong walls to resist the battery of the Ram*
and if they had Curtains, these were ^^anked a l'antique with round Turrets*
These Castella the Romans called also Burga, I know not whether they borrowed*
Burg a Latin^ and a German word, signifies a Fort.
the word from the Germans, or the Germans from them, for the old Dutch* word
Burg, yet in use, signifying a Strength, Hold, Fort or Castle, many of* them
were built by the Romans in Germany, and some of them are to be seen at* this
day. The Governors of these Castles or Forts were called Cust^des and Magistri
Burgorum, which at first were only committed to them, during the pleasure of
the Consuls and Emperors* afterward by the liberality and bounty* of Princes,
these Keepers were made hereditary Governors, and long after* the Castles and
Burgs themselves, with many fair lands belonging to them, were* given to them
and their heirs in property for ever, to hold them in Va^^alage, Hence comes
the name of Cast^l^^ns, a title of great honor and profit in Poland, Castellan.
where they enjoy it but for life, the King having the disposa^ o^ it
afterward. Hence the title of Burggrave in Germany, which in the language of
that Country is of greater honor than the title o^ an Earl, which in Dutch is
simply Grave. And that dignity of ^urggrave to this day is there very
honorable* and kept by the greatest Princes of the German Empire as an
addition, and that no Burggrave.
small one to the rest of their great Titles, as the Elector of Brandenburg is
the hereditary Burggrave of Nuremburg.

In process o^ time Villages, Hamlets, and little Towns were built besides
these Burgs, many whereof are become great and famous Cities, which keep yet
their denomination from the Burg or Castle, besides which they were at first
edified, such as Strasburg, Augsburg, Nuremburg, Wirtsburg, Lunenburg,
Neramburg, Ha^burg, and many others. And as at the first building these Castles
or Burgs, the Keepers were called Magistri Burg^rum; so to this day the
principal Magistrates and Mayors of Cities are called B^rgomasters.

The Roman Soldiers having finished the fortification of their Camp, are next
to be lodged within it: I am afraid it will not contain them all, yet let us
see how Polybius will accommodate his Consular Army, for we have done with
Vegetius.

It was the duty of that Tribune whole lot or turn it was to officiate for the
Legion, to go before (no doubt with a guard) and some Centurions with him to
take up ground for the Camp, and to measure out all the several quarters of it.
Which that you may the better comprehend, we shall divide the Roman Camp into
two, but not equal parts; these were called the upper and the lower Division of
the Roman Camp into two parts.
parts: in the upper lodged the Consul, the Treasurer, the Legates, the Evocati
of the Romans, and Extraordinaries of the Allies, the lodgings of the Tribunes
and Pr^fecti were also there, and in it was the Marketplace, and a large place
to receive strangers. In the lower part of the Camp were quartered all the four
Legions of the Romans and Allies in several Maniples, and all the Troops of
Horse, of both the one and the other.

The Tribune who measured the Camp, first chose ground for the Pr^t^rium,
Prat^rium, or Consuls Pavilion.
that is the Consuls Pavilions and Tents, and allowed for it two hundred foot
square, the superficial measure whereof was eight Italian miles; for multiply
two hundred by two hundred, the product will be forty thousand foot* and these
make eight miles, and no doubt himself, his friends, servants and baggage might
be well enough accommodated in such a compass of ground. That ground was marked
with a white flag, and all the other quarters with red ones. And here be
pleased to observe that the Romans keeping constantly one way of
Castrametation, they were so well acquainted with it, that no sooner any of the
Army saw by the white flag, where the Consul was to lodge, but every one knew
how to go straight to that quarter that was designed for him: As well, says
Polybius, as Citizens know how to go to their houses, after they enter any of
the Ports. Upon both hands of the Pr^t^rian were the quarters of the Treasurer
and Legates; for the first were allowed two hundred foot in length, and a
hundred in depth, for each Legate a hundred foot long, and fifty deep.

To the Foot of the Ev^cati of the Romans, Lipsius (and Terduzzi, and the Who
were quartered in the upper part of the Roman Camp.
Si^ur de Pr^issack following him) allow eighty foot in length, and two hundred
thirty eight in breadth, and to the Horse of the Evocati, eighty foot in
length, and a hundred twenty five in breadth; perhaps they gather this out of
Polybius, but I am very sure, notwithstanding any of their assertions to the
contrary, the number of the Evocati being uncertain, (for they were voluntary,
sometimes Evocati.
more, sometimes fewer, and so not definite) one and the same measure of ground
could not always, and at all times be allowed to them. But all these being thus
quartered on both sides of the Prat^rium, there was a street of one hundred
foot broad, which traverst the breadth of the Camp, the name whereof is forgot,
between which Street and the Alarm place were lodged the Extraordinaries
Extraordinaries*
of both the Cavalry and Infantry of the Allies; for the quarters of their
Horse eighty foot in breadth, and a hundred sixty seven in length were allowed;
and for their Foo^ two hundred foot in length, and seventy in breadth. Within
the Extraordinaries of the Horse was the Marketplace, which they called Forum.
Without the Foot of the Extraordinaries, and next them was the place of arms,
or the Alarm-place, and this was of one equal breadth in all Alarm-place.
the four quarters of the Camp, to wit two hundred Foot, kept yet in our Modern
Castrametations. Next to this place of arms was the Rampart, and that Port
which was called P^rta Pr^t^riana, the Pr^t^rian Port. Now though the Pr^torian
Port.
Roman Consul by this account was not in the middle of his Army, (as Xenophon
would have all Generals to be) yet Lipsius thinks it enough that he was in
medio Ducum, in the middle of his Captains, I know not why this was enough, but
let us see how.

Behind the Pr^tor ^^n on the right hand of it were the* Tents of the six
Tribunes of the first Roman Legion, and upon their right hand the Tents of the
six Praefecti of the Allies, on the left hand of the Praetorium, at some
distance behind it were the Tents of the six Roman Tribunes of the second
Legion, and Tribunes and Praesecti.
on their left hand the six Praefecti of the second Legion of the Allies were
quartered. The Sieur de Preissac and his Translator Captain Crus^ in their
delineation of the Roman Camp place the Tents of all the twelve Tribunes, and
twelve Praefecti; as Lipsius does in his first figure, which himself found
subject to censure, and therefore helped it in the next Page. In the first he
makes the left hand Tribune of the first Legion, and the right hand Tribune of
the second Roman Legion to place their Tents close behind the Praetorium, and
by that means they took away the mutual prospect of the Consul from his Legions
who were quartered behind him, and of the Legions from the Consuls Pavilion
which was pitched before them. This Preissac did also, but Lips^^^ helped and
mended his by ^eaving the Praetorium visible to all quarters; and this
Preissuck was bound to do likewise, but he did it not. Besides this error,
Preissack allows a hundred and fifty foot-square for every Tribunes Tent,
whereas Polybius allows but fifty, and allows enough when he does so; this I
conceive to be the Printers fault, whereof I thought fit to acquaint the Si^^
de Preissacks Reader. So you see that the twelve Tents of the Roman Tribunes,
and the twelve Tents of the Praefecti of the Allies, took up twelve hundred
foot of ground square, fifty foot square being allowed to each of them. Observe
here that Polybius tells us not at all where, or in what place of the Camp the
Allies Pr^fecti lodged, and this gives just cause to Lipsius to complain of his
carelessness in this point, which Lips^^^ himself has very well supplied in
quartering them where they should be, that is in the front of their Legions, as
the Roman Tribunes were placed by Polybi^^ in the front of theirs, as I have
told you, and in imitation of Lips^^s, Pr^iss^ck, and T^rduzzi quarter them
just so. This is all I have to say concerning the Castrametation of the
Superior or upper part of the Roman Camp. And so I come to the lower one.

Below the Tents of the Tribunes there was a Street which traversed the
Inferior part of the Camp.
whole breadth of the Camp, and divided the superior part of it from that
inferior one which I am now to describe. This Street was a hundred foot broad,
and was called Via Principalis, the principal Street; whether it had that name,
because Via Principalis.
it was near the Consuls Pavilion, the Tribunes Tents, and the Eagles; or
because if the Camp was of any long continuance, they erected their Altars in
that Street is no great matter. This Street was intersected by another, which
did run the whole length of the Camp, from the Decuman Port, to the Praetorian
one. This Lane divided the right hand Roman Legion from the left hand one, and
consequently had on each side of it the half of the Consular Army. On the right
side of it were quartered the Horse and Foot belonging to the first Roman
Legion, and on the right hand of that Legion the first Legion of the Allies in
this following order.

Nearest to the Street was quartered the Cavalry belonging to the first Legion,
Quarters for the Roman Horse of the first Legion.
all in one Row or Street; call it as you please, for Polybius his Interpreter
uses both Striga and Vicus, a Row and a Street. This Row was divided into ten
several quarters, each of which was to contain and lodge a Troop consisting of
thirty Riders, with their Horses, Arms and Baggage. Every one of these ten
Quarters was a hundred foot square, and consequently the whole Row was a
thousand foot long, and a hundred foot broad. If you please to multiply a
hundred by a hundred, you will find the product ten thousand Foot, and so much
ground had every Troop of thirty Horse allowed to it. And that I may tell it
you once for all, every Maniple of the Principes and Hastati had as much, but
not the Triarii, as you will see anon. On the right hand of the Horse were
quartered the Triarii, who being but half the number of the Hastati and
Principes, Triaril.
to wit, six hundred, they had but fifty foot of ground in breadth, but in
length as much as the Horse, to wit, a thousand foot, divided equally into ten
parts, to every one of which parts was assigned a Maniple consisting of sixty
men. Multiply a hundred by fifty (for every Maniple of the Tri^^ii had a
hundred foot in length, and fifty foot in breadth) the product in five thousand
foot, and so much ground of superficial measure had every Maniple of the
Triarii. They were obliged to have a care of the Horses belonging to the
Cavalry, to feed them, and see that in the night they strayed not to the
disturbance of the Camp, and so you may think the Horsemen needed the fewer
Grooms. Next the Triarii was a Street fifty foot broad; on the right hand of it
was a Row of Tents, in which lodged the Principes, who were twelve hundred in
number, divided Princi^e^.
into ten Maniples, each censisting of a hundred and twenty men: to every
Maniple was allowed as much ground as to a Troop of Horse, to wit a 100 foot
square; so to all the ten Maniples a thousand foot in length, and a hundred in
breadth. On their right hand quartered the Hastati, all in one Row, twelve
Hastati of the first Roman Legion quartered.
hundred in number likewise, and had an equal allowance of ground. The Hastati
were divided by a Street fifty foot broad from the Allies, who constantly
quartered on their right hand.

You will remember that in my Discourse of the Allies I told you that the third
part of their Horse, and fifth part of their Foot were taken out to wait on the
Consul, and were called Extraordinaries, whom accordingly I have quartered in
the upper part of the Camp near the Consul. Their Horse at first were six
hundred for every Legion, whereof two hundred being lodged in the upper part,
we have but four hundred to quarter in the lower part of the Camp* These being
by one third stronger than the Roman Cavalry, had of ground a Horse of the
Allies first Legion lodged,
third more in breadth allowed, but alike length; the quarter then for the
Horse of the first Legion of the Allies was a thousand foot in length, and 13^
foot in breadth, which contained them well enough; this quarter was equally
divided into ten parts for ten Troops, each consisting of forty Riders. Upon
the right hand of these Horse were quartered the Foot of the Allies first
Legion, remember every one of their Legions at their first coming forth was
three thousand heavy armed, as the Romans were; but the fifth part of that
number, to wit, six hundred being taken away by the Consul, and lodged besides
him, we have now but two thousand four hundred to quarter, for whom as much
ground was allowed, as to both the Principes and Hastati, as to the breadth, so
they had a thousand foot in length, and two hundred in breadth; multiply the
one by the And their Foot all in one Row.
other, the product is two hundred thousand foot, which superficial measure of
ground contained them well enough. I must tell you of an oversight I have
observed in my Lord Preissack's Roman Castrametation, which is, that he allows
to the Allies Foot as much ground as I have done now, but no more ground to
their Horse than to the Roman Cavalry, which was not fair, being the one was
stronger by one third than the other. It is of little or no consequence to us
to know, nor is it worth our curiosity whether the Allies quartered their Foot
by Maniples, or by Cohorts, concerning which Lipsius to me seems to be very
needlessly solicitous. Upon the right hand of the Allies Foot was the
alarm-place constantly two hundred foot broad, and next to it was the Rampart.

We are in the next place to quarter the second Roman Legion, and the second
Legion of the Allies, which is soon done by allowing to every part and member
of them the like quantity of ground for length and breadth, as we did to those
of the two Legions on the right hand, as thus: On the left hand of that Street
which I told you run from the Decuman to the Pr^t^rian Port, and intersecteth
The other two Legions quartered.
the Via principalis, were the ten Troops of Horse belonging to the second
Roman Legion lodged, all in a Row; next them the Triarii, upon their left hand,
a Street fifty foot broad, on the left hand of which lodged the Principes; next
them the Hastati, on their left hand another Street of fifty foot broad; upon
the left hand whereof were quartered the Horse of the Allies, and on the left
hand of them their Foot, on whose left hand was the Alarm-place, and next to it
the Rampart and Ditch.

And now we have our whole Consular Army very formally quartered in a Camp of
an aequilateral square figure, as Lips^^^, du Pr^issack, and Terduz^^, The
figure of the Roman Camp.
will needs have it to be, though hereafter upon strict examination, we shall
find it not to be exactly so. And what needs the whole be so, where all the
parts neither are or can be aequilateral? In the upper part of the Camp the
Pr^to^^^^ and the Tribunes quarters, with those of the Prafecti of the Allies,
were ^quilateral square, but so were not the quarters allotted to the Questor,
Legates, Evocati, or Extraordinarii. In the lower part of the Camp the quatters
ordained for the several Troops of Horse, and for the Maniples of the Roman
Hastati and Principes were aequilateral, but so were neither the quarters of
the Triarii, nor of the Allies Horse and Foot.

In the next place before I go further, I shall tell you that in this Camp
there were four Ports, these were the Praetorian, Decuman, and the right hand
principal Port, and the left hand principal Port. The two first were at the two
ends of the Camp, and the other two at the two sides. The first had its name
because it was nearest the Praetorium, and out of it the Consul marched. The
Decuman served for bringing in provisions and ^odder, for taking Beasts out to
Four Ports in the Roman Camp.
water; as also out of it were carried the Soldiers that were ordained to be
punished; from whence some think it has the name Decumana, from the Decimating
Soldiers alike guilty, and punishing the tenth. But we read in Livies thirty
fourth Book, that the Gauls assaulted Consul Sempronius his Camp, and entered
it at the Port Qu^storia, and committed great slaughter till they were beat
out. We read also o^ a Port called Quintana, which some think was all one with
that called Qu^storia, and had this name from the Questor, or Treasurer, who
lodged near it, and the other from the Street Quintana, near which that Port
was; but the Questors quarters being afterward removed to the superior part of
the Camp, to be near the Consul, that Port was shut up.

Observe next that in the Roman Camp there were eight Streets, five whereof
went in the length of the Camp from the one end of it to the other, and were
Eight Streets in the Roman Camp.
called Vi^ Direct^, or direct and straight Streets; the other three traverst
or crossed the Camp in the breadth of it, and were called Vi^ transvers^, or
cross Streets. Of the five direct Streets, one divided the length of the Camp
equally into two halves, and on each side of it, as I told you, lay the half of
the Consular Army Encamped.

Between the Triarii and Principes of the first Roman Legion was the second
direct Five direct ones.
Street; between the Roman Hastati of the first Legion, and the Allies first
Legion was the third direct Street. Between the Triarii and Principes of the
second Roman Legion was the fourth direct Street, and between the Roman Hastati
of the second Legion, and the Allies second Legion was the fifth direct Street.
All these five Streets were each of them fifty foot broad. But all five of them
Three ^raverse Streets.
either never had names, or have lost them. The three cross Streets traversed
the latitude of the Camp. The one of them was in the upper part of the Camp,
and divided the Praetorium from the quarters of the Extraordinaries, and was of
one hundred foot broad, and has lost its name. The second cross Street divided
the upper part of the Camp from the lower one, as I told you before, and was
called Vi^ principalis, and was likewise a hundred foot broad. The third cross
Street intersected the quarters of the Legions right in the middle, leaving
five Maniples on every side of it, as likewise five Troops of Horse from the
sides; it had its name of Quintana, and was fifty foot broad. These were the
Ports and the Streets of the Roman Camp.

Be pleased likewise to observe that Polybius in his Sixth Book (out of which
Shop all this stuff of the Roman Castrametation is brought) makes the length of
the Camp to be between the Praetorian and the Decuman Port, and where these
are, he calls the two ends of the Camp, and the breadth of it he reckons to be
from the right hand principal Port to the left hand principal one. All this
being premised, we may now take up the Podisme, or foot-measure of the Roman
Camp, as we have described it. And first the length of it from the Praetorian
Port, two hundred foot are allowed for the place of Arms, seventy for the
Extraordinary The Longitude of the Camp.
Foot, and eighty for the Extraordinary Horse, a hundred for the traverse
Street with the unknown name; next to that, two hundred foot for the
Praetorium, and fifty for the Tribunes and Prafecti their quarters, and this
clo^etli the superior part of the Camp; for the places ordained for the
Questor, Legates, Evocati, and Forum were on both sides of the Praetorium, and
so added nothing to the Camps Longitude. After this, reckon for Via
principalis, a hundred foot, and for the length of the Legions quarters a
thousand foot; for the Street Quintana fifty foot, and for the Alarm-place
besides the Decuman Port two hundred foot. If you will add these together, the
aggregate will be two thousand and fifty Foot, which is the Longitude of the
whole Roman Camp.

If you will exactly know the breadth of it, be pleased to enter the Camp at
the principal Port on the right hand, and traverse that Street till you come to
the left hand Port, and at your entrance you shall find two hundred foot for
the place of Arms, next to that two hundred foot for the Foot of The Latit^^^
of it.
the Allies first Legion, and then 133 foot for their Horse, next to them a
Street of fifty foot, on the left hand of that a hundred foot for the Hastati,
and a hundred for the Principes of the first Roman Legion, and on their left
hand you will see a Street fifty foot broad; and besides it the Triarii, who
possess fifty foot, and upon their left hand the ten Troops of Horse belonging
to the first Legion, who take a hundred foot for the breadth of their quarter,
then you will see that Street which runs from the Decuman to the Praetorian
Port, (except where the Consuls Pavilion hinders it) which is fifty foot broad;
and upon the left hand of it you may perceive the quarters of the Horse of the
second Roman Legion, take up a hundred foot in breadth, and the Triarii next
them fifty foot, on whose left hand is a Street fifty foot broad. Next to it
behold the Principes have a hundred foot, and the Hastati a hundred foot; then
you will perceive a Street fifty foot broad, which divides the Hastati from the
Allies of their second Legion; their Horse you will see, take 133 foot in
breadth, and on their left hand their Foot have two hundred foot; and next them
you will come to the Alarm place, still two hundred foot broad. And when you
have traced that place of Arms, and are come to the left hand Port, which they
called Sinistra principalis, you may if you please add these numbers together,
and you will find the aggregate to be two thousand and seventeen foot, which is
the latitude of the whole Camp.

You may remember that the length of our Camp was calculated to be two Roman
Camp not exactly aequilateral squares
thousand and fifty foot, and the breadth of it being two thousand and
seventeen, it is thirty three foot longer than it is broad. It is true the odds
is not great, yet such as makes its figure not to be perfectly aequilateral
square, which is the figure so much contended for. But Terduzzi says that here
a rigorous strictness in the measure is not to be looked to, things being done,
says he, in a Martial not a Geometrical field. But I am of opinion that no
measure should be more, strictly observed than that of ground allowed for
Encamping, for if it be not, you shall hardly shun strife and altercation, and
which is worse, disorder and confusion.

Now let us see if you please, how much ground this Consular Camp Superficial
measure of the Roman Camp.
contained, or (which is all one) what was the superficial measure of it. This
you may do, by multiplying the length by the breadth, to wit, two thousand and
fifty, by two thousand and seventeen, the product will be (if I have cast it up
right) 4134850; divide this number by five, to make paces of it, the Quotient
will be 826970, and this will want only thirty paces of eight hundred and
twenty seven Italian miles.

I wish Polybius had left us a figure of his Camp, for if he did, it is lost.
To supply which defect, several have attempted to do it. Lips^^s gives us one
in his Several figures of the Roman Camp.
Commentary on Polybius, you may see another in Achilles Terduzz^ his Military
Machines, the third in the Sieur do Preissacks Military questions; these two
last for most part borrow theirs from Lipsius, for they differ not except in
some few things which I have touched in passing. A fourth is to be seen in
Steuechiu^ his Commentary on Vegetius, and indeed that differs from Lipsius his
figure in some material points, if I have observed well, and they are these.

First, Stouechius allows fifty foot in length for the quarters of the Electi
of both Horse and Foot, more than Lips^^s does. Secondly, he takes these fifty
feet from the Tribunes, and quarters them in a parallel line with the Evoc^^i;
Differences between Lipsi^^ and St^^^c^ius figures*
whereas Lips^^s quarters them behind the Evocati and the Praetori^^. Thirdly
he leaves no room for the Pr^secti of the Allies, who were twelve in number,
and for whom Lips^^s allowed six hundred foot square, (to wit, fifty for every
one of the twelve) and in a parallel line with the Tribunes, below the Evocati,
and next to Via principalis. Fourthly, St^^^chius alters the whole site of the
Camp, for he makes the Decuman Port to be nearest the Praetorium, and the
Praetorian one to be furthest from the Consuls Pavilion: so by this account
that Port which to Lipsius is Principalis dextra, is to Steuec^hius,
Principalis finistra; and so indeed he calls it in his figure.

I know not how they shall be reconciled in these points, and especially in the
last: For upon the one hand, I think it agrees with reason, that the Praetorian
Port should have been nearest the Enemy, as out of which the Army was to march
in quest of that Enemy; and no doubt, the Consul would choose to lodge as near
the Enemy as he could, and on the head of that Army of his own, which faced
constantly toward the Enemy, since he did not quarter in the middle of his
Army. And conform to this, we find the fronts of Reasons for Lipsius.
the several quarters of both Horse and Foot, that were lodged in the inferior
part of the Camp, to face all toward the Praetorium, and Via Principalis, on
the other side whereof were the Tribunes quartered. Neither does it seem
reasonable, that the Consul, and his Tribunes quartered in the Rear of the
Camp, for so they must have done, if they had lodged so far from the Praetorian
Port, out of which the Army was to march. And all this makes for Lipsius his
position of the Roman Camp: Yet I must tell you, that on the other hand, I
think Steuechius may not only allege his own Author Vegetius to be for him,
but Polybius likewise. Let us hear them both, I shall English them faithfully.
Vegetius in the twenty third Chapter of his first Book says, The Decuman Port
is behind the Praetorium, out of which the delinquent Soldiers are carried to
their punishment. Behind the Praetorium, that is not far from Reasons for
Steuechius.
it. And this insinuates, that the aspect of the Praetorium, or Consuls
Pavilion, was toward the furthest end of the Camp, where Steuechius will have
the Praetorian Port to be. For if Vegetius had meant, that the further end of
the lower part of the Camp was the place where the Decuman Port was, he needed
not have said it was behind the Praetorium, but behind all the quarters of the
Legions, as Lipsius makes it to be. And Polybius in his sixth Book, speaking of
that nameless street which traverseth the upper region of the Camp, has these
words, and I pray observe them. Over against the Praetorium, says he, there is
a street, which carries to the Postern parts of the Camp. Here he seems to be
very clear for Steuechius; if he be not, hear him once more: He had been
speaking of the extraordinary Horse of the Allies, and he adds these words:
Averse from these Horses, are quartered the Extraordinary Foot of the Allies,
looking to the back of the Camp. Now these Extraordinaries were quartered in
the upper part of the Camp, and not far from the Praetorium, and faced to the
Rampart; which by this place of Polybius was the back of the Camp; and
consequently the Port nearest it, was the Decuman. I shall leave it to those
who understand Castrametation better than I either do, or profess to do, to
compose the difference.

But all four, Lipsius, Du Preissac, Terduzzi, and Steuechius differ from their
Both of them differ in some things from Polybius.
Master Polybius, for he expressly mentions a Forum, or Market place, and
quarters for two Legates, to be all in the upper region of the Camp. The Forum,
Lipsius has not in his Figure, though it be mentioned in his Table, nor have
Preissac, or Terduzzi one in theirs; a great oversight in all three. Steuechius
has indeed the Forum on the Left hand of the Praetorium, but for that he
exterminates both the Legates out of his Camp, to whom the other three are so
hospitable as to afford Lodging; and yet all four are one way or another
inexcusable.

The Romans allowed Tents both to their Horse men and Foot, in every Roman
Tents.
Tent were ten men, and those had the name of a Contubernium, whereof I spoke
before, though Vegetius makes it to consist of eleven, wherein I believe few
join with him. By this account, three Tents served all the Horsemen of one
Troop, and twelve served a Maniple of Foot of one hundred and twenty Men. I
find their Tents were made of Leather, for holding out of rain, and were
carried at the public charges. Terduzzi says they were low and flat, and he
calls them in his Italian language, Trabacche; which is, Booths or Shelters. In
this place Lipsius offers to fill up a corner of their Tent with a Vas, so he
calls it; a Vessel, or a Tub, (and indeed it is but the tale of a Tub, to say
no worse of it) wherein he will have the Roman Soldiers to do the work of
nature: He says, it is but his own conjecture, and truly, it is so poor a one,
that he might have kept it to himself, and the Tub too. For who will imagine,
except Lipsius, that the Contubernals did make one of these Vessels at every
nights Leaguer, or else that they carried it about with them by turns? the
first very improbable, and the second exceedingly ridiculous. He might have
learned of the Jews, and all late Castrametators too, to have sent them for
such an errand a pretty way without the Camp.

The same Lipsius, and to second him Terduzzi, are very prolix in the
commendation of the regularity, form, convenience, and order of this Camp; of
which a man is obliged to believe no more, than what agrees with his own
reason. Among other things, the first of them will have us believe, that no
woman was suffered in the Roman Camps. And because he foresaw that it Women in
Roman Camps.
might be objected, that Scipio the Numantine, in his Reformation of Military
Discipline, discharged the Camp of all Whores; from whence it might be
inferred, First, That married Women were still kept in the Camp; and Secondly,
That Whores had been permitted to be in it before Scipio's Reformation; he
boldly avers, that the Latin word Scorta, in that place is not taken for
Whores, but for Viri mulierosi. Whether the word will admit that
interpretation, Lipsius extra^agant.
I dare not dispute with Lipsius, whom Boccalini stageth in Parnassus,
confessing, that he was nothing but a mere and a pure Grammarian. But I cannot
understand what he means by his Viri Mulierosi, if not those whom we call
Sodomites, or Buggerers: And if so, we may infer, that these were either
allowed of, or connived at, before Scipio reformed that sinful abuse: And this
perhaps gave occasion to a Poets wish,

Romany utinam patuissent castra puellis. Since Natures Laws must be obeyed,
or men will go astray,
Why do you women then command
out of your Camps to stay?
And if this be Lipsius his meaning, then I am sure, the ancient Romans who
gloried so much in the profession of moral Virtues, owe him the lie; I suppose,
he forgot here what a little before he had told us in that same Book, out of
Tacitus, that a lascivious woman was found in carnal act with a Soldier in the
principal street, which was accounted Holy, because their Altars were erected
in it; neither did the Historian complain, that a woman was in the Camp, or was
found with a man in the Camp, but that she had profaned so sacred a place of
the Camp. Now if no woman had been permitted to be in the Roman Camp, then that
woman could not have played the Whore in so public a place of it. But Lipsius
knew well enough, that the Empress Agrippin^, Colonia Agrippin^.
Nero's Mother, honored the place of her birth on the banks of the Rhine, with
a Colony of Romans, which in time grew to be the famous City of Cologne; now
she could not have been born there, if her Mother Agrippina had not been
permitted to be in the Roman Camp with her Husband Germanicus.

There is no doubt, but in the less ground an Army can be Encamped, the more
defensible it is: But that Topic, Frustra fit per plura, quod fieri potest per
pauc^ora; is not at all true, but with this restriction, si ^que commode fieri
potest: And therefore it shall be easily granted, that this almost equilateral
Camp of the Romans was excellent, if all was contained within its circuit, that
ought to be within it. But I am sure, upon a strict examination, we shall not
find it to be so. Terduzzi Roman Camp defective.
says, the circuit of this Camp was eight thousand Foot, little more than one
Italian mile and a half, and he says right: He says moreover, that within it
were quartered sixteen thousand eight hundred Foot, and eighteen hundred
Horsemen, besides Servants. Herein he says not right, as shall be
demonstrated anon. And first in this Camp, I find no place for an
Armamentarium, or First, No Armamentarium, or Magazine in it.
Magazine, no place for their Engines and Machines, their Catapults, Balists,
Rams, Towers, and the rest of their Artillery; and though it be true, that
these were carried seldom about with the Army, yet it is as true, that the
materials whereof they were composed, were often carried with their Armies; and
if this be not granted me, yet I am sure, they will allow a quarter for those
who were to make, guide, conduct and direct them; and in a word, for those who
were set aside for that service by Servius Tullius, King of Rome; but in this
Camp there is no room at all for them, or for any Arms, or any thing else which
might be said to belong to a public Magazine; nor are they so much as
mentioned by Polyblus, Lipsius, D^^ Preissac, Steuechius, or Terduzzi.
Certainly, it had been unadvisedly done to lodge them without the Camp, where
the men might easily have been killed, and all the materials and utensils burnt
or destroyed by an Enemy. This Terduzzi would seem to obviate, by telling us,
that there was nothing in the Magazines, but ^avelines and Arrows, and these he
says would take up but little room: Yet he does not tell us where that little
room was, for he assigns no void space for it. Next, he sets the Machines on
the Retrenchment, let it be so. But did these Engineers, Carpenters, Smiths,
and other Arti^icers, to whose care the Machines were recommended, lie night
and day beside them, on that Retrenchment; I hope he will not say that. Thirdly
he says, that the Treasurers quarters, and the street Quintana might have been
made of a lesser length or breadth, for reception of these Engines. Could any
man have expected to have heard such an expression drop from a person, whose
other writings speak him to have been a great Master of Reason: For, who knows
not, that in case of necessity, the Pr^torium, the Legates and Tribunes Tents,
and all the whole quarters, of the Camp might have been made of a lesser
extent. We know from L^vy, that when Claudius Nero made that march which proved
so fatal to Asdrubal, and joined with his Colleague Consul Livius, all his six
thousand men were quartered and accommodated in Livy's Camp, without enlarging
it; every Tribune of Livius's lodging a Tribune of Ner^'s, every Centurion a
Centurion, every Maniple a Maniple, and every Troop a Troop; in doing which
perhaps many of themselves walked in the Streets and the Alarm-place. But here
we speak of a formal Camp, which should be of that capacity, as to contain all
that ought to be ^^^^in it. And therefore T^nduzzi having said but little for
my satisfaction, I say still, that the Camp we have described was deficient in
this point; besides that, I know no place allowed for Beasts of Carriage,
appointed for carrying these Machines, Boats, Materials, and other necessaries
for public use.

But in the second place, I have a greater complaint to make, for I miss the
Secondly, No quarter for the Velites.
Velites, for whom I find no quarter at all allowed, and they were no fewer
than four thousand eight hundred men in every Consular Army. Polybius is
extremely careless of them, for as he assigned them no place to march in, so he
allows them no place to lodge in: This makes Lipsius exclaim, O P^lybi, cur
siluisti? per te sumus, etc. O Polybius, ^ays he, why wast thou silent in this?
by thee we are either in an error, or darkness, out of which one word from
thee might have cleared us. Concerning this important matter, men being left to
guess, I shall tell you three several conjectures, and then choose which you
Three Conjectures where they lodged.
will. And indeed it is a business of importance to send the fourth part of an
Army to look for their quarters, when they might have been lodged with as much
convenience as the other three parts were.

First, Before Lipsius his time, some were of the opinion, that the Velites
First Conjecture
were divided among the heavy armed, and forty eight of them lodged with every
Maniple of the Principes and Hastati, and twenty four of them with every
Maniple of the Triarii; and by this way the twelve hundred Veli^^s of every
Legion will be completely quartered. Now, you may easily make an account, that
by this means four of them were quartered in every Tent of Con^uted.
the heavy armed, a thing hard to be done, if not impossible; beside, that it
made the Contubernium to consist of fourteen instead of ^en, and according to
Vegetius, of fifteen. This opinion Lipsius, with good reason, rejects as very
extravagant, as indeed it is.

The second Conjecture is his own, and it is this: That the Velites of the
Second Con^tore
two Roman Legions were quartered at the two ends of the Camp on the
Alarmplace, and the Velites of the Soc^, or Allies, on the place of Arms on
both sides. He says, that they wanting Defensive Arms, and having but little
B^ggage, little ^oom would serve them. Yet room they must have, and no room
they can have by this expedient of Lipsius, but what is taken from the Con^uted.
place of Arms; the ground whereof Polybius (the great Doctor of the Roman
Castrametation) will have to be no less than two hundred foot of breadth, and
that for several good reasons expressed by himself, which quantity of ground
was always kept by the ancient Romans, and by the Castrametators in Lipsius his
own days (who would have laughed at this fancy of his) and is still kept to
this day. Neither could Lipsius allow less ground for the Velites, than the
half of that which the heavy armed had, and that was rather too little; so that
of necessity fifty foot must have been taken from the Alarm-place for their bad
accommodation: Now this cannot be done without reflecting on Polybius, who if
he had intended any such thing, would have allowed only one hundred and fifty,
and not two hundred foot for the breadth of the Alarm place, which the Ancients
called Pom^rium. Next, how can you call that the place of Arms for the heavy
armed, where the light armed have taken up their lodgings, and pitched their
Tents? Besides all this, Polybius is very positive, that the Extraordinaries of
the Allies should lodge nearest the Rampart, at the Pr^torian Port, (the place
of Arms being only between them and it) the heavy armed Roman Foot at the
Decuman, and the S^cii at the two side Ports; which could not be, if the
Velites were interposed between them and these Ports and Ramparts. And Lipsius
might likewise have remembered, that one of the reasons why Polybius would have
two hundred Foot of void ground between the Rampart, and the Soldiers Tents,
was that the Soldiers by that distance might be safe from Darts or Arrows,
thrown or shot in the night time by an Enemy over the Rampart. Unless Lipsius
thought that the Velites receiving these Darts and Arrows in their Bodies, did
serve as a second Retrenchment to the heavy armed. So, be Lipsius his
conjecture right, or be it wrong, he may own it himself, and own it indeed he
must, for he cannot father it on Polybius.

The third conjecture is of Terduzzi, who will have the Velites to be quartered
Third Conjecture.
without the Camp, in the proc^stria or Suburbs of it; and to bear them
company, he sends out with them all the Merchants, Victuallers, and Sut^ers. I
think this the plainest language of all, for within he saw it was impossible.
to lodge them. But I admire what pretext of authority he has out of History
Con^^ted.
for this opinion; all he says is, that in time of danger, they were received
again within the Camp, but he puts us just where we were, the question being
still where they were quartered, when they were received within the Camp. For
we read that the Romans were often besieged within their Camps for some
considerable time, so was the Consul L. Minutids, till he was relieved by the
Dictator A. Cincinnatus; so was Cicero one of C^sar's Legates by Ambiorix, and
himself likewise forced by that same Enemy to keep some days within his Camp:
Where were the V^lites lodged all this while? And I pray you observe, that but
just now Terduzzi assured us, that within the Camp was quartered the Consular
Army of sixteen thousand eight hundred Foot, and eighteen hundred Horse, and of
that number he now sends four thousand eight hundred out of the Camp, for want
of quarter within it, not to come back till time of danger: His own words are,
Ricevendoli dentro, solo in tempo di pericolo; Receiving them within, says he,
only in time of danger. Here I am either mistaken; or Terduzzi, besides the
improbability of his conjecture, foully contradicts himself.

Thus we see the poor Velites very ill used; for if you will remember what
Velites Individua Vaga.
I have observed of them in the preceding Chapters and in this, you will think
with me, that they were marshalled and fought I know not how, they marched I
know not when, and they were quartered I know not where. I shall not imagine
for all that, that they were Spirits, but I think, it may be disputed
Problematically, whether they were Individua Vaga, or not. And so I take my
leave of them.

In the third place, I find in this Castrametation no more place or ground
allowed Thirdly, Officers lodged like common Soldiers.
for Centurions, Decurions, Ensign and Standard-bearers, than for the common
Troopers and Soldiers; and this confirms me in that opinion, whereof I have
often told you, that the Romans had no greater esteem of any Officer below a
Tribune, than we have of Corporals and Lancespesats. Terduzzi affirms they had
more room, I wish he had told us how or where, for among the Turmes and
Maniples, they had no more than private Soldiers and Riders, for any light he
or any other has given us.

Now all these defects proceed from the flim flam conceit of an equilateral All
these defects soon helped.
Square, whereas all might have been very well accommodated in a Camp of an
oblong Figure, in adding more rows to the Latitude of the Camp, and keeping the
same Longitude. And the not doing this, I attribute to the obstinacy of these I
have so often mentioned, Lipsius, Preissac, Steuechius and Terduzzi, and some
others of their gang, who will rather lose 4800 men than an equilateral Figure;
for I must advertise my Reader, that their Master Polybius, does not only
permit an addition to the Latitude but to the Longitude of his Camp. Si magis
copiosa sint Legiones, pro rata ad Longitudinem and Latitudinem Roman Camps
might be of several figures.
adjiciunt: If the Legions be more numerous, accordingly they add to both the
length and the breadth. And Vegetius tells us in the eighth Chapter of his
third Book, Pro necessitate loci, vel quadrata, vel trigon^, vel rotunda, vel
oblong a castra constitues: According, says he, to the necessity or site of the
place, you may make your Camp Quadrate, Triangular, Round, or Oblong: And in
another place, he says, Semi-circular: But for this Figure, I should think, it
were requisite to have behind the Camp, either a Fortified Town, a Marish, or
an unfordable River, and guarded with a Bridge.

We may imagine, that the Camp of the Israelites, after they had crossed the
Red Sea dry shod, was the most orderly, as being directed by the all^wise God,
who is the Sovereign Lord of Hosts, and we find both their Exterior and
Interior Camps were quadrangular: For we read in the truest of Books, that in
Quartering, three Tribes faced toward the East, three toward the South, three
toward the West, and three toward the North. And within that vast Leaguer,
was an inward one, consisting of the Levites, who encamped also en Carree,
facing East, South, West, and North. These were the Guards of the Lords Ark.
Yet being that the Sacred Text tells us, that all these Tribes were not of
equal strength and number, it must follow, that those who were most numerous,
had most ground allowed them, and consequently more rows of Tents, and more
room for their Beasts and Baggage, and therefore the form of the whole Camp
could not be Square, but oblong. And here I shall also say, that the manner of
the Israelites Encamping and Castrametation did more resemble our form (whereof
we shall speak in its proper place) than the Roman, for we find the Ark of God
(who was the Conductor, and Great General of that Army) lodged in the Center
and middle of the whole Camp: About it, the Levites (who were honored to be
its Guards) and without them, and about them the other Tribes, as they were
marshalled by Moses, the man of God. And as they were Encamped, so we read they
Marched: First, the Ensign of Judah, and under it three Tribes: Next, the
Ensign of Reuben, and under it three Tribes: After them, marched the Levites in
the middle of the Army, and in the center of them the Ark: After them came the
Ensign of Ephraim, under which were three Tribes; and in the last place marched
the Ensign of Dan, and under it three Tribes.

The Rampart and Ditch of the Roman Camp, as to both the ends of it, were made
and defended by the two Roman Legions, and the Allies were obliged to fortify
and maintain both the sides of this Consular Camp, of which I have spoken
perhaps more than enough. See the Figures of Lipsius, Steu^chius, and the Lord
Preissac.

CHAP. XXII. Of Guards, Watches, Watchword, and Rounds.
IF this Camp, though never so strongly fortified, be not carefully guarded, it
will be but a prey to a resolute Enemy. Both the Roman and Grecjan Guards were,
as ours are, of both Horse and Foot; the difference is this, they had several
Guards for the day and the night, ours continue twenty four hours, unless some
emergency alter the custom. You have the Roman Guards expressed by three
several words common in Authors, and though all three signified Guards in some
sense, yet if I mistake not (with submission to others) these three several
words signified three several things. Excubi^, Vigilia, and Stationes, were the
three words. Excubia, I conceive, signified the men who Excubi^ what.
kept Guard and Sentinel: Vigilia, the several distinct times, in which they
were to keep Guard and Sentinel: And Stationes were the places where they kept
Guard and Sentinel, which we call ordinarily Posts. The Ancients divided the
night, Summer and Winter (beginning at six at night, and ending at six in the
morning) into four Vigilia or* Watches, allowing three hours to every Vigilia
what.
Watch, after which time the Night-guards were relieved by the day ones; for we
read not of any Vigilia in the day time. From hence we have in all ancient
stories the actions of the night season, described by the first, second, or
third hour of the first, second, third, or fourth Vigil. And so the Knights of
old, and some yet (Knighthood being a Military Order) were to keep their Vigils
on the Eve before they received that Order. Stati^, is a word that comes
Station^^ what.
a stando, from standing; and is, as I said, taken for a Post, yet the
denomination is not from the place where, but the manner how they watched, and
the posture is said to be standing: Yet it is not to be thought, that all the
Roman Guards stood, only the Sentinel, for the other three that were on a Post,
lay down and slept. Whether their Horse-guards stood constantly, their Riders
being on Horseback, Authors make it not clear: I suppose it was only the
Sentinels, yet probably it was otherwise: And because it was an extreme fatigue
either in the heat of Summer or cold of Winter, we read in Lavy's 45 Book, that
the Consul Lucius Aemili^s in the Macedonian War, ordered the Horseguards to be
relieved at noon; so the day from six in the morning till six at night, was
equally divided by two several guards of Horse: I know not whether the
Foot-Guards were also changed, it seems not; else the Historian had mentioned
it; and if not, that Consul has had a more tender regard to Horse than Men.
The Military word Station, has since been appropriated to all other
professions, yea, and to all other Trades, be they never so mechanic and low;
yea, to all Magistrates and Office-bearers, how high soever, even to him who is
vested with the Sovereign and Supreme Power: So that every man in his Station,
is a word now proper enough.

The Ancients kept Guards both without and within their Camps: Within, Roman
Guards within the Camp.
the Romans ordered a Maniple to watch at the Praetorium, or Consuls quarters,
day and night. Three Quaternions of Soldiers watched at the Treasury, two at
the Legates quarters, and two for every Tribune, and one was appointed to look
to the quarters of every Maniple; all these were of the Principes and Hastati,
for the Triarii kept Guards at the Horse-quarters. Every hundred foot of the
Rampart had a Quaternion of Soldiers to guard it. The reason why these Guards
were called Quaternions, was, because each of them consisted of four Soldiers,
that were ordered for one Sentinel, which they kept by turns. We find these
Military terms of the Romans used by the Penmen of the New Testament; In the
twelfth Chapter of the Acts of the Apostles, it is said, that Herod delivered
St. Peter to be guarded by four Quaternions of Soldiers, that is, to four
Guards, each composed of four Soldiers, every one of which Quaternions or
Guards, was to keep a Sentinel upon him. The Quaternio, or the four Soldiers
was to watch full twelve hours, every one of A Quaternion, what.
them a Vigil, to wit, three hours; and it is to be presumed, one of them stood
Sentinel one whole Vigil, because they could not well by their Glass divide a
Vigil of three hours into four several parts; and truly that was too long, for
in four hours time a Sentinel might very readily have been both weary and
sleepy.

For any thing I yet know, the Guards without the Camp* were only kept in Roman
Guards without their Camp.
the day time, and before every Port of it a Cohort of Foot, and a Troop of
Horse watched; but when an enemy was near, their Stations or Guards were
doubled, tripled, or quadrupled, according as the danger seemed to require.
This says Terduzzi was an easy duty, because, says he, there were forty
Cohorts, and forty Troops in the four Legions, and therefore he thinks they
watched but every tenth night. But he did not consider how many Guards were
Mistake of Terduzzi.
kept within the Leaguer, for if he had, he might have concluded that the Foot
ordinarily watched every fourth night; and when the Guards were doubled, or
tripled, the Duty would come upon them every second, if not every other day.
The Consul or General appointed the Stations or places where Guards should be
kept without the Camp, which in reason ought to have been so ordered that they
might have had succors according to the necessity or exigence of affairs, and
therefore you may find that Caesar when he caused his Guards to advance nearer
the enemy, and further from his own Camp, he still commanded fresh Troops and
Cohorts to be brought out to fill up their room, and to support and sustain
those who were advanced in case of a retreat. Livy tells us in his Thirteenth
Book, that Manlius was accused at Rome by the Tribunes of the people for
keeping weak Guards without his Leaguer, and that they attributed the loss of
both Camp and Army to that.

It was death for any man of what degree or quality so ever to desert or leave
his station, let the pretext be never so plausible or advantageous. Livy in his
Desertion of a Station, death.
Fourth Book says that he read it in the Roman Annals, that the Dictator
Posthumous put his own Son Aulus Posthumous to death for advancing beyond his
station, though thereby he gained an advantage of the enemy. And though that
Author writes that he did not believe it, yet it may be true for all that.
Lips^^s commends much the Roman custom of having four Soldiers on one Post, and
for not committing the keeping of it to one Sentinel, as the manner is now to
have but one man at every Port of a Town. But this Bookish man was so much
taken up with the Theory of the ancient Militia, that he studied but little the
practice Mistake of Lipsius of the Modern Guards.
of the Modern; for I dare be bound for it, that in the Country where he lived
he never saw a Sentinel at a Port of a Town, but where there was a Corpse du
guard close by of more than four Soldiers, though they were not obliged to
stand all Sentinel at one time more than the Roman Quaternio was, whereof only
one stood. But the old Tactick Aeneas will not have Sentinels to stand single,
Grecian Sentinels.
but two or more together, and to stand but a very short time, for which he
gives two reasons, first, for fear that being long on duty they might fall
asleep; secondly, that they might have no time to practice with an enemy, but
frequent rounds and visits of the Corporals might prevent both these.

Lipsius in this place falls also a quarrelling with his Master Polybius for
not Lipsius quarrels with Polybius,
telling him what Posts the Allies kept within the Camp, or how the Ports and
Ramparts were guarded. But he wrongs him; for when Polybius told him what
Duties the Roman Legions performed, he gave ground enough to Lipsius (who is so
ready with his conjectures) to guess that the Legions of the Allies kept the
like Guards, and did the like Duties as the Romans did. And since Polybius had
already said that the Roman Legions were bound to fortify and defend the two
But without reason.
ends of the Camp* and the Allies the two sides; I conceive L^psius might
without suspicion of witchcraft have guessed, nay, past his word for it, that
the Romans kept Guards at the Pr^t^rian and Dec^^an Ports, and the Allies at
the two principal Ports. And now I hope Lipsius is reconciled with Polybius.

The Roman Watchword was given in this manner: The Tribunes whose Roman
watchword, or T^ss^ra.
turn it was to officiate, and the Praefecti of the Allies received it from the
Consul, and toward night at the going down of the Sun, one of the last Maniple
of Foot, and one of the last Troop of Horse lodged near the Decuman Port,
(being made free of other Duty) went to the Tribune and received from him a
piece of wood, perhaps of Parchment or Paper, which was called a T^ss^ra, on
which the Watchword was written; this Soldier (whom Vegetius calls
Tesserarius) and this Trooper carried the Tessera to the Centurion and
Decurion, and delivered it to them before Witnesses, adhibitis testibus, and
they in the same manner to their fellow Centurion and Decurion, and so from one
to another till it came to the first Centurion and Decurion, who redelivered it
to the Tribune, who by some note (which it seems every one of the several
Classes of the Legion had) or mark on the Tessera, immediately knew if it had
gone through them all; if not, inquiry was made, and the Delinquent was soon
found out (since in that case that every Centurion was to prove by Witnesses
that he delivered it) and severely punished. And this custom Achilles Terduzzi
prefers to the Modern Terduzzi ill to please.
way of whispering the word in one another ear. But most men are better
pleased with things they never saw, than with those they daily see, a Fastidium
or loathsomeness of our present condition being a mark of the depraved nature
of man; for certainly the Watchword in our times is given with as much
security, and with a great deal of more ease than it was by either the Grecians
or Romans. The several Guards or Quaternions of Soldiers, had each of them a
Tessera, which were taken from them by the Rounds, as you will see anon.

The Rounds were called Circumitiones, or Circitiones, and those who went with
Roman Rounds.
them, as Veg^tius has it, Circ^mit^res, or Circit^res. This duty belonged to
the Horsemen, as to those who in dignity were next to the Tribunes. By this
also you may see in what small account Centurions were with the Romans, who did
not trust them with visiting their own Foot-guards, (a thing any Lancespesat^
may do with us) but conser'd the honor of that on Horsemen. In every Legion
one Troop was ordained to look after this duty every day by turns, but the
whole Troop was not employed in it, only four of them had that service put on
them. The manner was this: The Prefect or prime Decu^ion of the Troop ordered
his Subdecurion, or his Deputy to acquain^ such four whose turn it was to ride
the Rounds that following night, and this the Subdecurion was bound to do
before he dined; as also at night he was to acquaint the Decurion of the next
Troop, that it was his turn next night after to order the Rounds: If any of
them failed in this duty, they were liable to heavy censure. The four Horsemen
who were appointed to ride the Rounds, cast lots who should ride the Rounds of
the first, second, third and fourth Vigils. After that they went A duty
incumbent on the Horsemen.
all four to the Tribune to be cleared by him, what Guards they were to visit,
and if there were any new Posts ordained besides the ordinary ones. Having done
there, they went to sleep besides the Primipilus, or first Centurion of the
Triarii, which was quartered nearest the Eagle, and this was an honor to hi^,
as Terduzzi says, and so indeed it might be; but I desire to know if they did
not lie without the door of his Tent, in regard I think he could hardly
accommodate them within. After Supper the Guards being set, he whose turn it
was to ride the first round, went about the whole Guards belonging to that
Legion, and from him who was Sentinel he took the Tessera, which he carried
away with him, and so he did from all the rest of the Quaternions; the like was
done by the second Circ^or in the second Vigil, and so by the other two in the
third and fourth Vigils: hence you may see that every Soldier of the Quaternion
had a T^ss^ra, otherwise the four Circitors could not have brought back each of
them one. If the Round ^ound a Sentinel asleep, he did not demand the Tessera
from him, nor did at waken him, but required the other three to be witnesses of
the misd^^anor, and these three for honor sake convoyed the Circit^r or Round
to the next Guard. Why the three men who were awake A Sentinel found asleep.
should have left their Post to be kep^ by a sleeping man, only to complement a
Round, let the admirers of Antiquity tell, I cannot. Yet I believe the Rounds
found but few sleeping, for they had fires allowed them, by the light whereof
they might discern both an enemy and a Round, and one Guard was almost
constantly calling to another to keep them awake: besides, it is not likely
that all the other three of the Quaternion were asleep; and if any one of them
were awake, it is not probable he would suffer his fellow Sentinel to be taken
sleeping. And in process of time they followed the example of the Grecians, and
used Bells, by which one Guard corresponded and answered another; for Polybius
tells us, that of all Nations the Romans were the aptest to learn and imitate
the commendable customs of others. Next morning very betimes, the Rounders went
and gave the Tribunes an account of their diligence; and where they found a
Tessera wanting, either by the sleep, negligence or desertion of any of the
Guards or Sentinels; the Delinquent if apprehended, was punished by the
Grievously punished.
Fustuarium, the manner whereof you may learn in the next Chapter save one.
After the Roman Guards were set at night, it was not lawful for any man to go
out of his quarters.

Aeneas will have it that the Grecian Rounds went but from one Guard to
another, Grecian Rounds.
and not round the whole Town, Fort, or Camp, for that says he, keeps many
Rounds going together without confusion. He would have all Rounds or Circitors
to ride where Horses might conveniently be had, but no Round either to go or
ride till he were commanded so to do by his Superior, either by word of mouth,
or some sign, suppose a fire or a Lanthorn. He will have all his Rounds to give
the word to the Guards, and not to receive it from them, as the Romans did
their Tessera, which indeed seems to be the surer way; but his Rounds he
permits not to give the Watchword till the Guards require it. And in time of
danger he will have the Guards when they require the word from the Rounds (if
it be in the nightime) to utter some words or sounds (such as have been
ordered by the General or Governor of the place) and the Rounds besides the
giving the Watch word, to utter such counter^ounds as have been agreed on. But
if it be in the daytime, (observe by this, that Rounds rode in the day, at
least in the morning) then the Guards when they asked the word, were to give
signs, and the Rounds counter signs such as were condescended on by him who
commanded in chief on the place. As suppose when one of the Guards required the
word from the Round, he would put his Hat or his Headpiece on his face,
breast, or belly, and upon that sign the Round was to advance, or order his
Lance or Spear as a counter-sign.

CHAP. XXIII. Of Prisoners of War, of Parleys, Treaties, and Articles.
SIN brought War into the World, and though we do not read of any public War
before the Deluge, yet Moses tells us of a private one between the two Brothers
Cain and Abel, which ended with the death of the righteous one.

In all public Wars that ever were, Prisoners have been taken, over whom the
Victor always assumed to himself power of life and death. And I believe for
Reason why Prisoners are taken in War.
most part, the lives of Prisoners were saved, not so much out of pity and
compassion, as out of interest, thereby to draw advantages either by exchanging
them for others who had fallen into that same misery, or by ransoming them for
money, or to make profit of them by Drudgery and Slavery. And though we read
not in the History of Moses (and I conceive it is not only the truest but the
oldest in the world) of any Prisoners of War taken, before L^^ was taken by
Amraphel and Chad^rlaomer, yet I cannot imagine but Nimrod and his Successors
(though bloody enough) spared the lives of many, whom they made Prisoners in
those Wars which they waged against their neighbors; for I suppose Conquest
was the best title they could pretend to ^or their Sovereignty, witness these
words in the 14 of Genesis, Twelve years they served Chaderlao^er, and in the
thirteenth they rebelled. Sure then before these twelve years they were free
people, and that which made them Vassals was the longest and sharpest sword.
And when Abraham rescued Lot, and his goods, the women also, and the people*
there is no doubt but he took some Prisoners of Chaderlaomer his party, which
he had beaten, else the King of Sodom had not said to him, Give me the persons,
and take the goods to thy self.

The Law of Nations is that which all or most Nations agree in, either by a The
condition of Prisoners of War.
mutual, declared, or yet by a tacit assent. And therefore we may truly say
that by the Law of Nations before Christianity shone over the World, Prisoners
of War might be used as the Victor pleased, that is, either made slaves, or put
to death. In this Discourse I shall only speak how the Ancients used their
Prisoners, and of their Parleys, Treaties, and Articles before the Promulgation
of the Gospel, reserving the Discourse of Christian Prisoners till toward the
end of my Essays of the Modern Art of War.

We are told by Xenophon, that after the Great Cyrus had taken Babylon, he told
his Captains that it was a perpetual Law through the whole World that Cyrus his
sense of Prisoners.
those who stood out in arms till they were overcome, might be disposed of,
either as to their estates and goods, or their lives and persons, at the
Victors pleasure. And if you will consider all the Wars that were managed
either before or after his time, you will find he spoke truth; for if it was
not a perpetual Law, it was a perpetual custom to do all that he said. This
speech of his was confirmed by the Athenian Ambassadors, whom Thucydides
introduces, telling the Inhabitants of Melus (whom they had besieged both by
Sea and Land), That Nature her self had put a necessity on all Conquerours and
Victors in War to have the absolute dominion and power over those who were
vanquished The At^enians.
to be disposed of as the Victors pleased; which Law, said they, we did not
make, nor are we the first who have made use of it, neither will we hinder it
to be a perpetual Law to ages to come, being assuredly confident, said they,
that if you had that power over us, that we probably may shortly have over you,
you would not fail to put this Law in execution against us. So you see that
both Cyrus and the Athenians thought Prisoners of War might be put to death if
the Victor pleased, not only by the Law of War, but by the Law of both Nations
and Nature.

Before I go further, I shall premise one thing, at which perhaps many of my
own Profession scruple, which is that notwithstanding any quarter granted in
the field in time of Battle or skirmish, or at the assaults of Towns or
Castles, How a General may use his Prisoners of War, Jur^ B^ll^.
he who commands in chief over the Victorious army may put all or any of the
Prisoners to death that he pleases, without doing any wrong to the Law of War,
because they had no quarter promised them by him either by word, or in writing,
which we ordinarily call Parol. What quarter is given by any Officer who is
inferior for the time, or by any Soldier, is but till the General or Commander
in chief judge of the Prisoners, and then he may do with them as he pleases.
But observe on the other hand, that though Jure Belli he may do so, yet when he
puts Prisoners to death in cold blood, he may be justly branded with inhumanity
and cruelty, unless those Prisoners have been Traitors, Rebels, Runaways, or
Fugitives, or that Quarter had been promised contrary to the express command of
the General; any of these alters the case. Such was that act of Saul King of
Israel, who gave quarter to Agag, contrary to the express command of the Lord
of Hosts, who had ordained him to die.

Let us take a short view how this perpetual Law, whereof Cyrus and the
Athenian Ambassadors spoke, was executed in ancient times; and I believe we
shall see that all Prisoners of War were either ransomed, exchanged, put to
death, or made slaves. The Jews differed a little from other Nations in the
matter of Jewish slaves.
Slavery, for Deuteronomy. 23. they had a Political Law, which ordered a refuge to
their Slaves. Slaves certainly who came to that calamity by none of their own
fault, and that is mostly to be understood of Captives of War. Cyrus found the
Law he spoke of practiced against himself, by Tomiris Queen of Scythia, who put
him to death in cold blood, if the Historian tell us truth. How the Assyrian
Monarchs used their Prisoners, though profane story were silent, the Sacred
Writ would inform us; by it we know how Tiglath Pil^ser took away the Ten
Tribes of Israel, and Nebuchadnezz^r the other two to Babylon, and how this
last put most of the Chiefs and Princes of the people to Death, after How the
Israelites used their Prisoners.
they were Prisoners, and caused the Children of King Zed^kiah to be cut in
pieces before his face; that after having seen so sad a specta^le, he might
have his eyes put out, that so thereafter (as Sir Walter Raleig^ observes well)
he might never see any thing to comfort him. The Captains of Gods chosen people
of Israel and Judah, thought not that their hands were bound up by any qua^^er
that was given by their inferior Commanders and Soldiers, but passed very
ordinarily a Sentence of Death upon most of their Prisoners of War. Joshua
hanged most of those Kings whom he took in the Land of Canaan. Adonibe^^k had
his Thumbs and great Toes cut off, for so he had used seventy two Kings before.
Zebah and Zalmunnah, Kings of Midian, after they had quarter given them, were
killed in cold blood by Gid^on; perhaps by no other inspiration, than that of
Revenge, because they had killed his Brethren. And by the way, I observe, that
the Israelites, in their Civil Wars among themselves, gave very bad quarter: As
for example, after the rest of the Tribes had killed in one Battle eighteen
thousand Benjamites, they put five thousand of them to the Sword in the chase,
who no doubt, called for quartor: The Text says, they gleaned them; that is,
killed them one by one in the way, and after that, two thousand of them were
put to death at Gido^, who I make no question, yielded themselves Prisoners.
How many thousand Ephra^^^tes were put to death by the Gileadites, when they
b^wrayed what they were by the wrong pronunciation of S^bb^teth. David, King of
Isreal's, David very severe to his Prisoners.
not only ^^aughtered those Ammonites whom he had taken Prisoners in the War,
but tortured them, and put them to cruel dea^^s: Whether he did this ^or ^^y
other reason, than to be revenged for the disgrace done to his Ambassadors, by
H^nan King of the A(...)ites, I shall not offer to determine. But ^ertainly the
Prophet ^lisha gave a contrary advice to Jehor^^^. King of Israel, Elisha
advises to give fair quarter.
who asking the man of God, what he should do with those Syrians, who were
miraculously brought into Sam^ria, in these words, Shall I smi^e them, my
Father, shall I smi^e them? Was answered, Wi^^ thou smi^e those whom thou have
tak^^ with thy Bow and thy Spear; nay, see Br^ad and Water before them, and
send th^^ back to their Master. I confess, this was very fair quarter, but it
was not to be imitated in all its points.

The obstinate keeping out of Towns, Forts, and Castles, when there was An
occasion of bad quarter.
neither hope nor probability of succors, has been often the reason why the
Besieged, after they have rendered, have been ^^tchered to death, that is,
after they had yielded to the discretion of the Conqueror, who, having granted
no Articles or Conditions, may put them all to death, without any st^^^ of
perfidy: He may do it Jure b^lli, but he may be taxed with severity, if not
cruelty for it, yet generous Princes have practiced it. Titus, a merciful
Prince, cast the Jews, who were his Prisoners, both men and women, by hundreds
to be torn and devoured by Wild Be^sts. The Great Alexander caused some
thousands of the Tirians to be Scourged and Crucified after they wore
Prisoners, because in defense of their City they had so long put a stop to the
course of his Victories. But I think he cannot be vindicated from extreme
inhumanity Inhumanity of Alexander.
used to the Noble Governor of Gaza, who kept out that place courageously
against him, till the never-failing Fortune of that daring Prince put the woeful
Governor into his hands, whose F^^t he caused to be bored, and through the
holes he put Cords, and tying these to Horse-tails, in that manner caused him
to be dragged about the City, in imitation, perhaps, of what Homer says
Achilles (of whom Alexander derived his P^d^gree) did to the dead body of the
Valiant Hector. The Veneti, a people in G^^le, were overcome by C^sar Severity
of Caesar.
in a Nuval Battle, yielded to his mercy; but because they had before given
hostages, and yet had rebelled, and contrary to the Law of Nations, had
imprisoned his Ambassadors, he put the chief men of them to death, and sold
the rest for Slaves. And at Vxellodunum, he cut off the hands of all those who
had maintained the siege against him, and had yielded to his mercy, because
they had rebelled before; yet the same C^sar was known to be very merciful.

Xenophon in the first Chapter of his Third-Book says, that Prisoners of War
may be used without form of Law, or Process of Justice, at the Victors
pleasure: This is true, if there be no provions Articles or Treaty, for that
alie's the case. The Grecians were cruel enough to their Prisoners: In that
Nayal The Grecian^ generally gave bad quarter.
Battle, wherein the Lacedaemonian Lisander gained the Sovereignty of the Sea
from the Athenians, he put three thousand Prisoners to the Sword in cold Blood.
Those who yielded to their discretions made but a bad bargain of it. Take a few
Examples: Mitilene, which was tributary to Athens, rebelled, the Inhabitants,
after a long resistance, yielded to mercy; the first Sentence of that popular
State was, that all the men above fourteen years of age, should dye, and all
under it, with all the women, should be sold for Slaves: The next days Verdict
was more favorable, which gave life and liberty to all, except the
Ringleaders of the Sedition, but these the Athenians made not to be so few as
a thousand. The Plat^^ns, a free people of Greece, after a long Siege, yielded
to the mercy of the Lacedaemonians, who put every one of them to death, and
sold the Women for Slaves. The Inhabitants of the Isle of Melus, of whom I
spoke a little before, after a long Siege, yielded to the mercy of the
Athenians; but they exercised that perpetual Law of the Conqueror over the
Vanquished, (whereof their Ambassadors had told them) and though they had no
pretext of other power over them, but that of the sharpest Sword, yet they
killed all the men that were above fourteen years old, and sold all the Women
and Male children for Slaves.

But the Romans were the most merciless Conquerours of any Nation, (except The
Romans generally most merciless to Prisoners.
the Cannibals, who feed their Prisoners to kill and eat them) for those
Prisoners whom they killed not, they reserved for worse uses than drudgery and
^lavery: Some were kept to adorn their Pompous Triumphs, and when the
Triumphers Chariot turned toward the Capitol, then the woeful Captives were
taken to the place of Execution, and there butchered to death; and if any of
them had their lives spared at that time, it was a cruel mercy, to make them
dye a worse death afterward; which was the fortune of Pers^us, the last King of
Macedon; for after he, with his Children all in Chains, had been made
spectacles at Ae^^ilius his Triumphant Chariot, they were left to dye in prison
for want of either Food or Sleep, the two great supporters of man's life. Others
of their Prisoners were forced to fight and fence at Sharps on the
Amphitheatres, till they killed one another, and all to make sport to that
inhumane people: And which was worse, they were forced many times to satiate
the cruelty of the Spectators by fighting for their lives with Lions, Bears,
and Tigers, kept purposely from Meat, to make them more eager to devour those
miserable wretches: And thus they used women as well as men. I told you also
how Titus (who was so meek a Prince, that he was called The D^light of Mankind)
used the Infatuated Jews, after the destruction of Jerusalem. So unlimited a
power did those Ancient Conquerours assume to themselves over the persons and
lives of their Prisoners, which by the Law of War, and the Law of Nations they
had acquired.

Yet the Roman Senate very often either really were, or seemed to be
dissatisfied Roman Cruelty to Prisoners often restrained by the Senate.
with some of their Consuls, and other Supreme Commanders of their Armies, who
were cruel to those who yielded to mercy. So when S^rgius Galba had sold in
Spain all those Portugueses who had submitted themselves, a Law was made at
Rome to restore them to their liberty, but it had no effect; and this imported
juggling. But the Senate went further, for they punished some of their Generals
for using cruelty to those who yielded to mercy, as the Pro-Consul Plicinius,
Crassius, and two Admirals were judicially condemned at Rome for their
inhumanities of that nature in Greece. The Consul M. Popilius having by sundry
Victories well near ruined the Ligurians, ten thousand of them submitted to his
Discretion, and observe what that was; he first disarmed them, next he razed
their Town; thirdly, he sold all their goods and substance; and fourthly, he
sold themselves for Slaves. A most detestable action, and as such, resented by
the Senate, who ordered the Consul to pay back the price to the Buyers, restore
the poor Ligurians to their liberty, and return to them, as much of their
goods, and as many of their Arms as could be recovered: But the half of this
was not performed by the Consul; yet the reason on which the Senate grounded
this order, is very observable: Because, said they, Victory does not consist in
exercising Cruelty on those who yield to Mercy, but in vanquishing the
obstinate and Contumacious. Most of the Capuans (who stood for Hannibal) after
a long Siege, yielded themselves and City to the mercy of the two Roman
Consuls; one whereof was wounded, and incli^ed to be merciful, but the other,
Q. Fulvius, caused eighty of the principal Citizens, first to be whipped with
Rods, and then b^headed with Axes, and he used all the rest very inhumanely.

And assuredly the fear of merciless usage, and bad quarter, has forced many
Fear of bad quarter produces despe^ate effects.
to make an unlooked for resistance, to the great prejudice of the prevailing
party; for Despai^ produces the most horrid and desperate effects. Most of the
Saguntines saved Hannibal a labor to kill them, by killing themselves. The
Citizens of Astapa in Spain, detesting the Roman Cruelty, made a great ^ile of
Wood within their Town, set it on fire, threw first their Wives and Children
into it, and then themselves. When Philip, the last King of Mace^^n except one,
would grant no other conditions to the inhabitants of Abydes, but to yield to
his Mercy, which they knew was the extremest of Cruelties; after many
desperate resolutions, and vigorous oppositions, when the Macedonians entered,
it was a r^thful sight to see the poor Abydens destroying one another
promiscuously, men and women, young and old, some hanging their Wives first,
and then themselves; others cutting the Throats of their Children, and then
their own; others casting their nearest relations in Wells, and over the tops
of Houses, and themselves after them. Philip being astonished and appalled at
so terrible a sight, by Proclamation gave them three days to live, before their
death should be resolved on by him* But in vain, for an of them dispatched
themselves, excep^ such as were by force, bonds, and chains compelled to live.
You may read their lamentable Tragedy in Poly^^^ his sixteenth Book, and in the
thirty first of Titus Livius.

Nor did the Romans in their Civil Wars give better quarter one to another
Romans cruel to Prisoners in their Civil Wars.
(except C^sar) than they did to strangers: P^^^^ius killed those Soldiers of
C^sar's whom he found in his Camp, though C^sar spared those of Pe^^ei^s, and
sent them back to him. Scipl^, Pompey's Father-in-law, put a^ those of C^sar's
party to death, whom he took Prisoners. Sy^^^, after all his Victories, very
cruelly put eight thousand Romans to the Sword in the great hostelery, near the
City, after they had yielded to his Mercy. Nor did A^gustus keep himself within
the limits of Mercy, when he thought it fit at one time to sacrifice three
hundred Roman Knights to appease the incensed Ghost of his Great Uncle Julius
C^sar. But it may be said, these had that pretense which all Civil War carries
along with it, and that is, that all who oppose either of the two parties, are
Rebels to the State, whether the party be for the lawful and supreme authority,
or against it. And therefore, to say no more of their Civil Wars, I find them
extreme cruel in their Wars with Hannibal, to their own Soldiers, which that
great Carthaginian had taken Prisoners. Fabi^s the Dictator (who saved the
Roman State) made an agreement with Hannibal for the exchange and ransom of
Prisoners of a like quality, and for every one of those who (after the exchange
was made) were super^umerary, they were to pay ^ea^ eight pounds, Sterling. At
one exchange there were two hundred ^orty seven more Romans than Carthaginians;
Hannibal demands their ransom, Fabius sent to Roman ^enates Avarice.
the Senate for it, who basely refused the money, and disowned the agreement;
what could the good old man Fabius do, but send his Son to Rome, and sell a
part of his Patrimony, and pay the money to Hannibal, which was near two
thousand pound Sterling? a vast sum in those days. But they dealt worse with
those of their own men who were taken Prisoners at Cannae, whom they Its
Cruelty and Injustice.
would neither ransom out of the public P^rse, nor suffer the Prisoners
themselves, or their Friends to ransom out of their private fortunes and
estates, And though the Senate flattered themselves, by calling this act of
their own, Mag^animous; yet since there was no Justice in it, it could carry no
generosity along with it; for if these Captive Romans misbehaved themselves in
the Battle, the Senate was bound in honor to ransom them, and punish them
themselves, and not suffer them to rot in prison with their capital Enemy.
Assuredly this Action wanted for neither Avarice nor Cruelty; for strange it
was thus to punish common Soldiers, and yet to send out some principal
Senators to meet and complement their hair-brained Conful, Teremi^^ Va^^, and
thank him, that he had not despaired of the Commonwealth; and yet by his
obstinate and inexcusable folly he had brought the Commonwealth to the very
brink of Destruction.

And why might not Hannibal have used these Roman Prisoner^, as Livy in his
seventh Book tells us, the Romans used some thousands of the Tarquinian
Prisoners, A merc^^ess act of the Romans, yet not unjust.
of whom they chose 358 of the prime Noblemen and Gentlemen, all these they
first whipped well with Rods, and then struck off their Heads in the great
Marketplace of Rome, and presently after put all the rest of the Prisoners to
the Sword in cold blood? Though this was a very merciless act, yet by the law
of War they might do it, and so might Hannibal have done to their Prisoners;
and truly, I do not see how he could be obliged to ^eed those whom their own
Masters would not ransom.

Let us hear what opinion Polyb^^s had of Prisoners of War, who was a grave
Polybius his opinion how Prisoners of War may be used.
Historian, a great Statesman, and a good Captain. In his second Book,
speaking of Aristomachu^, who being a Prisoner of War, was tortured to death:
He says on that subject, that neither Antigon^^ King of Macedon, nor Aratus
Praetor of the Ach^ans, could be called cruel, for putting a Captive to death
with torments; for, though Aristomachus had not deserved that usage otherwise,
yet they might have done all to him that was done, ^ure Belli; for the Law of
Nations and War give the Conqueror power to use his Prisoners at his pleasure.
And the same Author speaking of the Mantimans, who were justly punished for
their abominable perfidy and ingratitude, in slaughtering those Achaans who
were sent to preserve them; he says expressly, That though they had committed
no such wickedness, nor any other crime at all, yet the Victor in War, Jure
Belli, might have either killed them, their Wives, and Children, or sold them
for Slaves at his pleasure. Thus far he.

But this power of Victorious Princes or Generals over the Goods, Persons, and
Lives of their Prisoners, is limited and restrained by Treaties, Parleys,
Treaties.
Capitulations, and Articles; to the strict observance whereof simply, and
without fraud or ambiguity, all men of what Station, Rank, or Quality
whatsoever, or of what Religion or Persuasion soever, be he Jew or G^mile,
Gr^cian or Barbarian, Christian or Mohammedan, are tied; because Faith and
Promises Articles and Promises should be faithfully kep^. No Enemy to be
trusted in time of Treaty.
are the Sacred and Indissoluble Bonds, which maintain Humane Society, and
whosoever breaks them on any pretense, should be looked on as a Monster, and
not as a Man.

In the time of Treaty, both parties who treat, ought to be careful, that a
Cessation of Arms be agreed on, and signed by the Commanders in Chief, of both
Forces, whether it be in Field, Town, Castle, or Garrison; and not only so, but
they ought to be on their guard, for fear of ^oul play, or some unexpected
rupture of the Treaty: For both in Ancient and Modern times, Cities and Forts
have been surpised, when those within thought themselves secure by a Treaty
and Cessation, as Histories of all ages bear witness: And many times these
Surprises have been made without either the consent or connivence of either the
Commander in chief, or his Subordinate Officers, merely by the common
Soldiers, who frequently think themselves defrauded by Treaties, of that which
they conceive is the price of their Sweat and Blood; to wit, the spoil and
booty of the place besieged, or of the persons of those almost beaten and
overcome in the Field. Nor should any Treaty give the least interruption to the
constant keeping of strict Guards, and careful Watches; nor should those who
treat, have liberty to view Guards, Camps, Magazines, or Parades, unless they
be so strong, and in so good order and posture, that the sight of them may
serve to terrify an Enemy. Scipio the African, in time of a Treaty with Syphax
and As^r^bal, having by his Commission sufficiently spied the posture of their
Guards, and weakness of their Camps, suddenly breaks off the Treaty, sets upon
them, burns their Leaguer, and destroys forty thousand of their men. In this
the Roman General made no breach of Faith nor Promise, but made a more prudent
use of the Treaty than the Enemy did. Treaties, Promises, and Articles should
be religiously observed, but yet there is a prudent mistrust often necessary*
for the heart of man is desperately wicked, and deceitful above all things, who
can know it? And here the old lesson, Disce diffidere, is very often necessary
to be remembered. Trebonius, Caesar's Legate, had very long besieged Marseilles,
and had granted the Defendants truce till Caesar's coming; this rendered the
Besiegers negligent; Caesar's Legate cheated by a Treaty at Marseilles.
which the Marsillians perceiving, and having a high and fair wind for their
purpose, sallied, and in a moment burnt his Ambulatory Tower, his Rams,
Muscles, and other Machines of War, which had been the works of many months. In
one of my Discourses of the Modern Art of War, I shall speak more fully of the
sad effects of negligence in time of Parleys and Treaties. Some of the Ancient
Gauls were in Treaty with Caesar, and had a Cessation of Arms with him, they
perfidiously break it, and kill many of his people; he marches against them,
they send Ambassadors to him, without any previous liberty demanded, or
granted by him for those Ambassadors, and therefore he keeps them in
restraint, till he had utterly undone their Army: Here they broke with Caesar,
not Caesar with them, for after their breach, he neither granted them Treaty
nor Cessation, nor Passports for their Ambassadors; yet Cato, in full Senate,
avouched this act of his to be Perfidy, and a Caesar's reputation questioned by
Cato.
breach of the Law of Nations, and pleaded that he ought to be delivered up to
the Gauls, whom he had offended, as a Sacrifice, to appease the wrath of the
Immortal Gods.

The Ancient Greeks, who accounted all other Nations Barbarians, broke
frequently their Treaties, Conventions, and Articles very barbarously. Those
who commanded the Corcyrian Army articled with the Inhabitants of Epidamnus,
that they should deliver up their Town, and that till the pleasure of the
populace of Corcyra were known, all the Corinthians should be kept in Chains,
and all strangers sold for Slaves: A bad enough agreement at best, and yet the
half of it was but kept by the Corcyrians, for all the Corinthians were indeed
Articles broke.
kept in Fetters, but the strangers were all put to death. In that total rout
given to the Athenians in the Isle of Sicily, by the Syracusians, assisted by
Gilippus a Lacedaemonian Captain, Demosthenes, one of the Generals for Athens,
had Articles granted him for his own life, and six thousand men that were with
him, and so they yielded themselves Prisoners; and shortly after Nicias, the
other Athenian General, submitted himself without conditions, to Gilippus his
discretion: Both of them were put to death. And though no Articles were
Perfidious and cruel usage.
broke to Nicias, yet it was inhumanity to kill him in cold blood; but in the
death of Demosthenes, Perfidy was added to Cruelty. The bloody Dictator Sylla
made Articles with three thousand Romans at Antenna, and gave them their lives,
on condition that they should kill some of their own party within the Town, who
were his Enemies: They performed their part, but so did not he, for he put them
all to the Sword; a perfidious act of his part, though indeed they met with
that which they well deserved.

Treaties ought to be concluded, and Agreements and Articles subscribed,
without any design to pick quarrels, or to lay hold on any small emergent No
quarrel to be picked out of Articles.
that may seem to give the contracting parties any ombrage or occasion of
breaking: This has been too often practiced in our Modern Wars, nor did some
of the Ancients fail to help themselves with base fetches. Take two or three
instances: At Pilos, the Lacedaemonians are beaten at Sea by the Athenians, and
four hundred of them shut up in a barren Island, likely to be starved: An
agreement is made, the Lacedaemonians are to deliver up their Ships, a final
Peace is to be concluded, and those in the Island were to be set at liberty,
but if any one Article happened to be infringed, then all of them were to be
void; and if the people of Athens (who had the Sovereignty) did not ratify
this agreement, the Truce was to end, the war to begin, and all the Thucydides.
Galleys were to be restored. The Athenian State rejects the Treaty, the
Cessation is given up, the War is commenced, but the Fleet was not restored,
because, said the Athenian Captains, in time of the Truce, some of the
Lacedaemonians endeavored to get out of the barren Isle into Pilos: A most
detestable Perfidy. And what better was the usage the Samnites got from the
Romans in that Treaty, wherein they gave the Roman Army liberty to depart
Livius.
and go home, after they had made every man of them pass under the Gallows at
Caudium? the Senate refused to ratify the Treaty, prepared for War, and sent
the Consuls who had signed the Articles, prisoners to the Samnites; a
subterfuge which did not quadrate with the Justice to which they pretended. Yet
it was such usage as was foretold to the Samnites by their old General
Herennius. A considerable number of Corcyrians (who seditiously had left the
Town, taken arms and spoiled the adjacent Country) are routed by the Athenians,
they come to a Parley, and it is agreed first they should deliver up all their
Arms: Secondly, all their Auxiliaries: and thirdly they should remain faithful
Prisoners till the people of Athens gave judgment, what should be done with
them, but still provided they should not be delivered to their merciless
Countrymen the Corcyrians; Perfidy of the Athenians.
but this was the Athenians grand design, and therefore an article is shuffled
in, that if any one of these conditions were broke, all of them should be void.
Then were some Corcyrians sent to the Prisoners, who counterfeiting themselves
friends, advise them to escape, and to that purpose offer them a Ship; the
infatuated people lays hold on the offer, and sails away, but being waylaid,
are easily retaken, and then delivered to their capital enemies, who put them
all to cruel deaths. An execrable act of the Athenians, and that the rather
because their City was famous for Schools, wherein were taught the Moral
Virtues. I will not speak here of Hannibals breaking Maharbals Capitulation
with six thousand Romans at Thrasimenus, but shall reserve it till I speak of
the power that subordinate Officers have to give Conditions and Articles, which
you may find in the Twenty sixth Chapter of the Modern Art of War.

I know not whether Amilcar, Hannibals father dealt heartily when he Treated
and Capitulated with Spendius and Antaritus, the Ringleaders of the
Carthaginian Amilcar taxed.
revolted Mercenaries, and made it an Article that it should be in the power of
the Senate of Carthage to choose any ten of the Rebels they pleased, and to
dispose of them as they thought good; and when this was agreed to, he
immediately seized on them two as two of these ten. Sure if they had thought
they had been in that danger, they had never signed a paper tending so directly
to their own destruction; and therefore that Article was signed against the
intention of the Capitulators, and so perhaps was void in Law. Amilcar made
also choice of the Ten himself, and not the Senate which was against the Letter
of the Capitulation. The Athenian General Paches had besieged Notium, and
invited An execrable villainy.
Hippias (who was Commander in chief within the Town) to come out and speak
with him, promising faithfully (if they did not agree at the Treaty) to send
him back in safety, but did not tell him when. The foolish Governor came out,
Paches immediately storms the secure City, takes it, and puts most that were
within it to the sword, but would needs keep his word to Hippias, and therefore
lends him back to the Town, where he was no sooner arrived but by order of the
execrable Paches he is shot to death with Arrows. This treachery in seeking and
laying hold on occasion to break Treaties and Articles was, is, and ever will
be a monstrous crime crying to Heaven for vengeance. The Sons of Saul paid dear
for their fathers breach to the Gibeonites, who with moldy bread and Joshuah
his Piety.
clouted shoes had cunningly cheated Joshuah to treat with them, and give them
conditions, which notwithstanding he resolved for his Oaths sake Religiously to
observe.

But those examples of Spendius, and Antaritus of Carthage, and Hippias of No
Commanders in chief should Parley in person.
Notium, should teach all Generals and Commanders in chief of whatever quality
they are, whether in field or Town, not to parley in person; for if contrary to
Parol, promise, faith, Oath, or Hostages, they be either killed or made
Prisoners; then the Army, Town, or Castle which they commanded, stand for a
time amazed, which gives a fair opportunity to the deceitful enemy (who has
prepared himself for it) to fall upon them, and put them in a fearful
confusion, if not totally to rout them before they can recollect themselves.
Julius Caesar, I confess, had an advantage in his personal parley in Spain,
with Afranius and Petreius, because by his presence, and the justifying his
cause in his own excellent language, and his promises not only of fair quarter,
but of entertainment, he debaucht most of their Army. But these very reasons
which made his parley with them justifiable, rendered their meeting with him,
in presence of the Soldiers of both Armies (which Caesar would needs have)
altogether inexcusable. And indeed Pompey refused on good grounds all parley
with Caesar at Dirrachium. But there was no such cause of Caesar's Personal
parley with Ariovistus King of Germany, at which I suppose he was made sensible
of his error; for though he thought he had made the meeting cock-sure, on a
little hill situated in the midst of a large Plain, (where no ambushes could be
laid) and none were to approach that Plain, but himself and the barbarous King,
each of them accompanied with ten Caesar's danger by it.
Horsemen, and he had made choice of ten of the gallantest of his Legionaries
to be with himself all mounted on good Gallick Horses; but notwithstanding all
these cautions, the Treaty and parley was broke of, not without visible signs
of treachery. And the same Caesar gives a Caveat to all Commanders in chief,
either of Armies, or parts of Armies, or of Cities, or Castles, not to parley
in person, when he tells us the sad story how he lost one full Legion, and five
Cohorts of another, by the simple folly of his Legate Sabinus, first in
believing the Intelligence of Ambiorix a professed enemy; and next in going in
person with his His great loss by it.
principal Officers, to treat and parley with the same Ambiorix, upon the bare
word or parol of a faithless Barbarian, by whom he and his Officers were
immediately killed, and then their forces presently after put to the Sword. And
take take here a perfidious trick of a Roman at a Parley. Comius a Gallick
Prince had not been very faithful to Rome, Caesar's Legate Labienus appoints one
Volusenus to Parley with Comius; the Gaul having got the accustomed assurances,
came to the place where Volusenus (by order from Labienus) as out of friendship
took him by the hand, but held it fast till one of his Centurions gave him a
deep Perfidy of a Roman Legate.
wound on the head; but it not proving mortal, Comius escaped, and swore
thereafter never to trust a Roman. If Caesar had either cut off his Legates
head, or (according to the Roman custom used in such cases) delivered him over
to the incensed Gauls for this treacherous act, then the same Labienus had not
afterward perfidiously deserted himself, and run over to Pompey. Sempronius
Gracchus being betrayed by his Host, left his command, and being Proconsul,
went in person to Parley with some Carthaginians, from the result whereof he
expected Gracchus killed at a Parley. Scipio the African questioned for his
Parley with Syphax.
great matters, but he never returned, for he was environed and killed with all
his retinue. Scipio the African, though an accomplished Captain, no doubt,
forgot his duty when he left his charge in Spain, and went to Africa to treat
with Syphax in the midst of an Army, and at that time accompanied by Asdrubal a
professed enemy to the Roman name and Nation, having no assurance for his safety
but the word of a Prince, whom Scipio himself accounted barbarous. And though
he escaped that hazard, yet did he not escape the severe reproof of Great
Fabius, who to his face, and in full Senate charged him with this inexcusable
oversight in very rough and bitter language, as you may read in Livies
Thirtieth Book. Nor do I look on the personal Parley between the same Scipio,
and the famous Hannibal before their last Battle at Zama, but as an extravagant
action of two such renowned Chieftains. The Enterviews of Kings and Sovereign
Princes have seldom proved fortunate, or gained those advantages to either
party that were expected. But this Discourse belongs to another Chapter.

To conclude, the apprehension of bad quarter, and the fear of the breach of
Promises and Articles, and the suspicion of ill usage, has made many refuse
Desperate ways to prevent bad Quarter.
all quarter, reject all Treaties, and distrust all Articles and Agreements,
and by a voluntary death rid themselves from all fears and dangers, and rob
their enemies of the glory of their Captivity. Thus Saul King of Israel desired
his Armor-bearer to kill him; and because he would not, he did it himself,
that he might not fall into the hands of the uncircumcised. Thus Virius Vibius
persuaded seventy Capuan Senators to sup with him, and every one of them to
drink a draught of Poison to shun the Rods and Axes of the Roman Conquerours.
Thus the Great Hannibal poisoned himself, that the Treacherous King of Prussia
might not deliver him into the hands of his implacable enemies the Romans. Thus
Brutus and Cassius dispatched themselves, that they might not be grateful and
welcome spectacles to Anthony and Octavius Caesar. Thus Cato made Vtica Victrix
ca^sa Diis placuit, sed Victa Catoni.
famous by pulling out his own Bowels, that he might not be beholding for his
life to merciful Caesar. Thus Scapula to shun the same Caesar's just resentment,
for his sedition, caused a huge pile of burnt-wood to be heaped up, supped
plentifully, took Nard, or Spikenard, and Rosin inwardly, and then commanded a
slave to kindle the fire, and to throw him in it, after his freed servant had
at his entreaty cut his Throat. Thus Mark Anthony and his beautiful and beloved
Cleopatra, opened to themselves two several doors of death, that they might not
assist at Augustus his Triumphal Entrance into Rome. Thus Vaodicea Queen of the
Britons chose rather to poison her self, than be the object of the Romans
contempt, to whom in restoring to liberty her oppressed Country, she had done
much mischief. What some others, who were not Heathens, have done like this in
latter times, moved by the fearful examples of the calamities and inhumane
usage of those who have been Prisoners of War before them, shall be spoken to
in its own place.

CHAP. XXIV. Of the Military Punishments, and Rewards of the Romans, and other
Ancients.
AS in all well ordered Commonwealths the Virtuous should be cherished, and the
wicked chastised, so in Armies, (which both in Economy and Policy, do not only
represent, but are indeed either well or ill governed Republics) those who in
ancient times did signal services, were rewarded, and those who transgressed
Military Laws were punished. And if Martial Animadversions Military Laws should
be severe, and severely executed.
be more severe than the Civil ones, there is reason for it, because on the
right or wrong managing the War, depends the safety or ruin of the State, and
upon the least mistake of one Military order, may follow the loss of that Army,
to which is entrusted the management of that War. The great Master of War,
Caesar says, Fortuna quam in reliquis re^us, tum praecip^e in bello, parvi^
momentis magnas commutationes efficit: Fortune, says he, as in other affairs,
so more especially in War, makes inconsiderable accidents produce vast changes
and alterations.

That which Lamachus in Plutarch says is now common, Non licet bis in bello
peccare. In War one cannot do wrong twice; that is, in summa rei, in the
principal points of War; as in the loss of an army, the ill Marshalling of it,
the ill fighting a Battle, the loss of a considerable Town or Pass, by
negligence, sloth, treachery, or cowardice. Vegetius in the Thirteenth Chapter
of his first Book, says, Praliorum delicta emendationem non recipient. The
errors committed in fighting Battles are not capable of amendment. And in the
fifth Chapter of his Third Book he tells us, Siquidem nulla sit negligentia
venia, ubi de salute certatur: There is no pardon for a neglect, where men
fight for the common safety.

Now though it be an unquestionable truth, that when subjects do their Prince
and Country service, they do but their duty; and when they do either of them
disservice, or transgress Laws, they deserve punishment: yet it is as true,
that men naturally are much encouraged to virtue, by seeing rewards liberally
bestowed on those who are faithful and loyal, as they are frighted or terrified
from vice by the punishments they see inflicted on the wicked and disloyal. I
think it was no flash, but a remarkable saying of a Noble English General, who
by an Rewards encourage as well as punishments deter.
exemplary hanging of some Plunderers in his Army, did encourage the Country
Gentlemen to entreat him to hang some more for taking Geese and Hens, and yet
they were making no great haste to bring in either meat or money for the
entertainment of the Army: Nay, Gentlemen, (said the General) all hanging, and
no money will not keep any Army together, a little hanging, and a little money
will do better. And indeed it is so, all punishment, and no reward, proves but
one support, instead of two to the continuance of either Commonwealth or Armies.

Many of the ancient Governors of Republics, and Commanders of Armies knew
very well how to dispense both rewards and punishments. Some Nations whom both
Greeks and Romans qualified with the title of Barbarous, were extremely
inhumane in their punishments. So we read that he who came last to Some ancient
Nations inhumane in their punishments.
the Rendezvous of the ancient Gauls, was either cut in pieces, or thrown quick
into a fire. And Caesar in his Seventh Book of the Gallick War, says, that for
petty faults, Vercengent^rix caused noses, ears and hands to be cut off, and
the eyes of Delinquents to be put out, and in that manner* sent them home to
their friends; but for greater crimes he caused them to be burnt quick, or put
them to death by some more lingering torture.

Though the Grecians were severe in their punishments, yet we find them not
ordinarily cruel in them, their Animadversions being for most part rather
Ignominious than Capital. It is said of the Lacedaemonians (from whom others had
their breeding in the Military Art) that they punished a Coward by clothing him
in a Woman's apparel, and making him stand every third day in their Markets, or
other public places, which was looked on by men of spirit as worse than death.
We find the ordinary death to which the Grecian Delinquents in Armies Grecian
punishments.
were put, was that of stoning, which perhaps they learned from a more ancient
people than themselves, the Israelites, it being a custom with them to take
their Malefactors without the Camp, and there stone them to death. This
punishment was no new invented one in the time of Alexander, for Q. Curtius
speaking of the Conspiracy against the King, says, all that were named by
Nicomachus, so soon as the sign was given, were stoned to death, More patrio,
after the custom of the Country. Punishments of another sort were inflicted by
the Great Alexander, after his great Soul began to deviate from the path of
Virtue; such was his inhumane torturing to death the noble Phil^tas, perhaps
with that same justice that he caused his father Parm^ni^ to be murdered,
whose Conduct had so much contributed to most of his Conquests.

I much wonder why Steuechius will reckon stoning to be a Roman punishment, for
we find nothing of it so far as I know in History. He tells us, as he says*
out of Florus; he might have said out of Livius too, that Posthumous a Roman
General was killed with stones by his own Soldiers. But that which was done by
a Mutinous Army to their Commander in chief, is not to be reckoned a punishment
authorized by Law, for he confesses it was done in a Mutiny, Seditione facta.
I have spoken of this Mutiny in another place.

What punishments were legally inflicted on the Roman Officers and Soldiers,
Roman punishments.
we are left to glean out of History, for Polybius speaks but of few, and
Vegetius of none that I remember, except in the Fourteenth Chapter of his first
Book, where he says, the Tirones who either did not willingly learn their
Exercises, or made no great proficiency in them, were fed with Barley instead
of Wheat. But we find that manner of punishment imposed on the Veterans as well
as the Novitiates, and for other faults. Livy in his Thirty seventh Book, says,
that some Companies who had lost their Colors were appointed to be fed with
Feeding with Barley.
Barley. Polybius tells us that the Tribunes had power to Fine, to take
Pledges, and to whip with Rods; and a Centurion had power to whip with Vines,
for a twig of a Vine was his Badg, whereby he was known. Tacitus says, that one
Lucilius a Centurion was nick named, Cad^ alter^^, because when he had broke
Whipping with Vines and Birches.
one twig on the back of a Soldier, he called for a second, and a third.
Observe by the way that a Soldier might not resist his Centurion when he was
chastising him, for if he but held the Rod, he was cashiered, and if he broke
it, he died for it: and this will prove what I asserted in another place, that
the Roman Centurions were sometimes Hangmen; yet in these days they were looked
upon as such no more than Be^aja^, Solomon's Captain General, was thought a
Hangman, for killing his Predecessor Joa^, Adonijah, and Shimei, with his own
hand, at his great Masters command. Scipio the Numantine, caused every Soldier
to be whipped severely that went ever so little out of his rank, or fell behind;
if he was a Roman Soldier he was whipped with Vine^, if one of the Allies with
Birches. The Tribunes, says Polybius, for neglect of Guards, had power to
punish with death; but he adds, not without the Council; but there is no doubt
the Consul had power without advice or counsel of any whatsoever, to put any
under his command to death, either for crimes forbidden by the Laws,
Constitutions and Customs of their former Discipline, or for transgressing any
Beheading their own Sons.
new Commands or Edicts. As Ma^lius struck the head from his own Son, for
Combating with one of the Latins contrary to a late order; and for some such
emergent transgression, some think Posthumous did as much to his Son, as I told
you before. Caius Matienus for deserting his Army in Spain, was first cruelly
whipped with Rods, and then sold for a slave in open Market for a piece of
money, not worth an English Groat.

Desertion of a Post was death, but the punishment I last spoke of was worse
than death. By their Law it was death to leave their Officers or Colors in the
Field; to lose Arms, or go from their Guards, to commit theft, to bear false
Crimes punished alike by death.
witness, or commit any one crime, how small so ever, three several times; yet
this was not always, yea but seldom put in execution. Some Cohorts that were
chaced into their Camp by the Tuscans, and with loss of their Colors, did not
die for it, but were ordered only to lie without the Camp, without shelter of
either Hut or Tent, till they recovered their reputation. Those that fled from
Cannae were ordered by the Senate to be carried to Sicily, and to remain there
till the end of the Punick War, though most of them had served out their time.
At Canusium, Marcellus ordered those Maniples that had lost their Ensigns to be
fed with Barley instead of Wheat, and the Centurions to have their swords taken
from them, and turned out of the Camp.

Sodomy was a capital crime when publicly known. A young Soldier not only
Sodomy a capital crime.
refused to suffer one of his Tribunes to abuse him, but in defending himself
from force, killed the Tribune, and was acquitted by the Consul. The manner of
death inflicted by the Romans on Criminals was ordinarily twofold, Beheading,
Beheading after severe whipping. Battoning o^ Fustuarium.
and Battoning, both very cruel as they made them, for heads were seldom struck
off, but after a severe scourging with Rods. Battoning, or the Fustuarium, is
thus described by Polybius in his Sixth Book, The party who was to suffer, was
brought publicly, (he tells us not to what place of the Camp) and then the
Tribune touched him with his Battoon, immediately after (he having liberty to
run, as at our ^atloupe) he was cudgel'd and felled to death by the Soldiers in
any place of the Camp he fortuned to come, and if he had the luck to escape, he
was nothing the better for it, home he durst not go, none of his friends or
acquaintances durst harbor him, and it was lawful for any man to kill him.
Sometimes the Delinquents were punished after death, as much as man could
punish, Punishment after death.
for we read of some who after they had been cruelly whipped, and their heads
cut off, had burial denied them, yea their friends were forbid to mourn for
them. But though I confess that for giving terror, horrid crimes deserve
horrid punishments, yet I think the consideration of humane frailty should
teach man to be shie in inflicting inhumane pains on the living, and be very
sparing to meddle with the dead; for Savire in manes, is an assured token of a
monstrously cruel nature.

Several transgressions were punished by diminishing the offenders wages, by
Lesser punishments.
making them march with the Baggage, winter in the field, both out of Town and
Camp, to dig Ditches, more than their Companions did, to stand a whole day
before the Generals Pavilion, and sometimes with turfs on their heads; and as I
observed before, it was no small punishment for a Horseman to have his Horse
taken from him, and be made to serve on foot, and this was called Militiae
mutatio.

After the Emperors had invested themselves with the Sovereignty of Rome, many
of them inflicted punishments, not pro ratione delicti, or according to the
quality of the crime, but according to their own boundless power, more to
satisfy their cruel and inhumane natures than to give Justice its due course.
Among none of the most unjust you may reckon this, that the Emperor Alexander
(who did well deserve the Surname that was given him of Severus) hearing that a
young Soldier had injured a poor old woman in spoiling her of some goods,
disarmed him, declared him a slave, and gave him to the woman, that by his work
and drudgery he might gain her a livelihood. But these I will speak of, had not
so much of justice in them. Aurelian put one of his Soldiers to a horrible
death for Adultery, by ca^sing his feet to be tied to the tops of two Trees
branches, bowed down, which being let suddenly fly up, tore the woeful wretch in
Abominable cruelties.
two pieces. The Emperor Macrinus caused a Tribune to be tied (who had
suffered his Guards to desert a Post) to the wheel of a Cart, and carried him
so a days march. The same Monster of an Emperor being told that two Soldiers
had deflowred their Hosts serving Maid, caused immediately the bellies of two
Cows to be opened, out of which the Tripes were taken, and then the Soldiers
were sowed alive in them, but the heads of the Cows were cut off, that so the
woeful couple might speak one to another so long as their cruel agony suffered
them to breath. The Emperor Avidius Cassius caused a Pole of the height of one
hundred foot to be erected, and caused Delinquent Soldiers to be tied all along
to it from the top to the foot of it, and then set fire to the lowest part, in
that manner consuming the miserable wretches with fire and smoke. In our Modern
Discipline of War, there have been and are yet some Nations, who for the subtle
inventions of atrocious punishments, need borrow nothing from the ancient
Tyrants, having not only equalized, but far out-reach'd them, as shall be told
you in its proper place.

To return to the ancient Romans before the times of the Emperors, when many
were found guilty of one Capital crime, all were not put to death, but
sometimes one of five, one of eight, for most part one of ten, as Polybius
tells us in his Sixth Book; and this was called Decimation: he on whom the lot
fell, died Decimation.
certainly by Battoning as the same Author in^orms us; the rest had some small
punishment inflicted upon them, that so as the Historian says, there might be
Poena ad paucos, terror ad omnes. This Decimation is used in the Modern Wars,
the Soldiers casting the Dice, upon which one is hanged, and the rest are
sometimes whipped, and sometimes pardoned.

An Ignominious Dismission was also a Roman punishment, for with them there
were four kinds of Cashiering or Dismission: The first was when Soldiers had
served out their time appointed by Law, and this was called Justa missio, a
Legal dismission. The second was for just and sufficient reasons, as when the
party Dismissions.
was lame, mutilated, or so infirm that he could not serve longer, and this
they called Missio caussaria, an occasioned dismission. The third was when a
General or a Tribune (for sometimes he had the power to do it) gave a Soldier
his Dismission out of grace and favor, and too often for money, and this was
termed Missio gratuita. The fourth was, when men were put out of the Armies for
crimes, and this they called Missio Ignominiosa, a shameful Dismission, by
which C^sar used two of his Tribunes in Africa, Avienus and Fonteius, to which
severity they had too much provoked him.

The Ancients proposed and gave rewards to those who carried themselves
signally and valorously in any Military occasion; and to invite them to these,
the Harangues and public Orations of their Generals contributed much.
Agesilaus rewarded those who in their Drillings or Exercises carried themselves
better than their Neighbors. The Athenians and several other Grecians gave
Golden Grecian Rewards.
Chains, and other testimonies of honor and respect to those who had done any
notable explo it. And so did the Carthaginians as well as the Romans; for
Livius says in his Twenty third Book, that Hannibal at the siege of Canusu^m,
offered a Mural Crown to him, who at the assault should first get to the top of
the wall.

Though Polybius in his Sixth Book, speaks more largely of the Roman Rewards,
Roman Rewards:
than of their Punishments, yet he is not full enough in them. But in the first
place (as indeed it deserves the first place) he tells us, that after the
performance of any gallant action, the actors were publicly thanked and
praised Thanks.
by the General in a public Harangue; and assuredly this commendation in such
an Audience did not only hugely satisfy him or them, in whose praise it was
spoke, but stirred up in others a virtuous emulation to do, or endeavor to do
such things as might deserve the like honor. After thanks, says our Author,
the Consul gave a Spear, a Lance, or a Javelin to him who had overthrown an
enemy Spears.
in a private Encounter or Combat, fighting man to man, for so he restricts the
gift. And to him, says he, who had overcome and spoiled an enemy, was given (if
he were a Horseman) a Phalera, or some Caparison for a Horse; and Caparisons.
if a Footman, a Dish, a Platter, or a Viol, for the Interpreter calls it
Phiala, which Lipsius conjectures very rationally to be a mistake, and thinks
it should be Armilla, Bracelets, for we read in several Authors of these
gifts, but not of Bracelets.
the other.

It is strange that Polybius speaks not one word of Triumphs and Ovations, the
first being the greatest reward of Valor and Conduct, both for the honor,
magnificence and quality of it, and the last next to it. I shall speak a little
of both. The manner of the Triumph was, that he to whom Triumph*
it was granted, was carried into the City in a Chariot richly accoutred, drawn
ordinarily with white Steeds; and when the Romans had over-mastered Asia and
Africa, with Lions, Tigers, and other wild beasts that were tamed. He was
convoyed by his Army, who followed the Chariot, singing Verses and Rhimes of
their own making to the praise of the Triumphant. Upon his head he wore a
garland of Laurel, the Symbol of Victory; the Soldiers and people cried with
loud acclamations, Io Triumph. Before him were carried the rich Spoils, Money
and Gold, coined or uncoined, destined for the public Treasury. At first the
Triumphs were granted by the Senate, thereafter by the people, By whom granted*
and then resumed by the Senate, and sometimes the Consuls Triumphed in spite
of both Senate and people; which might have taught them to fear that some time
or other that hodg podg of their State divided between Senate and Commons would
be eaten up by some daring Consul. Livy in his Fourth Book says, that Triumphs
were only granted to Dictators and Consuls; and yet in To whom granted.
his Twenty eight Book he tells us, that Scipio the African had the most
magnificent Triumph that ever was seen in Rome, and he was but Proconsul; and
indeed after him, Proconsuls, Praetors and Propraetors had Triumphs granted
them. In that same place he tells us of the Conditions on which a Triumph was
granted, which were these, He must have killed five thousand Enemies at least,
won much spoil, and augmented the Roman Dominions and Estates. Yet the same
Livy tells us in his Fortieth Book, that P. Cornelius, and M. Babius Triumphed
over the Ligurians, who had yielded themselves without fighting; so here was
Triumph without bloodshed. Triumphs were not granted to those who had prevailed
over a Roman Army; this rendered Casar odious to the Populacy, because he would
needs Triumph for his Victory in Spain over young P^mpey; neither did that
Invincible Captain outlive that Triumph six Months.

Ovations were granted to meaner persons, and for lesser Victories; he who
Ovation*
entered ovant, either went on foot, or on Horseback, but had not his Army to
follow him, he carried a branch of Myrtle in his hand, and the people in their
Acclamations cried, Ohe, or Oho; and by this it would seem it was Ohati^, and
not Ovatio; some think it had its denomination above, because the Victor
Sacrificed a sheep. The Prisoners were led before the Triumphant Chariot, and
so soon as it turned ^owards the Capitol, they were taken to the place of
execution, an^ put to death; so you may be sure that all were not merry in that
day of joy. This certainly was a most barbarous and inhumane custom, wherewith
the Enemy of Mankind inspired that Warlike Nation. Chains of Gold Chains of
Gold.
were likewise given to deserving persons by most of the Ancients, and were
looked upon as rewards proper to Militaty persons, as in some places they are
used yet.

To him, says Polybius, who first mounted to the Wall of an assaulted City,
was given a Crown of Gold, as also to him who saved a Roman Citizen, or Ally
from being killed by an enemy, upon whom the party who was saved, was obliged
to look as his Savior, and was compelled to set the Crown on his head if he
did not do it willingly. The first Crown was called Corona Muralis, or a
Wall-Crown; Mural Crown* Citizen-Crown.
the second, Corona Civica, or the Citizen-Crown. This is all that we have from
Polybius of Rewards, except that he tells us that those who received these
gifts when they returned to Rome, might make show of them at solemn Games and
Assemblies, which indeed was no small honor for them, since none were
permitted to wear them, but those who had deserved them; and these badges of
honor they had liberty to place at the posts of the doors of their houses, or
in the most conspicuous places of their dwellings, to be seen by all who past
by, or came in to visit them, In conspectissima adium part, says our Author.

But I find in other stories that the Crown which was given to him who saved a
Roman, was of Oak, it may be the Golden one was given to him who saved a Oake^
Crown.
Citizen without the death of the enemy, and the Oaken Crown to him who both
saved him and killed the enemy, who had endangered the Roman. A Crown of Gold
was given to him who first entered the enemies Camp, and was called Campal
Crown. Naval-Crown.
Corona Castrensis. A Crown of Gold was given to him who in a Naval Battle
first entered an enemies Ship, and was called Corona Navalis. A Crown of Gold
was given to any Commander for doing any gallant piece of service. An
Olive-Crown Olive-Crown.
was given to him who carried himself eminently in Battle. But the most
honorable Crown of all was the Obsidional one, which was given to him who
Obsidional Crown.
succored, or relieved a besieged City, Castle, or Camp; for if he who saved
one Citizens life deserved a Crown, much more he who saved a City, wherein the
lives of so many Citizens were concerned. This Crown of relieving the bes^eged
was of grass or flowers, because in these times it was a custom, that these who
were vanquished and reduced to obedience, presented their Conquerours with
grass, herbs, or flowers. Neither do I think it was bad policy (besides the
humanity of it) after the loss of a Battle, or some other disaster, to comfort
the Soldiers, by laying the blame on fortune, some mistake, or accident,
imputing no blame to the Soldiers, thereby encouraging them to wipe away the
stain of their mishap by some gallant and glorious achievement. This To
comfort the Vanquished.
was excellently practiced by C^sar after his Army was bafled at the storm of
Pompeys Camp; and to the proposal of rewards to those who fought well, and
comfort to those who were overcome, does Virgil allude in the fifth of his
Aeneids:

Sic ait, and geminum pugnae proponit honorem
Victori, velatum auro vittisque juvencum,
E^s^m, atque insignem galeam, solatia victo.
A Combats twofold prize he does propone,
A Bull with gilded horns he gives to one,
To others he presents fair Helms and Swords,
And to the vanquished comfortable words.
Thus you see the Romans at best were severe enough in their punishments, and
in their rewards frugal, many times exorbitant in the first, and Parsimonio^s
in the second; yet as the Proverb goes, Better half a loaf than no bre^d:
Better small rewards than no rewards at all.

CHAP. XXV. Polybius his Comparison of the Macedonian Phalanx, and the Roman
Legion, reviewed.
IT is a common saying, he who wins, plays best; yet it is not universally
true, for very often the expertest Gamesters are losers, and so we find in a^
ages that great Captains, and well trained Armies, have not always been
victorious: yet I am not of the opinion that the success of the Roman Armies
under the Conduct of Flaminius and Aemilius, against the two Macedoni^n Kings,
Philip and Perseus, moved Polybius to give the Palm and Garland to the Legion,
when he compared it with the Phalange toward the end of the Seventeenth Book
of his excellent History; for to attribute either the justness of a cause, or
yet the good or bad order of an Army to contingent events, were to Careat
successibus opt^, Quisquis ab eventu facta notand^ (...).
stint the power of Heaven, (which both the Author and all Pagans then did
acknowledge to be in their gods) and leave nothing to that Eternal Providence
which we adore* by the direction whereof the actions of Mortals are governed,
and is in nothing more visible than in the successes and rou^^ of Ar^^es. And
therefore the Sovereign Lord of the World takes to himself the Title of Lord of
Hosts, the smallest and most inconsiderable accidents in War, (which are all
appointed by the finger of the Almighty) being able to produce most unexpected
changes, as Caesar well observed. There has been therefore other reasons that
moved so rational and judicious an Author as Polybius was both famed and known
to be, to prefer the Legion to the Phalange; other reasons* I say, than
success, and if I guess right at his meaning, you may take them to be these
which follow, in his observation of the advantages and disadvantages of both.

The Phalanx being composed of sixteen Ranks, and of one thousand twenty First
advantage of the Phalange.
four Files of lusty well armed men, and at its closest Order or Constipation,
so long as it is able to preserve its ^orce, it bears down all before it, for
at that posture every Combatant takes up but one foot and a half of ground; and
suppose their Pikes but eighteen foot long (whereas the Sarissas were twenty
one of length) you may easily compute the points of the fifth Rank (or if you
will of the sixth Rank) to extend three foot before the first Rank, of all
which I have spoken enough in my Discourses of the Gracian Militia. Now though
all the Ranks behind the sixth are useless as to the presenting their Pikes, or
wounding an Enemy, yet by the weight and strength of their Bodies they assist
the impression of the first six Ranks, help the charge to be more forcible, and
take away all possibility from those that are before them, to turn their backs
upon the Enemy. But this Phalange must have such a Its first disadvantage.
ground, that it may open and close at pleasure, and that ground must be plain
and even, without the encumbrances of Woods, Trees, Bushes, Hedges, Ditches,
Enclosures, rising Hills, and hollow grounds; for any of these is sufficient to
disorder it in its parts, and that being once done, an Enemy with little or no
danger, may enter at the void places of that great Body, when it is disjoined,
and Swordmen being once within the points of the Pikes, the Pike-men are a
prey to them, especially to the Roman Legionaries, who besides short Swords,
carried likewise* Semispath^, which I English, Daggers* Now, says Polybius,
such a Champaign, such a Field, as we have described, not being to be found
every where, the Phalange must of necessity stay where it has me^ with such a
ground, and march from it, and accept of such as time, place, or occasion
offers, as all Armies must do. If the first, then has an Enemy free liberty to
make himself Master of the Country, to besiege and force Towns, and take all
other manner of advantages. If the second, and that the Field prove improper
for the Phalange, then the Enemy takes the advantage of the ground* enters at
the void places, and having so dis-array'd it, quickly overthrows it. Next
Polybius grants, that the Phalange has the advantage of the Legion in this,
that three foot being Its second advantage.
allowed between two Legionaries (whereof I have spoke in my discourse of
Intervals) and but half so much to two Phalangites: When they are both to
fight, it follows, that every Legionary had two Phalangites in front of him,
and consequently twelve Pikes presented to him; for it is already granted, that
the points of the Pikes of the sixth Rank might be extended before the first
Rank; so by this account, there were twelve men against one, an advantage in
nature irresistible. But on the other part, the Phalangites could not fight in
Maniples, ^ohorts, or small Bodies, for being Its second disadvantage.
separated or divided, they were quickly broken. The Legionaries were so A^med
and that they could fight any way, either in a great or small Body, or Man to
Man, at any time, or in any place, let the encumbrances be what they will.

Let us resume all this, and say in one word Polybius prefers the Legion to the
Phalange, because the essential propriety of the Phalange was to fight close
together, and so long as it was able to keep so, it was able to bear down the
Legion; but sure it could but seldom keep in one entire body, the Legion, by
its order and constitution, being apt to fight in small or little Bodies, and
to divide according to opportunities and emergencies, could readily enter at
the void places of the Phalange, whether these were in the Van, Rear or Flanks,
and overthrow it, as often it did.

I shall presume to add two other advantages that I think the Legion had of A
Legions third advantage over the Phalange.
the Phalange, which Polybius has not mentioned. The first: The Phalange
fought all in one Body, the Legion in three Bodies successively, one after
another; so that if the Has^a^^ charged briskly, they might put the great Body
of the Phalange in some disorder; and they retiring, the Principes finding it
in some discomposure, might disorder it so, that the Triarii coming fresh to
the charge, might have a very cheap market of it.

The second advantage which I conceive the Legion had of the Phalange, A
Legions fourth advant^ge.
was in its larger Front, which I offer to make appear thus: The great Phalange
consisted of sixteen thousand three hundred eighty four heavy armed, these
marshalled sixteen deep, and so their Front consisted of one thousand twenty
four men, to whom you are to allow one thousand twenty four foot, for them to
stand on, when they were to fight; they had no more but one foot and a half
allowed between Files, and therefore for one thousand twenty four Files, allow
one thousand twenty three distances, and for these fifteen hundred thirty four
foot and a half, add these, the aggregate is two thousand five hundred fifty
eight foot and a half; thus much ground, and no more, did the Phalange take up
in its Longitude, when it was to fight. The Legion was composed of three
Bodies, who were marshalled one behind another: The Hastati had the first
Batallion, and were divided into ten Maniples, in every one of which were one
hundred and twenty men, these were marshalled ten deep, and so each Maniple was
twelve men in Front, for whom allow twelve foot to stand on, and, as both
Polybius and Vegetius do, allow three foot between Files, twelve Files have
eleven distances, and for them you must have thirty three foot, add thirty
three to twelve, makes forty five; so much ground did every Maniple possess in
Front: ^n every Batallion were ten Maniples, multiply then forty five by ten,
the product will be four hundred and fifty. You may remember that I have
elsewhere demonstrated, that these ten Maniples had nine Intervals, and every
Interval must have as much ground allowed to it as the Maniple, that was forty
five foot; multiply forty five by nine, the product is four hundred and five,
add four hundred and five to four hundred and fifty, the aggregate is eight
hundred fifty five foot; and so much ground did the Hast^ati of one Legion
possess. In a Consular Army there were four Legions, then you are to multiply
eight hundred fifty five by four, and the product will prove to be three
thousand four hundred and twenty; and so much ground did the Hastati of a
Consular Army take up in Front. Now here the Hastati are reckoned to be but
twelve hundred, the Legion according to Polybius being supposed to be but four
thousand two hundred. But in Aemilius his Army against the Macedonian Phalanx,
the Legions were of six thousand, whereof the Tri^rii (according to Polybius)
being only six hundred, the Hastati and Principes must have consisted each of
two thousand, and the Velites must have been fourteen hundred. And by this
account, Aemilius his Hastati would have possessed in Front above five thousand
foot of ground; so it is clear, that the Hastati of the weakest Consular Army
outwing'd the Macedonian Phalange, and thereby was able to fall upon its
Flanks; supposing still, which cannot he denied me, that the Roman Cavalry gave
the Grecian Horse work enough; and they carrying short managable Arms, might
easily disorder the Phalangites, being once entered within their great Body, so
that the Principes and Triarii coming up fresh to the medley, would not find
much difficulty to make that great bulk a prey* Observe likewise, if you
consider the great Intervals of the Roman Maniples, all the Phalangites who in
Battle met with these Intervals were useless, for they had no Enemy to fight
with. These conjectures of mine I have presumed to add to Polybius his
weightier considerations.

But notwithstanding all that is said for the Legions advantage over the
Reasons why a Phalanx rightly ordered, had the advantage of a Legion.
Phalange, I am bold (with submission to Polybius) to say, If the Phalange be
ordered, as I spoke of in my Discourses of the Grecian Art of War, that is, not
so deep as sixteen, and consequently of a larger Front, and thereby not so apt
to be surrounded or out-wing'd, and with Reserves, I conceive, not only those
conjectures of mine; but all Polybius his reasons will come to nothing, or
signify little. Neither indeed can I at all be persuaded to believe, that so
soon as the Legionaries were entered at the void places within the Ranks of the
Phalanx, that presently they were Masters of it; for though the points of those
Pikes within which the Romans were come, were indeed useless, yet so were not
the points of all those Pikes that were at a convenient distance from them;
besides, I hope it will be granted, that a Legionaries offensive weapon, the
Sword was no more servicable to him at that close fight, than the Sword of a
Phalangite was to him that carried it; for it is not imaginable, that he was
bound to keep his Pike longer in his hand than it was useful for him, nor his
Sword in its sheath, longer than it was time to draw it, in defense of his
life. And what I now speak of a Phalange not so deep as sixteen, and
consequently of a greater Front, among the Grecians, and of Reserves, which the
Romans called Subsidia, is no vain speculation of mine; for I have formerly
demonstrated the truth of it out of good Authors, though I confess, I am
convinced such Phalanges were not at Cinecephala, where Q. Flaminius beat
Philip the Father, nor at Pidna, where L. Aemilius beat Perseus the Son, both
Kings of Macedon.

To confirm my opinion that the Legion by its constitution, had no advantage
Roman Army beat by Xantippus a Grecian,
over a Phalange rightly ordered, I shall use the authority of Polybius against
Polybius; for he in his first Book relates to us, how the Carthaginians in the
first Punick War were brought so low, that they were ready to accept any
reasonable conditions of Peace, till they gave the command of their forces to
Zantippus, a Lacedaemonian, that had come out of Greece with some mercenary
Laconians, and was one of those, who in this age are called Soldiers of
Fortune, who making use of the Grecian Rules, which he had learned in his own
Country, marshalled the Carthaginian Army in several Bodies of Horse and Foot,
each to second another; adding the help of his Elephants, and choosing the most
Champaign grounds he could, extended his Front to so great a length, that the
Romans using their accustomed order, were outwing'd, surrounded, and totally
routed by him; and the Consul, Attilius Regulus, with five hundred more Romans,
were led Captive into Carthage. Here Xantippus merely by the Grecian Art of
War, worsted the Romans, who made use of their own Art.

But I will go a greater length, may not we imagine, that Amilcar in the And by
Amilcar and Hannibal, who followed Xantippus his Art,
pursuance of that first Punick War, and his Son Hannibal in the beginning of
the second, imitated Xantippus, and managed the War according to that pattern
he had left behind him? I suppose we may believe it. If this do not prove that
the difference between the Grecian and Roman Art of War did not always make the
one Nation victorious over the other, then take more Instances.

Pyrrhus King of Epirus, at his first coming into Italy with a Grecian Army,
And by Pyrrhus.
Grecian Arms, and Art of War, did beat the Romans in Battle, so did he the
second time. A fancy took him to arm his Soldiers after the Roman fashion, and
then he was beaten by the Romans. Hannibal, when he came first to Italy, beat
the Romans in set Battle, and I believe with these kind of Arms, and that order
of War which Xantippus used in Africa, and consequently Grecian. But Polybius
tells us in his seventeenth Book, that the same Hannibal To what Polybius
attributes Victory.
armed all his Carthaginians after the Roman manner, no doubt, with those Arms
that he had taken from them; now as he had beaten them formerly with
Carthaginian and Grecian Arms, so he beat them frequently afterward with Roman
Arms. Therefore this noble Historian in that place does not attribute Hannibals
Victories to any advantage his Soldiers had, either in Arms or Art over the
Romans, but to his own singular Prudence, his Courage and Conduct, and
extraordinary Qualifications, and to use Polybius his own expression, His
Capital Engine. But when, says he, a Roman General, equal in abilities to him,
came to command the Roman Armies, then Victory flew from Hannibal over to
Scipio. But let us ask the question, Why so? Since both Captains were equal in
Valor and Conduct, and if there was any odds, the Carthaginian no question,
had it, because of his long experience, and almost matchless policy in feats of
Arms, and that there was but little difference in their Arms, or manner of
Militia. Here Polybius is at a stand, and gives no reason for it, but that
Fortune would have it so. What Fortune was to him, that is Providence to us. He
was ignorant of what the wisest Eccles. Chapter 3. and Chapter 9.
of men said long before the foundation of Rome was laid, That there is a time
for every purpose under Heaven, a time to kill, and a time to heal, a time to
gain, and a time to lose. And in another place, That the race is not to the
swift, nor the battle to the strong, nor favor to the men of skill* but time
and chance happens to them all. And indeed that happens to all, and to
every one, what the eternal has ordained for them. Nor did Polybius know what
was revealed to Nebuchadnezzar in that dream which Daniel interpreted to him;
that the Persians Daniel Chapter 2.
should subdue the Assyrians, the Grecians should ruin the Persians, and the
Romans should put a period to the Macedonian Monarchy. There was no stop to be
made to the current of the Victories of the Romans whom the Almighty had
pre-ordain'd to become Masters of the World. That there is such an All-ruling
Providence was not unknown to the wiser Heathens, though they, being in a mist,
did not see with so clear eyes, as we who are illuminated by the brighter rays
of Gods own word; and for all that, I think few Divines can express in fewer
words the omnipotency and unbounded power of the most high, than a Pagan Poet
did, when he wrote,

Sic ait, immensa est, finemque potentia coeli Ovid's Met.

Non habet, and quicquid superi voluere, peractum est.
Heavens power has no limits, hence we see
All done infallibly, what Gods decree.
If Polybius had lived in our days, he might have seen the hand of Heaven
distributing Victory (to speak with reverence and submission to the Almighties
pleasure) more partially, than he either heard it was awarded in the
Hannibalian, or saw it given in the third Punick War: of the first whereof he
writes, when he falls upon this discourse with us, He might have seen men of
one Nation, armed alike, following one and the same method of War, and for any
thing I know, of equal Courage, both parties inflamed, the one with Loyal zeal,
the other with rebellious rage, acting their parts very highly on the bloody
stage of War: he might have seen, I say, the best of Sovereign Kings King
Charles the First.
lose his Crown and Life, and have his head chopp'd off with an Ax, when the
worst of Subjects and greatest of Rebels had his decked with Bays.

Or if Polybius had lived but one age longer than he did, he might have seen
the Roman Legions, (which he so much commends) cutting one another Throats,
all Contrymen, all men of equal Courage and Conduct, armed alike, using one
and the same Art and Discipline of War, embruing their hands in one another
blood; and those who fought for the State and Liberty of their Country,
overthrown, killed, murdered, and massacred, and their Enemies almost adored
for their success in a bad cause: and he might have either seen or heard of
Pompeys Head ignominiously struck off, and Caesar's crowned Caesar and Pompey.
with Laurels.

And if Polybius had been an eyewitness of the prodigious success Gustavus
Adolphus the Great King of Sweden had in Germany in the year 1630. when he
invaded the Roman Empire, and how he took Cities, Forts and Castles, more
Emperor Ferdinand the Second,
for their number, and more considerable for their Strength, Beauty, and
Riches, in the space of six months; and made a greater progress in his
Conquests in less than two years time, than Hannibal did in Italy the whole
eighteen years he stayed in it: If, I say, he had seen this, he had never
attributed Victory to the goodness of Arms, the cunning of the Art or exactness
of the Discipline of War, for he would have seen the Emperor Ferdinand the
Seconds Generals, wise, And his Generals.
courageous, experienced, vigilant as well, and as much as either the King
himself, or any of his great Captains. Besides, both Wallenstein Duke of
Friedland, and Count Tili, had that which Polybius himself requires in a
General, that was, they were fortunate: Their great Victories over the Kings of
Bohemia and Denmark, Bethlem Gabor, the Duke of Brunswick, the Marquesses of
Baden and Durlach, and the famous Earl of Mansfield, being yet fresh in memory.
And if Polybius had seen any disparity of Arms, or Armor, or of Horses, either
for their number or their goodness, in this German War, he had seen the
Emperors Armies have the odds by much; neither was the difference of the
manner of their War, or Ratio Belli, so considerable, as to cast the Scales so
far, as that Martial King did in so short a time. Nor was Hannibals descent
into Italy with few more than twenty thousand men, more hazardous than the
Kings landing in Germany with eight or ten thousand at most, was justly thought
to be. What was it then, would Polybius have said, that carried Victory (whose
wings Ferdinands Generals and Armies thought they had clipped) over to the
Sweed, what else but the hand of the Almighty, who when that Emperor was very
fair to have reduced Germany to an absolute Monarchy, said to him and the whole
house of Austria, Non plus ultra, Go no further.

Titus Livius had read without all question, this comparison of Polybius,
Another comparison of Titus Livius,
whereof I have spoken enough, and it may be, has taken from it a hint to
start another question, which is this: If the great Alexander after his return
from India, and his subduing so many Nations in little more than ten years
time, had made a step over to Italy, what the issue of the War between him
Voided by himself.
and the Romans would have been? And gives his Sentence, that infallibly his
Country men would have beaten that Great Conqueror. Paola Paruta, a Paruta
not satisfied with Livius,
Noble Venetian, and a Procurator of St. Mark, refutes Livius his arguments,
and concludes, that the Macedonian would have over-master'd the Romans. But in
steps a third, an Author of no small reputation, the renowned Sir Walter
Raleigh, Nor Sir Walter Raleigh.
who will give the prize to neither Macedonian nor Roman, but to his own
English. It will not be denied, but the English Nation did admirable feats in
France (which was indeed the Stage on which Caesar acted his most martial
exploits) under Edward the Third, King of England, and his Son the Black
Prince, as also under Henry the Fifth while he lived, and after his death,
under his Valiant Brothers. But Paruta refutes Livius, yet I have seen none
that opposes Sir Walter, and I am sure I shall not, because I am not so much
beholding to the Grecians and Romans, as to the English. But those who are
curious to read the reasons of all the three, may find those of Livy in his
ninth Book of his first Decad; those of Paruta in the second Chapter of his
Political Discourses; and those of Raleigh in the first Chapter of the fifth
Book of the first part of his History of the World.

But to return to Livy's question, I shall tell my opinion, and that is lawful
Strong presumptions against Livius his opinion.
enough for me to do, and it is this: Since Hannibal, as Polybius confesses,
carried not much above twenty thousand men over the Alps, of all that great
Army that he brought out of Spain, and with them durst invade the Roman
Seignories in Italy it self, when Rome was Mistress of Sicily and Sardinia, and
of the Sea too; when Hannibal, I say, notwithstanding the Roman power, and all
the obstructions that Hanno and his party made against him within Carthage,
durst fight, and did beat the Romans so often, that if he had pursued one of
his Victories, he had gone fair to have set up his Trophies in the Capitol.
When with such a stock Hannibal could do so great things, I think, in all
humane probability, Alexander, who was master of the best and richest places of
the World, who was an absolute Sovereign Monarch (and so not liable or
accountable to a Senate) not in fear or jealousy of any Competitor, a great
and an experienced Warrior, of an Invincible Courage, Master of prodigious
Forces both at Sea and Land, his power almost boundless, and yet his Ambition
more unlimited than his Power; If he, I say, had entered Italy, and invaded the
Roman State (then but in its Infancy, and shouldering for more room with its
neighbor Cities) he had made it submit to his uncontrollable pleasure, or
drowned the very Roman name in the pit of eternal Oblivion.

PALLAS ARMATA. Military Essays OF THE MODERN ART of WAR. BOOK III.
CHAP. I. Of the Modern Militia in General.
HE who will rightly shape or form that monstrous Beast that War the wild Boar
of the Forest.
Bellua, that wild Boar of the Forest, that plucketh up all Vineyards by the
roots, War; must begin, says Themistocles, with the Belly: meaning, Provisions
and Victuals must be prepared to maintain the Armies of those Princes and
States, who wage War. And because meat in an orderly way costs money, they say
money is the sinews of War; yet we have seen and known Armies raised and
maintained with little or no money, prepared by those who levied them, but some
exceptions take not away an universal rule.

How the ancient Nations, as well Grecians, Romans, as others shaped this Beast
of War, how they composed his members, and how they entertained and fed him,
both for their own defense, and to offend others, I have showed to my Reader in
my former Discourses, as far at least as by conjectures rationally grounded on
the authority of approved Authors, (besides Aelian, Aeneas, Polybius, and
Vegetius) it was possible for me to reach. But coming now to speak of the
Modern Art of War, I find my self more embarrassed than in the delineation of
the rest; for besides the differences of the manner of War used by several
Nations (which perhaps might all be digested in one form with some exceptions
not very essential) I know not of what date, age, years, or Centuries of Modern
Militia of an uncertain date.
years, I shall make the Modern Militia. If I shall date its Birth from the
time the Roman Art of War began to be corrupted, I should perhaps make it too
old; for Vegetius complains that the substance of that was well near spent, and
no more but a shadow of it left long before his time; which moved the Emperor
Valentinian to command him to compose a Systeme of the ancient Roman
Constitutions of War, which had been needless if they had been then in vigor:
and how Vegetius has acquitted himself of that undertaking, I have already
told you. But if I should date the age of the Modern Art of War from the time
that Gunpowder was invented, I might perhaps hit right enough at its age,
because no doubt Gunpowder made a great alteration on the whole face and body
of War. But I am sure I have but few, or rather no helps to write the Series of
its History, either from the decay of the Roman Militia, or from the time that
Gunpowder was heard to make so loud and so fearful a noise in the World.

Though we are told that the ancient Roman customs of War were worn out The
Militia of several ages forgot;
of use, yet none tell us when either they were restored, or yet what others
were brought in their room. Neither do we find that those who wrote Histories
after the decadency of the Roman Empire give us light in it; or yet what kind
of Militia was used by those Nations who had the confidence with their sharp
swords to cut out to themselves very large portions of the great bulk of that
almost Universal Monarchy. From History we know that the Goths, the Vandals,
the As that of the Goths, Vandals and Huns.
Huns, and the Longobards, invaded the Empire, and fought many successful
Battles with some Roman Emperors, and their Lieutenants, and that they
conquered Kingdoms by feats of War, and got them confirmed to them by articles
of peace. But what order these Nations kept in Modelling their Armies, what
Discipline to preserve them, how they armed them, what art they used in
Embatelling, fighting, or taking Towns, none of the Roman Writers that I know
of, has either told us, or given us ground to conjecture, except a few things
of one of the Theodoricks King of the Goths. And from those Nations who were
Barbarians, who it may be knew not what it was to read or write, we are not in
reason to expect any significant account.

As little do we know what manner of Militia was used in France, Germany,
Batavia, and England, when they first emancipated themselves from the
subjection That of the ancient Germans and Batavians.
of the Roman Empire. The Victories the Saracens had in all the three known
parts of the World, the whole power of the Emperors of Greece in the East,
with almost innumerable Armies from the West to recover the Holy Land from
those Saracens (long before the name of a Turk was heard of) not being That of
the Saracens.
able to keep Jerusalem long from them, demonstrate that they were well armed,
well trained, and had a Discipline of War, and that a very exquisite one; but
what it was, we are yet to seek, for any thing we find in History, and yet
those Expeditions are very famous, and stand authentically recorded. We read
that Charles Martel Major of the Palace in France, made War with the That of
Charles Martel. Pepin and Charles the Great.
Saracens, and in one Battle which he fought in Provence, laid one hundred
thousand of them in the dust. His Son Pepin made a successful War against the
Lombards in Italy at the instance of Pope Zachary; so did his Son Charles the
Great, against both them, the Pagan Saxons in Germany, and the Moors in Spain;
but how the Armies of either the one party or the other were armed, modeled,
marshalled, or Embattel'd, is wrapped up in the abyss of dark oblivion.

What shall we say since Fire-guns altered many of the ancient customs of War,
and by piecemeal has obtained the pre-eminence over almost all offensive
weapons, and challenges the Prerogative even before and over the Sword, the
Lance, and the Pike, much more over the Bow, the Arrow, Dart, Javelin and
Sling: and yet from History we are no more acquainted with the manner of War
since they came in use, than we were before their invention; of the truth
whereof take a short view.

What vast Provinces and goodly Countries the Turk since the birth of
Gunpowder, has acquired in Asia, Africa, and Europe, is obvious to our sight,
though the Histories of all Nations were silent. And though in the general we
are told We have but confused notions of the Turkish Militia,
that his order is good, the Government and Discipline observed in his numerous
Armies is strict and excellent, yet the particulars have been hitherto related
to us but very confusedly: neither does Mr. Rycaut in his Book of the present
state of the Ottoman Empire, Printed a few years ago, help us much, but rather
gives us occasion to think that the Turks have lost their ancient Art of War;
or if they still retain it, we must wonder how these Unbelievers have triumphed
over so many both Christian and Mohammedan people, with so undisciplined and
disorderly multitudes, as his relation makes them to be; for he says, their
principal Foot which are the Janissaries (reputed to have been the strength and
support of that great Monarchy) fight confusedly; and the Spahies (who are the
best of their Cavalry) fight likewise in little good order; he says, that
sometimes they charge thrice, and if they then break not the enemy, they fly;
and withal he makes their Artillery very insignificant, in regard that as he
writes, they have no Gunners but such as either they take Prisoners, or are
sold to them for Slaves, who stay no longer with them than any fair opportunity
is offered them to run away.

Though perhaps the Victories which the great Tamberlan obtained, and the And
of Tamberlans order of War;
celerity he used in making these Conquests, which have rendered him so famous,
be not so vast as Stories make them; yet we may believe his Achievements to
have been extraordinary, in regard the Great Mogul of India derives his
Pedigree in a lineal descent from him, and at this day possesses a vast and a
Great Empire, which is but a remnant of a far greater acquired by Tamberlan,
whose Discipline is cried up to have been exceeding strict, his Art of War so
exact and orderly, that he never went out of the Field without Victory, or from
a besieged Town without either its submission or destruction. It is written of
him that the day he fought with Bajazet at Mount Stella, his Army consisted of
a Million of men, and yet he made use of them all in the time of the Battle. If
this be all true, is it not pity that the manner of his Encamping, Besieging,
Embattelling, and fighting is not left on record to posterity?

And to come home, the Scottish, the English, and the French Histories tell us,
what bloody Engagements have been among them, and what Battles have been fought
with various success: but except that we are told that the French As also of
the Scottish, French and English.
Gens de Arms were numerous, besides their other Cavalry; that the English
used the Bow and the Bill, and had men of Arms likewise; and that the Scots
fought on Horseback with Lances and Jacks of Mail, and on foot with long Pikes,
Battel-axes, Bows, and two-handed Swords; what know we more of the Art of War
that any of all the three practiced, of the order they kept, how strong their
several Bodies and Batallions were, or what names they gave them, how deep they
Marshaled either their Horse or Foot, how they Embattell'd, how they Encamped,
and how they formed their Sieges? for all these we have nothing but ill
grounded conjectures, and very confused notions.

I know not whom we shall justly blame for this great defect, but the several
Generals of several Armies, belonging to several Nations, and in several ages,
who if either they could not, or would not write the History of their own or
others actions, (as Xenophon and Thucydides among the Grecians, Julius Caesar
and Cato Many Historiographers defective.
among the Romans, Monluc, and a few others in our Modern times), yet I think
they were obliged to cause their Secretaries to keep exact accounts of the
manner of these Sieges, and those Battles which under their Command were either
formed or fought, that so they might have been transmitted to posterity. Some
have done so, but most have neglected it, thinking it enough if their actions
were generally remembered, recommending the particulars to the information of
Historians, which many times is such that it looks rather like a Romance than a
true story. But I had rather you should hear Monluc that famous Marshal of
France upon this Subject, who in the Third Book of his first Tome, says, That
Historians who write the feats of War, describe seldom or never the
Particularities Monluc his Complaint of them.
of the action, as how such a Castle was surprised, in what order such a Town
was assaulted, or in what manner defended, how such two Armies were Marshaled
before they joined in Battle, how the Horsemen were armed, and how the Foot,
with many more circumstances necessary to be known by those who in time coming
desire to be instructed, and especially such as intend to serve their Prince
and Country in Military Employments, that from thence they may learn how to
demean themselves in the like occasions. But, says he, the whole multitude of
Historiographers conceive they do enough if they tell us such a Battle was
fought, such a Prince or General gained the Victory, such a City was besieged
and yielded, and such a one was taken by assault. For himself, he professes he
wrote his Commentaries to be registers of the actions of his time, the
particulars whereof might serve to inform those who were to come after him, how
to carry themselves either in Sieges, Assaults, Skirmishes, Rancounter, or
Batte^; for those, says he, who think they know not so much as I, will be glad
to learn of me, but those who fancy they know enough already, need no Master.
In another place he says, Historians are to be blamed for not writing
particular things, and of particular men: they think, says he, they do enough
if they name Princes, or Captain-Generals, and pass over with silence all other
persons that are not of so large a Stature. Thus far Monluc Marshal of France.

To this same purpose you may see Polybius his complaint in his Twelfth Book,
Polybius his complaint of them.
where he says, Historians first err, in not writing things truly, and as they
were done* and next that they give no particular account of the manner of
Battles, Skirmishes, Surprisals, and Sieges: and this he attributes to their
want of skill, and therefore wishes that all great Captains would write the
Histories of their own actions themselves.

These Complaints of Polybius and Monluc are just: but I complain of another
kind of Historians, who take upon them to give us descriptions of all those The
Authors complaint of some of them*
Particularities without having received particular relations from the
principal actors, and this they do either upon hear say, registring the fables
of vain and ignorant Sol^^ers (who either have been, or pretend to have been in
the action) for truths; or write according to their own apprehensions of
things, which many times are so pitifully weak, that their extravagancies put
knowing Readers on the rack, and force them to cast their Books away from them.
And indeed I have read the descriptions of some Battles in Books writ by no
mean Authors, wherein both Armies were Marshaled in such order that I could not
fancy it could be done by any except A^adis de Gaul, or the Knight of the Sun.

Let us except from these, of Modern Historians, Paolo Giovio, d'Avita, and the
other unknown Author of the History of the Civil Wars of France, Philip Noble
His^orians.
de Comines, Cardinal Bentivoglio, Strada, John Pe^it, Edward* Philips his late
History of England, Chemnitius his History of the Swedish Expedition, Theatrum
Europ^um, these two last written in high Dutch, and Di Sir^ who has written
the History of these times very Voluminously in Italian. These having either
been Actors themselves, or having got their relations from those Emperors,
Kings, Princes, or Generals who managed the Wars, have given us Histories well
worth the reading. To these we may add Guicciardin^, though for his prolixity
he be used very scurrilously by Boc^alini, who tells us that in Guicciardini
taxed by Boccalini.
Parnass^^ a Laconian (who had expressed his thoughts in three words which he
might have done in two) was ordered for his punishment to read Guicciardini.
The poor fellow begged rather to be fley'd alive, than be tortured with reading
an Historian who in the relation of the War between the Flor^ntines and Pisans,
made longer discourses of the taking a Pigeon house than he needed to have made
of the best fortified Castle.

Yet thus much most, if not all Historians agree on, when they speak of Armies,
they mention Van, Battle, and Rear; which shows that the Roman method of
Marshalling their Armies in three Bodies, one behind another, was observed by
most Nations, till of later years some Masters of the Military Art, for some
good reasons, thought it convenient to reduce them to two.

It is pity so few since Vegetius his time have shown themselves Tacticks, that
We have but few Tacticks*
is to teach us the Art of War used in their own time, for so we should have
known the Military Customs of several Nations, and of several ages. I have
heard t^^t Gonsalvo di Corduba (who by his gallant Conduct recovered the
Kingdom of Naples from the French for the House of Arragon) wrote in Spanish,
Tra^^ado de re Militari; if it be extant, it must be well worth the perusal, as
the work of one who by his great actions had acquired to himself the Title of
I^ Gran Capitan^.
It Gran Capitano, the ^reat Captain.

In the last year of the Reign of Henry the Fourth of France, about sixty years
ago, Louis de M^mgomery Lord of Carb^^s^^, wrote a little Book, De ^^ Louis de
M^^gomery.
Milice Francoise, of the French Militia; it shows him to have been very much a
Soldier, but the marrow of that piece lies in his descriptions of some
Artificial Fireworks, the knowledge whereof lies not in every man's way, nor is
it Preissac.
necessary for every Soldier, though it add to his perfection. The Si^^r de
Pr^issa^* wrote a little Treatise in French of Military Questions and Resolves,
very well Englished by Mr. Cruso, an understanding Captain, who I suppose wrote
Captain Crus^. Bockler*
himself in English a Book of Cavalry, well worth the reading. Bockler a German
Engineer, has not many years ago written in his own language a piece wherein
he gives us a pretty good account of the Military Customs of his own Country in
his own time, which may be from the year 1630, till the year 1664, or
thereabout. Lieutenant Colonel Elton, his Complete Body of the Military
Lieutenant Colonel Elton.
Art, with the Supplement added to it by Captain Rud, (without which it is not
a Complete Body) is a piece well worth the perusal. There are certainly others
who have writ of this Subject, whom I have neither seen nor read.

Some again there are who instead of informing us what method or ordinances of
War, Princes and States used in their time, (the want whereof I so much lament)
give us Models of their own framing, either in whole, or in part; for Princes
and States only to mould new Militia's.
my part I think any new mould of a Militia, or the reformation of an old one,
is the work of a Prince or State, who are able to bring together persons
experienced in all kind of Military affairs to give their advices, out of which
the Prince or State may frame such Constitutions as are thought most conducible
to carry on a War, and then by their authority impose a necessity of obedience
to those Constitutions; and therefore they should not be the work of any
private person. Brancati^ an Italian peremptorily condemns the use of the Pike;
and in imitation of him Mr. L^pto^ an English man writes a Book, wherein he
endeavors to prove the uselesness of that ancient weapon, but I shall meet
with his arguments in another place.

Machiavelli goes a greater length, and presents the world with a Milice of
Machiavelli his Books of War.
his own, the birth of his own brain, a hodg podg of some of the Ancient, and
some of the Modern Militia, with a mixture of many of his own inventions. In
his Books of that Subject, he fathers most of his notions on Fabritio Col^^^^,
an excellent Captain, who no doubt, if ever he had seen them, had rejected them
as spurious. Some of his mistakes I have touched in my Discourses of the Roman
Art of War, I shall only in this place trouble my Reader with two or three
Animadversions that will show his skill in Martial affairs.

In his fourth Book, he makes it one of his Maxims, that all good Captains
should rather receive than give the charge; of this I spoke in the Nineteenth
First observation of them.
Chapter of my Essays of the Roman Art of War, here I shall tell you the reason
he gives for his opinion. The first fury, says he, is easily sustained by firm
and experienced Soldiers, and then it vanishes in smoke. But I ask first, what
if they who are charged be neither firm nor experienced, for all Armies are not
composed of Veterans? next I ask, what if they be both firm and experienced,
and yet do not sustain the charge in thosew two cases, the first charge
vanishes not in smoke? Pompey his Soldiers were firm and experienced, yet did
not sustain C^sar^ Charge at Pharsalia: but of this I spoke enough in another
place.

In that same Fourth Book this Author shows us how an enemy may be surrounded
in time of Battle, and I pray you observe the Lesson he gives how to do it:
First, says he, let the front of your Army be Marshaled equal with that of
your Second.
enemy; then, says he, let your front retire by little and little, and your
flanks standing still shall environ your enemy. I doubt not but Machiavel
thought this a squint device, but it is a fancy only beseeming a Gentleman of
the long robe. If he had said, let your Battle stand, and your wings extend
themselves, he had spoke some sense; but a front to retire is an improper
speech, and unintelligible in the Art of War: for in strict and proper language
a Front and a Rear consists but each of them of one rank, whether that be of
ten, a hundred, a thousand, ten thousand, or twenry thousand Men, or Horse; so
the first rank which is the Front cannot retire further than six or three foot
allowed to be between it and the second rank, unless all the ranks, and
consequently the whole Batallion retire. I grant there be some who will have
the half of the ranks to be the Front, and the other half the Rear, as in our
Foot Batallions, which are six deep, the three first ranks make the Front, the
other three the Rear; but this, as I think, is not proper language, neither
will it help Machiavel; for his Front of the three first ranks cannot retire
till the three last ranks (that are behind them) retire first. Besides all
this, I doubt if in Machiavels time, Captains might well hazard more Third.
than now, to command a Batallion of men to retire, for fear they could not get
them to advance again, at least not so readily.

Justus Lipsius had reason to accuse Machiavel of gross ignorance for denying
the right ordering of a Militia to be an Art, and certainly his conceit to do
so Fourth.
was very extravagant; ^esides he contradicts himself, for he calls his
Treatise of War, I set libri del'arte della guerra di Nicolo Machiavelli,
Seven Books of the Art of War of Nicol Machiavell.

Indeed Soldiers are very little bound to him; for he says, neither Prince nor
State should suffer any of those who profess to live by the Art of War, to
dwell under them; nor does, says he, any virtuous or good man use it as an
art; and adds, that those who do so, must of necessity be false, fraudulent,
treacherous, and violent, for they must (says this Doctor) either obstruct all
peace, that the War continuing, they may thereby be maintained, or they must
pill, plunder, and make spoil of other men's goods in the time of War, that
thereby they may maintain themselves in the time of peace. This is bad enough
if it be all true.

These are his goodly arguments which are but his own idle dreams, for it is
Fifth Observation.
no difficil matter to keep men who make profession of Arms within the bounds
of their duty, even when they but seldom receive their wages; and this in this
age is visible to the whole world. Nor can many Instances be given where men of
War obstructed that peace which their Masters desired, or which both parties
were contented to make. And if after the conclusion of a peace, and disbanding
of Armies* any exorbitancies chance to be committed by the Soldiers (as seldom
any such thing falls out) they have been occasioned by too great a defalcation
of their pay, with the half or moity whereof all Modern Soldiers will be
heartily well contented, so perfectly have* they learned the Baptists Lesson in
the Gospel, to be content with their wages.

But to conclude, I know not whether I shall more cry up the lowliness of
spirit of those great Statesmen who are pleased to descend from their high
Corollary.
Spheres to learn their Politics from Machiavell, or commend the generosity of
those Captains who disdain to stoop so low as to receive their Lessons of the
Military Art from the Town Clerk of Florence.

I suppose all that can be expected from me in the following Discourses, is in
some places to set down wherein the ordinances and customs of War in all or
What the Author promises to do.
most of the several points or parts of it, in diverse Countries agree or
disagree, with the practice of the present times, and when I give my own
opinion, it shall be sparingly, and with submission: neither shall I decline to
go as far back in the ^nvestigation of the Customs and Constitutions of War in
former times, as I have either probable grounds for conjecture, or any glimpse
of light to conduct me.

Since I wrote this Chapter, I have seen some Frenchmen who having been
Soldiers themselves, have given us an account of the present French art and
order of War, as De la Valiere, Monsieur Louis de la Saya, and some others.

CHAP. II. Of Levies, the manner of several Nations in making them. Duties of
Soldiers when they are levied, their age, and how long they are bound to serve.
ARmies are properly the members of the great Body of War, and men are the
sinews of Armies. The best choice, election, or levy of men is of Voluntary
Levy.
the subjects of that Prince or State who makes the War, where the Law of the
Land imposes a necessity on men ^it for service, to enroll themselves
according to their several ranks and qualities. And this Levy alters its nature
according to the nature of the War, for if that be a Defensive one, the Levy is
Voluntary, for ordinarily men rise willingly in arms for the defense of their
Country, Lives, Wives and Children. But if the War be an Offensive one,
intended to invade a stranger, and such as leads Natives from their Countries
and Homes, and carries them to foreign lands; it is not universally voluntary,
and very often gets the name of a Press. In this kind of Levy most Nations
followed the custom of Press.
the Grecians and Romans, and chose most of their Cavalry out of the Gentlemen,
or the better sort, and the* Infantry out of the Commons; but the substance of
that custom is now vanished, and we have scarce the shadow of it left with us.

The Emperors of the High Dutch Nation, the German Princes, and Imperial
Towns, by the old Constitutions of the Empire, made an Election or Levy of
their Subjects according to their Laws, sometimes the tenth, sometimes the
sixth, or fifth man, or according to their Estates, in all their Wars, both
since Manner of the ancient Levy in Germany.
the Turk became their unwelcome neighbor, and before he had footing in
Europe. It is not above fourscore and ten years since in the reign of
Maximilian the Second, all that were Enrolled in the German Cavalry were by
birth Gentlemen; it is true they brought some of them one, some two, and some
three with them, who waited on them, well horsed and armed, for whom they
received wages, and were subject to articles of War; but these were called in
their language Einspanneers, to distinguish them from the Masters, who were of
necessity to be all Gentlemen, a custom worn clear out, most of German Troops
being now composed of Einspanneers, without Gentlemen, unless it be the
Officers, and not all of them neither.

The Commission of array in England is an excellent order, by which an Army In
England.
Royal may be brought together either for defense, or invasion in a very short
time.

The ancient custom of Levy in Scotland, as we are told, was to command all
between sixteen and sixty years of age to appear in every Shire, and you need
In Scotland.
not doubt but out of these an Election was made of such a number as the Kings
Lieutenants thought ^it. But in latter times a far better and more expedient
way was found out, and that was to impose the raising such a number of Horse
and Foot on every Shire proportionably according to the true valuation of the
Estates of the Heritors and Proprietaries. Assuredly a way very orderly,
methodical, and just, provided it never be made use of in an unjust cause.

The Kings of Sweden have constantly standing forces within the Kingdom to In
Sweden.
prevent both Invasions and Insurrections; they consist of Regiments and
Troops, which have their denominations from the Provinces where they are
raised, and where they reside, they have their Officers and Colors, and are
appointed at several times to meet, muster and exercise, but are not in pay,
only some small thing is given to the Captain and the Ensign, who ordinarily
are their Drill-masters, and upon that account get wages. But these Troops and
Regiments are sometimes carried out of Sweden to foreign Wars, and that in
great numbers, and others appointed to be raised in their rooms. As in the time
of Charles the Ninth they were carried to Liefland, against both Pole and
Muscovy; in the time of Gustavus Adolphus, and his Daughter Queen Christina, to
Livonia, Prussia, and Germany, and more lately by Charles Gustavus to Prussia,
Livonia, Pole, Germany, and Denmark.

The Kings of Denmark have their Country Militia for defense of the Kingdom,
In Denmark.
but are neither so orderly nor so numerous as those of Sweden, neither do they
take them so frequently to foreign expeditions as of old they did, when by
their mighty Armies they invaded many places of Germany, Scotland, and England,
and made an entire conquest of Normandy. But these were like the inundations of
the Huns, Lombards, Goths and Vandals (which two last, both the Sweedes and
Danes pretend to be their Ancestors) on the Roman Empire.

The like of such an Election or Levy has been in former times used in In
Spain.
Spain, and may be yet. But when we consider, that it has been often drained
of men, in the days of Philip the Second, for the maintenance of his Wars in
Italy, and the Low Countries, but more especially for his Plantations in
America, which began in his Father Charles the Fifth's time, and continued
during the Reigns of Philip the Third, and the Fourth; we must conclude, that
all the Spanish Levies made within that Kingdom, neither were, nor could be
voluntary.

The French Levies of old were all made of the Natives, the Cavalry consisting
of the Nobility, and in the number and strength of a Cavalry, France surpassed
any other European Nation. Charles the Seventh took the assistance of Scottish
Foot, who joined with his own in his long Wars with England. In France.
But his Son Lewis the Eleventh, beside the Scots, made use of the Switzers,
who had at that time acquired the reputation of a stout and warlike people, not
only in maintaining their liberties against the house of Austria, but in a
bloody War against Charles the Warlike Duke of Burgundy, whom they defeated in
three great Battles, in the last whereof they killed himself, if he be not yet
on his Pilgrimage to Jerusalem. These Switzers were so much the more highly
esteemed of by Lewis, because they had routed and undone his capital Enemy; of
them his Infantry was mostly composed; and he appointed some thousands of them
to guard his person, as his Father had appointed the Scots to guard his; but
Lewis kept the Scots likewise, and it was well for him that he did so, for they
defended his life valiantly at the Siege of Liege, when the Inhabitants by a
desperate Sally had pierced through the Burgundian Army even to his lodging, as
Philip of Comines relates the story. Not only while he lived, but in the reigns
of his Son Charles the Eight, and of his successor Lewis the Twelfth, did the
French Infantry consist of Switzers; but Francis the first having had some
bloody-trials of the Infidelity of these Mercenary Soldiers put on a resolution
to stand thereafter on his own legs, and not on those of strangers. In order to
which in the year 1534, in imitation of the Romans he appointed to be levied
and enrolled seven Legions of French Foot, French Legions six thousand each.
which made up a gallant Infantry of two and forty thousand men; how these were
armed, shall be told you in its own place. This Ordinance fell out to be made
in the days of Marshal Monluc, who seems in his Commentaries rather to
disapprove than approve of it; but gives not his reasons. I suppose these
Legions were kept up in the reigns of this Francis, who was the instituter of
them, and of his Son Henry the Second. But if I have observed right, they began
to wear out in the reigns of his Grandchildren, Charles the Ninth, and Henry
the Third, who in the time of their Civil Wars, made use again of the Switzers,
as also of Germans; and so did likewise the Protestants take the assistance of
both Horse and Foot of the German Nation, as you may find them ordinarily
designed in the French Histories under the name of Reuters, and Land^sknechts,
the first in the German Language signifying Riders, or Horsemen, the second,
Country fellows. For as I told you the Germans composed their Cavalry of
Gentlemen, and their Infantry, except the Officers, of Peasants.

In the Seventeen Provinces, both before they became all subject to the Dukes
of Burgundy, (when they were under several Dukes and Earls) and after the Levy
In the Low Countries.
of their Foot was imposed on the Commons to be made of the sixth, fourth or
tenth man, according to the danger of the Country, or for most part the
pleasure of the Prince. The Cavalry was made up of the Nobility, according to
their several qualities and abilities; and they were obliged to keep such a
number of serviceable Horses and Arms in the time of peace on their own
charges, having for that some exemptions and privileges, of no great
consideration; and in time of War they were paid with some small wages,
appointed at the first forming their Militia. Which Cavalry (says Bentivoglio)
used to be of a high repute and estimation: but now, says he, not being
composed of the Noblest, as formerly it was, but of common and ignoble persons
it is fallen extremely from its ancient honor and dignity. And observe that
this Cardinal wrote this long ago, to wit, in the year 1610. and therefore we
may conclude that the whole Militia of these Provinces belonging to the King of
Spain, is now much more degenerated, whereof our eyes can bear witness.

The Great Turks Levies are soon made, for the raising his Armies is but as In
Turkey.
the Randezvouzing of ours, all the members of his forces by land being one way
or other in his pay, before he wage War: his Foot, I mean the Janissaries, being
bred in their several S^rails and Seminaries, and in his pay. His Spahies and
Timariots, which compose his Cavalry, either possessing Lands, for which they
are bound to serve; or receiving weekly wages in time of peace out of the
several Treasuries through his Empire.

His Neighbor the Sophi of Persia, his Militia consists of Cavalry, most In
Persia.
whereof, if not all, are Gentlemen, excellently well Horsed and Armed, with
which he has often grapled with the Turks Armies, consisting of a more numerous
Cavalry, besides vast numbers of Foot, and a great Train of Artillery, of the
two last whereof the Sophi is destitute, unless it be of very late years.

The second kind of Levy is when Princes and States impose no necessity on
Second kind of Levy.
their Subjects to rise, but for making up their Armies, invite by Trumpet and
Drum all to take employment, whom either the desire of honor, riches, booty,
pay or wages may encourage to undergo their service. And this is that kind of
Election which now is universally and properly enough called a Levy. It is
certainly the only Voluntary Election, because the parties elect themselves
without A Voluntary Levy described.
the constraint of any Law, none being pressed to the service but such who of
their own inclinations engage themselves, and give their names to be Enrolled.
By this kind of Levy have most foreign Princes and States in our days raised
their Armies, the manner of it is shortly this: The Prince or State makes
choice of Colonels both for Horse and Foot, to whom they give Commissions or
Patents to raise Regiments of such a number of Companies, and such a number of
men in each Company or Troop as the Prince or State thinks fit; to this purpose
they give every Colonel a sum of money, so much for every Horseman, every
Dragoon, and every Footman, as they and that Colonel can agree. And these sums
vary often according to the fewness of Soldiers, the numbers of Armies and
Leviers, and the danger of the War, or good or bad pay of him who wageth it; so
that I have known ten Crowns not sufficient for a Foot soldier, where four
would have served the turn three or four years before. The Colonels are limited
ordinarily to such a time to have their Regiments ready, and for that purpose
have a place of Rendezvous appointed to them. The Colonels themselves give
Patents to their Lieutenant-Colonels, Majors, Ritmasters, and Captains, and
they to their Lieutenants, Ensigns, Cornets, Quarter masters, Sergeants, and
Corporals, immediately after Trumpets are sounded, and Drums beaten, and those
who present themselves, receive levy-moneys, and thereafter are entertained,
and their names being Enrolled* they are no more free, but bound to serve.
Observe here that the Prince or State make choice of such Colonels as they
think most proper to raise men for their service, either in their own
Countries, or foreign ones, where Levies are permitted to be made for them, by
their friends, Confederates and Allies.

The Emperors Ferdinand the Second and the Third, and this Emperor Leopold
Made use of by most of Princes in later times.
levied all their great Armies in the time of their long and bloody Wars by
sound of Trumpet, and beat of Drum. So have all the German Princes, and mostly
the Kings of France and Spain. The great King of Sweden, Gustavus Adolphus, his
Daughter Christina, and the late Swedish King Charles Gustavus made up most of
their Armies, and so did Christian the fourth King of Denmark (except some
Regiments of their native Swedes and Danes) of Dutch, Scots, and English,
raised all by this manner of Levy. But hereby you may easily fancy that the
ancient distinction and difference between the Cavalry and Infantry, as to
their birth and breeding, is wholly taken away, men's qualities and extractions,
being little or rather just nothing either regarded or inquired after; the most
of the Horsemen, as well as of the Foot, being composed of the very scum of the
Commons.

But there is worse than that, for where a War is of any long continuance,
Abuses and Inconveniences of this Voluntary Levy.
that Armies mouldring away, either new Regiments must be levied, or the old
recruited; this kind of Levy is grossly abused, and many there are who make a
trade of it, taking money from one, and presently running over to another. As I
said before, scarceness of Soldiers is the cause why Princes are the more
liberal of their Levy-moneys, he who carries the heaviest purse ordinarily
being master of most men; and this procures another great inconvenience and
mischief; the desire to be fingering a beneficial new Levy-money, inticeth many
to run from their Colors, and desert their Masters service. In the long German
War I have known in one Imperial Town six or seven Captains (whereof my self
was one) all levying for several Masters, and some Rogues receive money from
most of us, and yet go out of Town with none of us.

If these and many other inconveniences be considered, we may conclude the
Safest way of Levy.
surest and the safest way of Levy, is that a Prince or State makes of their
own Subjects, or of those whom they receive as Auxiliaries from their Allies,
as the great stock of the forces of the Estates of the United Provinces of the
Netherlands, Levies of the Estates of the united Provinces. ^
was of Regiments of Scots, English, Germans, and French, most whereof continue
in their service to this day, yet have these Estates been many times forced to
make use of this Levy by Trumpet and Drum, and never more than in this year
1672, being necessitated to levy not so few as fifty thousand Foot and Horse.

In all kinds of Levies such Officers should be chosen as are men of
understanding, What Soldiers should be elected.
and of some experience in Military matters. As to the Soldiers, whether there
they be to serve on Horse or Foot, the stature is not to be looked to so much
(whether it be tall, mean, or indifferent) as the proportionable and cleanly
connection of all the members of the body, which must be compact and strong, a
manly face, with lively, vigorous eyes, which denote the quickness and vivacity
of the mind, apt to learn what belongs to his Art. If the Soldier be to serve
on Foot, he ought to be such as has been inured to toil and hardship; for
which purpose, as the Roman custom was, choice should be made of such young
fellows who have had their breeding rather in the Country, than in Towns,
unless they be Mechanics, that are not of a Sedentary Trade. If he be to serve
on Horse, and that the Levy be not made by the Trumpet, but where a right
Election may be got, only such should be chosen, as are of an honest birth, for
their reputation will make them undergo any fatigue, and a little time will
inure them to toil, though they have been bred with ease and plenty.

I have formerly shown you what years made a man capable to be enrolled a
Soldier, among the Ancients. I shall tell you now, that though it be not
generally Soldiers age.
looked to by many, yet I find, that in our Modern Wars, most Captains conceive
sixteen years to be too young, and if so, I swear sixty is too old; they need
not be twenty, for if they be of such Bodies as I have described, they may pass
muster of eighteen; and if they be not infirm, wounded or mutilated, they may
well enough continue Soldiers till they be fifty and upwards; though, some
think, they should not serve after the forty sixth year of their age. So upon
this account of mine, those who levy, may enrol such as are not under eighteen,
nor above fifty: And this may be easily observed in Country Elections, where
there is choice, yet very often it is not done, for which the Officers are to
be blamed. But in that other Voluntary Levy made by the Drum, where Soldiers
are hired for Moneys, the age is seldom looked to, old and young, being
promiscuously enrolled, which is an intrinsecal defect of that kind of Levy. If
men may not be enrolled after the forty sixth or fiftieth year of their age, it
follows, they should then have their dismission, yet that is but seldom
practiced, Necessity (which is limited by no Law) detaining them very often
many years beyond that time, which is no new thing, having been often practiced
by the Romans, and How long they should serve.
other Ancients, as I have shown before. Some limit the time of a Soldiers
service from his Enrolling, which is just. The Sweedes order their Foot
Soldiers of their own Country to serve twenty five years, strangers fifteen;
but if they followed the Roman way, the Horsemen should serve but half that
time. The French King is more gracious to Soldiers, especially to strangers,
whom he orders to get their Dismissions (if they require them) after they have
served four or five years.

But for all I have said, I know not why all Kings, Princes, and Free States,
in their Election and Levy of Soldiers, should not follow the example of the
Great King of kings, and Lord of lords, who (as you may read in the first
Chapter of Numbers) ordered his Servant Moses to muster all Males fit for the
War, of twenty years old and upwards, and therefore we may conclude, he thought
all under that age unfit to go to the Wars.

As to the duties and qualifications of Soldiers, whether of Horse or Foot,
there be some who make so many of them, that if Princes keep none in their
service but such as quadrate with all their properties, they will make Duties
of Soldiers.
but very thin musters. But you may take all the duties of a Soldier (as the
Lacedaemonians did) to be three. First, To give exact and perfect obedience to
all the lawful commands of Superiors. Secondly, To endure the fatigue, travel,
and discommodities of War, whether it be in Marching, or working at Trenches,
Approaches, and Sieges, Hunger, thirst, and cold, with an exemplary patience.
Thirdly, In time of Battle, Skirmish or Assault, to resolve either to overcome,
or dye. But Reader, do not you seek Not to be expected to be perfectly in any
one.
all these in every Soldier, do not seek any of these exactly in every
Soldier, nay nor in any Soldier, for you will not find them; let it be
enough, if they have some of them in some degree, though not in perfection. And
why may you not comprehend the two last Duties under the first of Obedience?
For he who can obey his Superior exactly, will, when he is commanded, endure
any fatigue, and in any rencounter resolve to be victorious, or perish. And
indeed, Obedience is the very life of an Army. A All comprehended under
Obedience.
Laced^monian in a Skirmish, having overthrown an Enemy, was ready to have run
him through with his Sword; but hearing the Trumpet sound a Retreat, he left
him lying, and alive. Being asked, Why he did not dispatch him? Answered, He
was more serviceable to his Country by his Obedience, than by either his
Valor, or his Revenge. The Sacred Oracles tell us, that Obedience is better
than Sacrifice.

CHAP. III. Of Armor, or Defensive Arms, used by several Nations, both for
their Cavalry, and their Infantry.
WHat odds there is between a Man, armed both for Offense and Defense, and him
who only has Offensive Weapons, may soon be understood, though the practice
had never been seen. Why the same care is not taken now to defend men's Bodies
in the time of fight, as well, and as much as of old there was; since the
Offensive Weapons of later times, by the help of Fire, pierce more deeply and
more deadly, than any of the former ages did, Defensive Arms neglected*
before Gunpowder, I suppose cannot well be told. If the neglect be imputed to
Great Commanders, it were well done of Sovereign Princes and States, by their
authority to order the reformation of so hurtful an oversight. But perhaps this
reason will be given for it, because the long and continuated marches of our
Modern Armies, not only for many days, but for many weeks and months, both in
the extreme heat of Summer, and rainy and tempestuous weather of winter,
require that the Soldiers should be eased of the weight and trouble of their
Defensive Arms, that with less toil they may endure and undergo those marches.
To which I shall answer, first, that The Reasons why, answered.
we have no such Marches now adays, as the Ancients, especially the Romans had,
and if we consider that they in their Ambulatory March, walked twenty miles in
five hours; and in their cursory one, twenty five; and what a vast deal of
ground, what large and long Countries and Regions, they traced in complete
Arms, and burthe^'d otherwise, as if they had been Beasts of Carriage, we must
either blame our selves for not imitating them, or look upon most of their
stories as pure Fables. And if our Soldiers from the time of their first Levy
were habituated to wear at their Exercises and Drillings constantly their
Armor, and accustomed twice a week to march a good many miles in Arms, I mean
Defensive as well as Offensive; suppose the first week five or six, the second
seven, and so continue till they can march fifteen or sixteen miles in one day,
they would find it then an easy matter to march every day in Armor, for
custom is another nature; but this point of Exercising is generally neglected*
But Secondly, I say, if Ratio belli, or the present necessity of affairs
requires such a speedy and continuated March, then such an Army, as ordinarily
we call a flying one, should be made use of, consisting of light Horse,
Dragoons, and Musketeers; and the heavy armed Horse and Foot should be left to
march after, with as much haste as conveniently they can; to whom the light
armed in case of necessity, may easily make their Retreat; for to bring these
heavy armed forward (as I told you the Romans, and Grecians did) and then
permit them to cast away their Defensive Arms, is to denude your self of the
strength of your Forces and Army.

Our Modern Armies, as the ancient ones, consist of heavy and light armed, as
well Horse as Foot. In the Cavalry, the Cuirassier is the heavy armed, and the
Pike-man in the Infantry. The strength of all Armies ever was, and is the
Infantry, and the strength of it is the heavy armed. He who is in good
Armour-fights with courage, as fearing no wounds, and frightens him with whom
he fights, that is not so well armed. Pikemen then composing the Body Pike men
the Body of the Infantry, and it of the Army.
of the Infantry, and the men of Arms the Body of the Cavalry, should be armed
so that they may appear to an Enemy (when they come to the shock) as a Brazen
or Iron Wall. It is true, a Batallion of Pikes, without Defensive Arms, may,
being serr'd together, hinder a Troop of Horse from getting in among them; but
their Heads and Bodies being naked, and having nothing on either of them to
resist the force of a Carabine or Pistol-ball, (except it be a Buff-coat, and
for most part, not that) it is not to be fancied, but a Volley of shot from a
Body of Horse standing without the danger of the points of Pikes, will make
many of the Pikemen fall, which will so disorder their Body, that a sudden
Charge of Horse will easily break it. This is a great defect of our Modern
Militia, of which most Nations are now guilty; for though in all their
Constitutions of War there is an appointment for heavy armed Horse and Foot,
yet when we see Batallions of Pikes, we see them every where naked, unless it
be in the Netherlands, where some, and but some Companies represent the ancient
Militia; and we find an Universal de^ect in the Cavalry, as to the heavy armed,
there being but few Curiassiers in many Armies, and in very many none of them
at all to be seen.

Since the invention of Guns we find till these latter times all Nations did
allow defensive Arms to both Horse and Foot, according to the nature of the
service that was to be required of them. The Cavalry was ordinarily divided
into Curiassiers, and Harquebusiers, but I shall speak of that more fully
afterward. The first was to be completely armed, Man and Horse, and those we
call Men Defensive Arms for Horsemen.
at Arms, and the French, Gens d'Arms, which is the same thing. The
Harquebusiers had a Headpiece, back and breast, their Horses no arms at all.
But now for most part the case is altered, and instead of Curiassiers we have
Harquebusiers, and instead of Harquebusiers, we have Horsemen, only armed
offensively. Here I must answer an Objection, which is this, if the armor for
Horsemen be not Musket-proof, either the Bullet pierces through, or beats the
Iron into the Horsemans body, which is equally dangerous; and if it be proof,
it is exceeding troublesome to both man and horse; but I answer that there has
been, and are at this day Arms made that are proof, and of no considerable
weight, and it is supposed a Curiassier should be of a strong body, and should
ride a horse that for height and strength should be fit for that service,
wherein both he and his rider are to be employed, as I shall tell you afterward.

The heavy armed Foot-soldier, or Pikeman, should have a Headpiece, a For
Pikemen.
Back and Breast, a Belly-piece, Taslets for their Thighs, and Greeves for
their Arms, the Armor for their Heads, Breasts and Bellies, should be
Carrabineproof, and that for their Backs, Pistol-proof. But we shall rarely see
a Batallion of Pikes in such harness, and no wonder, since the Pike it self is
not now used so much as it has been, and still should be, of which I shall
speak at length in its proper place. But here it will be fit that I speak of
the supine carelessness and inexcusable inadvertency of Officers and Commanders,
in their Levies, who take no notice to make a difference of those who are to
carry Muskets and Pikes, distributing them promiscuously to the stronger and
the weaker; whereas, without all question, the tallest, biggest, and strongest
should be ordered to carry Pikes, that they may the better endure the weight of
their defensive Arms; nay, which is worse, I have known Muskets given to those
of the biggest stature, and Pikes to the unworthiest and silliest of the
Company, as if he who is not worthy to carry a Musket were sufficient to carry
a Pike, neither have I seen this abuse redressed, though often complained of to
Generals; so much have I seen a Pike, the Prince of Weapons, disparaged.

Many have thought it fit to give Musketeers some defensive Arms, as a Head,
For Musketeers.
Back and Breast-piece, and truly I wish that custom were continued; for though
most of the ordinary Armor that is given them be little better than
Pistolproof, if it be so good, yet it encourages them who wear it; and if, as I
said before, they be exercised, trained, and accustomed with it, it will not at
all be troublesome to them, either in their march, or on service; for we find
the ancient light armed, especially among the Romans, pretty well armed for
defense, and from thence they had the name of light armed to distinguish them
from the heavy armed Legionaries.

I think I may in this place reckon the Swedish Feather among the defensive
Swedish Feather.
Arms, though it does participate of both defense and offense: It is a Stake
five or six foot long, and about four finger thick, with a piece of sharp Iron
nailed to each end of it; by the one it is made fast in the ground in such a
manner that the other end lies out so that it may meet with the breast of a
Horse, whereby a Body of Musketeers is defended as with a Pallisado, against
the rude charge of a Squadron of Horse, which in the mean time they gall and
disorder with their shot. I have seen them made use of in Germany, and before I
left that War, saw them likewise worn out of use. When the Infantry by several
Regiments or Brigades are drawn up in Battle, and the Pikes and those Stakes
fixed in the ground, they make a delightful show, representing a Wood, the
Pikes resembling the tall trees, and the Stakes the shrubs. Gustavus Adolphus
was the first Swedish King that used them, and it is said he invented them in
his Wars in Liefland against the Polonians, who far overpowered him in Horse. I
believe he used them first there, but the invention of them is of a far older
date than the Swedes would have them to be; for Henry the Fifth, King of
England, the night before the Battle of Agencourt fearing to be born down by
the French Kings numerous Used by Henry the Fifth at Agen-court.
Cavalry, caused each of his Bowmen to provide one of these Stakes (whereof the
Vines there afforded him plenty) and being made sharp at both ends, though they
were not pointed with Iron, they did his business well enough, and contributed
not a little to the gaining of that Victory which gave him so great footing in
France.

To this kind of defensive Arms may be reduced that invention of Rangon in
Rangons frame of Defense.
the French Army, in the Reign of Francis the first, which was a great frame of
Timber that could be taken in pieces, and carried on Carts, and easily joined
together, whereby Batallions were barricado'd, and served but to little
purpose. As also that frame which (as I have heard from some Commanders) the
Great Duke of Muscovia uses, with which the Russians are so well acquainted,
Muscovian Barricado.
that they can very suddenly piece it together, and shroud themselves within
it, from the charge of Horse, and as nimbly take it down and march away with it.

In my last Chapter of the Grecian Militia, I spoke of the French defensive
French Defensive Arms.
Arms, both for their Horse and Foot in the Reign of Henry the Second, far
different from those that are used now.

The Turk uses defensive Arms, but neither so good or so many as other Turks.
Nations do.

The Persian Curiassiers are armed all over their Bodies, men and horse, and
Persian.
this perhaps helps them to over-master the Turk in Cavalry. Their Head-pieces
are decked with fair and large Plumes of Feathers, and their Targets (which they
likewise use) are gilded, they have likewise light Horsemen, who carry Head
pieces and Corslets.

When the Mamalucks had the Sovereignty of Egypt, Syria, and Palestine, the
Mamalucks.
better sort of them (for all were Horsemen) were armed for the Defensive, from
head to foot, man and horse; the second sort carried large Targets wherewith
they defended their Bodies in the shock, but before they came to it, they threw
these Targets over their backs, till they made use of their Bows and Arrows.

The Abyssens or Aethiopians one hundred and forty years ago, armed their
Abyssens.
Horsemen with Coats of Male, which covered their whole bodies to their knees;
Mor^ions for their heads, and in their hands round Targets.

In the days of Charles the Fifth the Bohemians had great Targets or Shields,
Bohemians.
wherewith they covered their whole bodies. Before that time, and since too,
the Hungarians, Walachians, and Transylvanians used Head pieces, Corslets, and
Hungarians.
Targets.

Since Gunpowder, the Englishmen at Arms, or Curiassiers, were armed at all
English.
pieces, their light Horsemen with Morrions, Jacks, and Sleeves of Male.

So were our Scots, who used also Steel-caps, or Bonnets. Scottish.


John Pety^ in his History of the Netherlands tells us, that in the year 1599,
when the Estates of the United Provinces were making vast preparations for the
prosecution Hollanders.
of the War against Spain, and to that purpose were levying both Foot and
Horse, they made an Ordnance for the Arms that both their Horsemen and Footmen
should carry: of the Defensive he gives us this account, The Reuters or
Horsemen (suppose Curiassiers) were to have a Headpiece, a Gorget, a Breast
and a Back, two Poldrons, a Gantlet for his left hand, belly and thigh, and
Knee-pieces, and Culots, (which, says he, were pieces of Armor to defend the
reins.) The Carabiners were to have a Headpiece, a Gorget, a Back and a
Breast. The Pikemen, Head-pieces, Gorgets, Backs and Breasts. The Musketeers,
Head-pieces. What Offensive Arms, or Weapons all these Nations used I am to
tell you just now.

CHAP. IV. Of Offensive Arms, or Weapons used by the Cavalry of several Nations.
THat there is no new thing under the Sun, and that what is, has been, may
admit of a favorable Interpretation; for time was when neither Pistol nor
Carrabine were known in the world; neither did Antiquity know Gunpowder, which
is the Mother of them both, and many other Engines of fire. The Sword is a
weapon that is never out of fashion, used in all ages, and by The Sword*
all Nations of the world; though the difference be that some Horsemen use
long, and some short Swords. But this should not be left to the choice of the
Horsemen, for the length of their Swords should be limited to them by the
Prince or State they serve* Few tell us whether the Swords of the Horsemen they
write of, were for cutting, or for thrusting, or for both, as the Roman Swords
were. The Persians, Turks, Russians, Polonians, and Hungarians, for most part
wear Scimiters and Shables, which being crooked, serve only for shearing, and
not at all for stabbing.

Monluc in the first Book of his first Tome, says, that in the Reign of Francis
the first, about a hundred and forty years ago, the French Gens d'Arms carried
broad Swords, which were so well edged, that they could cut through Sleeves and
Caps of Male. The Scots and English used constantly broad Swords, for if we
believe some of the English Histories, a Rapier is so new a Weapon in England,
that it is not yet above one hundred years old. In the time of the late
Troubles in England long Rapiers were used for a while, and then laid aside.
The German Horsemen use Swords fit both to slash and thrust. John Pety^ in that
place mentioned in the last Chapter, says, The Estates of Holland ordered their
Horsemen to carry short Swords according to such a length appointed for that
purpose. It were to be wished that if Horsemen be obliged by their capitulation
to furnish themselves with Swords, that their Officers would see them provided
of better than ordinarily most of them carry, which are such as may be well
enough resisted by either a good Felt, or a Buff-coat.

A Mace is an ancient weapon for a Horseman, neither was it out of use long The
Mace.
after the invention of Hand-guns for we read of them frequently used by most
Nations an hundred years ago. And certainly in a Medley they may be more
serviceable than Swords; for when they were guided by a strong arm, we find the
party struck with them, was either felled from his horse, or having his
Headpiece beat close to his head, was made reel in his Saddle, with his blood
running plentifully out of his nose.

The Lance was the Horsemans weapon, wherewith he charged; neither do I The
Lance.
find that any Nation wanted it, long after the invention of the Pistol.
Whether the Lance be laid aside as useless in Germany, England, Scotland,
France, Denmark, and Sweden, by the command of several Princes, or only worn
out by time, I know not; but that it is not used in these places, is certain
enough. And truly I wonder why it should not now rather be used when the
nakedness of men's breasts without defensive Arms, renders them more obnoxious
to the stroke or push of a Lance than in former times, when few or no Horsemen
were to be seen without a Corslet. I shall not doubt but there be strong
reasons (though I know them not) why our European Generals for most part have
abandoned the use of the Lance, yet it will not be denied but it has been a
serviceable weapon heretofore, even since Gunpowder, and all manner of Guns
were found out. I shall The Lance made useless by many Nations.
give but one instance* at that memorable Battle of Dreux fought about an
hundred years ago, the Prince of Conde, and Admiral Chastillon, who conducted
the Protestant Army by the reiterated Charges of their men of Arms with Lances,
after strong opposition broke the great Batallion of the Switzers, which was
composed of Pikemen, and was thought Invincible, and killed on the place
seventeen of their Captains. After the death of the Marshal St. Andre, and the
taking of the great Constable Montmorancy, two of the French Kings Generals;
the Prince of Conde was likewise made Prisoner by the Royal party, and the
Admiral forced out of the field by the Duke of Guise and his Cavalry.

The Admiral rallies, and that night proposed to his German Reuters, (who had
each of them a Case of Pistols, and many of them Carrabines) to march back and
fall on the Duke of Guise, then both weary and secure. But though that German
Body of Horse was whole and entire, yet did the Commanders of it A very
remarkable passage.
remonstrate to the Admiral, that it was impossible for them to break the
French Batallion of Foot which had kept the Field with the Duke; and I pray you
observe the reason they gave for it, Because, said they, we have no Lances,
which are only proper for that, for the French men at Arms who had with Lances
broke the Switzers, were then dissipated, or over-wearied, and all their Lances
broken. If this be true, it would seem that the manner of the Milice then, and
the Milice now, are very different, though both Modern. A Cavalry then armed
with Lances acknowledged to be able to break an armed Batallion of Foot,
whereof it gave a perfect demonstration; and a Cavalry then armed offensively
with Carrabine, Pistol and Sword, and not without defensive Arms, declares it
self incapable for it. And now the Carrabiners or Harquebusiers are thought
only proper for Rencounters, and the Lanciers are laid aside as useless.

But the Lance meets with better usage from other Nations, even to this hour.
Hungarians use the Lance. And the A^yssens, As also the Persians.
The Polonians and Hungarians use it, and so does the Turk. The Abyssens on
horseback use strong Lances, pointed at both ends, and great Maces of Iron. The
Persians (accounted the best Horsemen in the world) carry Lances very strong,
they are pointed at both ends, they carry them in the middle, and manage them
with great strength and dexterity. Giovio tells us that at Scyrus a Persian
Arms excellent.
great City of Mesopotamia, the Persians had many Shops, wherein the best Arms
of the World were to be sold, and that not far from it at Charmaum, were Swords
and Points of Lances made of so well tempered Steel, that our European Corslets
and Head-pieces could hardly resist the stroke of the first, and push of the
other; and that all Arms either for man or horse, whether offensive or
defensive were of Steel and Iron, well boiled with the juice of certain herbs
only known to the forgers, which made them so excellent. He adds, that these
Arms are bought by the Turks at excessive rates: but truly I think it was no
good policy to suffer them to be sold at any rate to so dangerous an enemy, and
so malignant a neighbor; but perhaps no inhibition would serve the turn, for
Auri sacra fames hearkens to no Law.

John Petyt tells us in the forementioned place that the General Estates of the
The Hollander rejects the Lance.
United Provinces in the year 1599, forbad their Cavalry to make use any more
of the Lance; but I find in Bentivoglio, the use of it was retained in the
Spanish Armies by Archduke Albert, and Marquis Spinola, in the year 1612, after
the Truce with the Hollanders. But the States commanded their Horsemen to wear
Coats above their Armor; these Coats according to the quality of him or them
who wore them, were fine, rich, and glistering, and are ordinarily called Coats
of Arms. The Grecians called them Ephaestries, and the Romans, Chlamides. But
now since few men are armed for the Defensive, few need Coats of Arms.

The Ancients made use of Bow and Arrow on horseback, and so in later Archers
on Horseback.
times have the Walacbians and Transylvanians, and so did the French till the
practice of Hand guns made them useless, and yet with them Horsemen armed with
Pistols, are still called Archers.

An hundred years ago the French Archers who attended the Gens d'Armes, carried
in their hand a half Lance, and one Pistol at their Saddle, and a Sword French
Arms.
at their side; the Arms of the light Horsemen differed little from these. The
Harquebusiers had Swords at their sides, and Harquebusses at their Saddles, the
Barrels whereof were three foot long. About seventy years ago the Estates of
Holland ordered these Horsemen, whom they called Carabiners, to carry
Hollanders Arms for Horse.
each of them a Piece three foot long, and their other Horsemen Pistols at
their Saddles, the Barrels whereof were two foot long. Generally now all
Horsemen, whether C^^rassiers or Harquebusiers, carry Swords at their sides,
and a case of Pistols at their Saddles; and these are mostly all their
Offensive Weapons, except that some carry Carabines, some whereof have Barrels
of four foot long, but ordinarily only three.

The Pistol was invented first by Camillo Vitelli, an Italian, when Ferdinand
of The Pistol when invented.
Arragon reigned in Spain, Charles the Eighth, and Lewis the Twelfth in France,
Henry the Eighth in England, and James the Fifth in Scotland, not above one
hundred and fifty years ago, and consequently more than two hundred years after
the German Monk had found out Gunpowder. The Harquebuss is of an older date.
The bore of the Pistol long ago was made for twenty Its ^ore.
Bullets in one pound of Lead, but it being found that the Ball entered not
easily, generally they cast one pound of Lead in four and twenty Pistol-ball:
The half of the weight of powder serves, if it be good; if not, they take two
thirds; as for one pound and a half of Lead, one pound of Powder; but if it be
fine, half will serve, as for two pounds of Lead, one pound of Powder. The
Barrel of the Pistol may be two foot for the longest, sixteen Its Barrel.
inches for the shortest. The French use Locks with half-bends, and so do for
most part the English and the Scots; the Germans, Rore or Wheelworks: Its
charge of Powder.
The Hollander makes use of both. If the Chamber of a Pistol be laden three
times the Diameter of her bore with Powder (which is easily measured by her
Rammer) she has her due charge. But all Horsemen should always have the
charges of their Pistols ready in Patrows, the Powder made up compactly in
Paper, and the Ball tied to it with a piece of Packthred.

The Carabiners carry their Carabines in Bandileers of Leather about their
neck, a far easier way than long ago, when they hung them at their Saddles.
Some instead of Carabines carry Blunderbusses, which are short Blunderbuss.
Hand-guns of a great bore, wherein they may put several Pistol or
Carabine-Balls, or small Slugs of Iron. I do believe the word is corrupted, for
I guess it is a German term, and should be Donnerbuchs, and that is, Thundering
Guns; Donner signifying Thunder, and Buchs a Gun.

CHAP. V. Of Offensive Arms or Weapons, used by the Infantry of several Nations.
I Have said before, that the Foot is the body and strength of an Army, the
Horse being placed on its sides or flanks, are called Wings. The Infantry was
by all the Ancient, and is still by all Modern Warriors divided into heavy and
light armed. In former times, as I have told you, the Velites, or light armed,
were sometimes ordered to fight in the Rear, sometimes on the Flanks, but for
most part in the Van of the heavy armed. Now they are almost constantly
embattel'd on the Flanks. Both of them have their denominations from the Arms
they carry. The Defensive Arms of the Foot, since the Invention of Guns, and
long before it, were near upon the matter the same among most Nations, but the
Offensive has not been constantly alike, since the noise of Powder, scarce in
any Nation.

The heavy armed carried universally in all Modern Armies, besides Swords Long
Weapons.
and Daggers, long Weapons, such as Pikes, Half-Pikes, long Javelines,
Partisans and Halberds, all comprehended by the French under the name of long
Bois, or long Staves. And, as I have told you in another place, with all these
were the Foot Batallions of Henry the Second of France provided, when he
marched into Germany against Charles the Fifth, one hundred and twenty years
ago, most of all which had Pistols at their girdles. His Predecessor Charles
the Seventh, having had a sad experience how pitifully the English Bow-men had
disordered both his Foot and his Horse, instituted also Archers; but those,
after the use of the Harquebuss came to be known, threw away their Bows and
Arrows.

But the English retained the use of the Bow much longer; and no wonder, Bow.
they were loath to part with a Weapon, which had done them so great service.
For we find that Henry the Eighth made good use of his Bow-men in his Wars in
France, when he besieged first Terou^nne, and thereafter Bulloigne; and though
Marshal Monluc, speaking of this last Siege, in his Commentaries, seems to make
a small account of the Bow, yet he might have remembered, how much mischief his
Contrymen had received in former times from it.

The Bow is distinguished in the Long-bow, and the Cross-bow, the first The
long Bow.
requires a strong arm either so by nature, or made so by habit, and long
practice. It is, without doubt, a very ancient Weapon, and universally used by
most, if not all Nations, Master Norton in his practice of Artillery thinks it
was used before the general Deluge; his reason is, because the Almighty gave
the Rainbow as a sign, that he would not destroy mankind again with Rain, and
he calls it his Bow, to distinguish it from that of Men. Since the Flood, we
read of it in all Histories, both Sacred and Profane: The Romans of all
Nations used it least, for it came not in request with them, till the reigns of
the Emperors, and before that time Bows were used only by their Auxiliaries,
and not by themselves, or their Allies, whatever Vegetius seems to say to the
contrary, whereof I have spoken in another place. The Bow is now in Europe
useless, and why I cannot tell, since it is certain enough, Arrows would do
more mischief now, than formerly they did; since neither Men nor Horses are so
well armed now to resist them, as in former ages they used to be. There are
some who bring reasons, for bringing the Reasons for bringing back the use of
the Bow.
Bow again into use, such as these. First, Arrows exceedingly gall Horses, and
consequently disorder their Squadrons, because being so hurt, they will not be
managed by their Riders. Secondly, A Bow-man can shoot many more Arrows than a
Musketeer Bullets. Thirdly, All the Ranks of Archers, though twenty, may shoot
their Arrows over their Leaders heads, with equal mischief to an Enemy, whereas
Musketeers can conveniently but deliver their shot by one Rank after another,
or by three Ranks at most, by kneeling, stooping, and standing, seldom
practiced, and only at a dead lift. These reasons to me are unanswerable, and I
think might weigh much with Princes, to make the half, or at least a third of
their Velites to be Archers, and by the bargain they might save much money
expended on Powder and Lead: but to them and Free States belongs only the
Reformation of abuses in the Militia. And therefore I shall say no more of the
Long-bow, than that it has been an Offensive Weapon since Hand-guns were used,
as well as before.

The Cross-bow requires but little strength to manage it, a Weapon much The
Crossbow.
used in France, when Fire-guns were rare. Monluc (whom I look upon as an
unquestionable Author) informs us, that in the beginning of the reign of
Francis the First, in a Company of two hundred French Foot, most of the light
armed were Cross-bow men, and there were not above six or seven Harquebusses
among them all, and all along in his Commentaries he frequently mentions
Cross-bows: In his first Book he tells us, how he made a Retreat, when he was
but a private Captain, from some Imperialists; and he says, when his Cross
Bow-men had spent all their missiles, he caused them to draw their Swords, and
hold them in their right hands, and their Cross-bows in their left, so to use
them as Targets, and in that posture of defense, he says, he got off, though
with some loss; whereat we need not wonder.

I do not directly find the time of the Harquebusses invention, but you may The
H^rquebass
suppose (since they were so rare in France a hundred and fifty years ago, as
appears by Monluc's relation, they were not known a hundred and sixty years
after their mother Gunpowders birth. But long before the death of that same
King Francis the first, mentioned by Monluc, the Harquebuss was become more
common in France, and the number of the Harquebussiers was mightily increased;
for of those seven French Legions which I told you were instituted by that
King, and which consisted of forty and two thousand Combatants, twelve thousand
were appointed to be Harquebussiers, and so in process of time the Harquebuss
Banisheth Bow^.
encroach'd so fast on both the Long and Cross-bow, that it chased them both
out of all our European Armies.

About that time when the Emperor Charles the Fifth and his Brother Ferdinand
Encamped with a numerous Army of Christians near Vienna in Austria on the banks
of the River Danube, expecting the coming of Sultan Soliman, the Christian
Infantry consisted of eighty thousand, sixty thousand whereof were Pikemen, or
those who carried long Staves, and twenty thousand were Harquebussiers.

Among the heavy armed, the Bohem^ans were observed to carry Javelins, at the
one end of which was tied fast a Mace of Iron (it was tied with a short chain
of Iron) the Mace was one foot and a half long, wherewith (says Paolo Giovio)
these Bohemians could give so strong blows that they could fell men Bohemian
Offensive Arms.
(though in never so strong Armor) stark dead. Our Author was an eyewitness,
but the Turks were wiser at that time than to come within their reach, for
Soliman marched back.

Now room for the Musket, and room it has largely gotten, for it has banished
from the light armed Foot, Darts, Slings, Long-bows, Cross-bows, Musket
banisheth the Harquebuss;
and the Harquebusses too: Our present Militia acknowledging no other Weapon
for the light armed Infantry, but the Musket and the Sword; and this last I
have seen sometimes laid aside for a time, that it might not impede the
manageing the Musket by its Embarras. And indeed when Musketeers have spent
their Powder, and come to blows, the Butt-end of their Musket may do an enemy
more hurt than these despicable Swords, which most Musketeers wear at their
sides. In such Medleys Knives whose blades are one foot long, made both for
cutting and thrusting, (the haft being made to fill the bore of the Musket)
will do more execution than either Sword, or Butt of Musket.

Most think that this Hand-gun of a Musket was never used till the Siege of
When first used.
Rhegium, in the year 1520, little more than a hundred and fifty years ago, and
I doubt much, if it be so old, and assuredly if it be, it has spent forty
years of its age before it learned to speak, for about the year 1560, some
Muskets were mixed with Harquebusses, and but a few of them too, till practice
made them so numerous, that no other Guns were used by the Foot. The longer a
Its length.
Musket is (so it be manageable) the better, for she shoots the further, and
the stronger, her Chamber being able to contain the more Powder; and experience
daily teaches what advantage a long Musket has of a short one. Fifty years
ago the Calibre of the Musket was ordained by most Princes, particularly by the
Estates of Holland to receive a Bullet, whereof ten were to be cast of one
pound of Lead; that has not been thought convenient since, and therefore most
allow twelve balls of one pound of Lead for a Musket. In the year 1657, the
King of Denmark agreed with five Colonels of us to furnish our Regiments with
Muskets of a bore to receive a ball, whereof fourteen should go to one Its Bore.
pound of Lead. I confess this bore was too small for a Musket. A Musket
requires the half weight of her ball in fine Powder, and two thirds of common
Powder, that is one pound of fine Powder to two pounds of Lead, and two Its
Charge of Powder.
pounds of ordinary powder for three pounds of Lead.

Musket-Rests were used a long time, and in some places are yet, to ease the
Musketeers in discharging their Guns, and when they stood Sentinel. But in the
Musket-Rests are worn out.
late Expeditions in most places of Christendom, they have been found more
troublesome than helpful, a Musketeer in any sudden occasion not being well
able to do his duty with Musket, Sword, and Rest, especially if you give him a
Swedish Feather to manage with them. Bockler the Engineer speaks of an
Instrument that might serve for both Rest and Feather, and such perhaps would
be very useful and convenient. He would have it at the top, as all Rests are,
like a Fork, An Ins^ument both a Rest and a Pallisado.
on the one side whereof, he would have an Iron of one foot and a half long
sticking out sharply pointed; th^se planted in the Van or Flanks, where you
expect the Charge, as the Swedish Feathers use to be, will sufficiently
Pallisado and defend a Body of Musketeers from Horse, and upon them they may
lean their Muskets when they give fire. To a Musketeer belongs also a Bandelier
of Leather, at which he should have hanging eleven or twelve shot of Powder, a
Powder-flasks inconvenient.
bag for his ball, a primer, and a cleanser. But it is thirty years ago since I
saw these laid aside in some German Armies; for it is impossible for Soldiers,
especially wanting Cloaks (and more want Cloaks than have any) to keep these
flasks (though well and strongly made) from snow and rain, which s^^n spoils
them, and so makes the Powder altogether useless. Besides, the noise of them
betray those who carry them in all Surprizals, Anslachts, and sudden
enterprises. Instead Musket-Patrons better.
of those let Patrons be made, such as Horsemen use, whereof each Musketeer
should be provided of a dozen; these should be kept in a bag of strong leather,
or the skin of some beast well sowed, that it be proof against rain, this bag
he may carry about his neck in a Bandelier, or if the weather be extremely
rainy, in one of his Pockets, and in the other a horn with Priming Powder, and
his Cleanser tied to it. By this a Musketeer has these advantages, he shall be
sure to charge with dry Powder, and that is no small advantage; next, it is a
more ready way to charge than the other, for he has no more to do but to bite
off a little of the Paper of his Patron, and put his Charge of Powder and Ball
in at once, and then ram both home. Thirdly, his Musket shall have her full
Charge, for it is impossible to lose any of the Powder, unless he lose it all,
and a full Charge makes a strong and a sure shot. If this were tried at home
with us, as it is by some abroad, our Powder flasks would be sold cheap.

It is impossible to hide burning Matches so well in the nightime, especially
if Burning Matches bewray Enterprises
there is any wind, (though there be covers made of white Iron, like
extinguishers purposely for that end) but that some of them will be seen by a
vigilant enemy, and thereby many secret enterprises are lost. It were therefore
good, that for the half of the Muskets (if not for them all) flint-locks were
made and kept carefully by the Captain of Arms of each Company, that upon any
such occasion or party, the half or more of the other Locks might be
immediately taken off, and the flint-ones clapped on by the Gunsmith of the
Company, and then there would be no danger of seeing burning Matches, the sight
whereof has ruined many good designs: I shall give you but one instance for
all. Not long after the invention of the Musket, some Spaniards were almost
starved to death in Instanced.
Coron, by a Blockade of the Turks, they hazarded desperately and sallied out,
and though they had some miles to march, yet they did it with great courage,
and all imaginable industry and silence, and had assuredly taken the Infidels
^^pping if their burning Matches had not bewrayed their approach, and this only
marred the achievement of a noble exploit. It is true, they made a handsome
retreat, but with great loss, and with the death of their chief Commander, one
Machichao, a Noble and stout Gentleman. I should have told you that all the
Muskets of one Army, yea under one Prince or State should be of one Calibre, or
bore.

There are besides these I have mentioned, other Weapons for the Foot, such
Other Weapons for Foot.
as long Rapiers and Touks, Shables, two handed Swords, Hangmens Swords,
Javelins, Morning stars, but most of these are rather for the defense of Towns,
Forts, Trenches, Batteries and Approaches, than for the Field. And as our light
armed Foot are now for most part armed with Sword and Musket, so our heavy
armed offensively are with Sword and Pike.

As I told you of the Musket, so I tell you of the Pike, the longer it is (so
it be manageable) the more advantage it has. In our Modern Wars it is ordered
by most Princes and States to be eighteen foot long, yet few exceed fifteen;
and if Officers be not careful to prevent it, many base Soldiers will cut some
off the length of that, as I have often seen it done: It were fit therefore that
every Pike had the Captains name or mark at each end of it. The Grecians knew
very A Pike
well what advantage the longest Pike had: the Macedonians (as I said before)
made their Pikes three foot longer than the other Grecians did. Nor has this
advantage been unknown in our Modern Wars, whereof Giovio gives us a remarkable
instance: Pope Alexander the Sixth waged a War with a Veteran Army conducted by
experimented Captains, his Foot consisted of Germans armed offensively with
Pikes. The Vrsines levy new and raw Soldiers, most consisting of their own
Vassals and Peasants, these they arm with P^kes, but each of them two Foot at
least longer than those the Popes Germans carried. The two Armies meet The
longer, the better.
in a plain Field at Suriano in the Papacy, and fight; the Vrsine Peasants led
by stout Commanders, killed most of the first ranks of the Popish Pikemen by
the length of their Pikes, and immediately after routed the whole Body, not
suffering one German to escape; upon this the Popes Cavalry fled, and the
Vrsi^^s keeping the Field, forced his Holiness to grant them against his will,
an advantageous Peace.

I shall not here speak of the number of Pikemen allowed to each Company, I
shall do that in its due place, but it seems strange to me there should be so
little esteem made of the Pike in most places, it being so useful and so
necessary a weapon. Thirty years ago when the War was very hot in the German
Empire, between the Emperor Ferdinand and the Catholic League (as it was
called) on the one part, and the Swede and the Evangelick Union (as they called
it) on the other, I saw such an universal contempt of the Pike that I could not
admire The Pike very much neglected,
it enough; for though after Gustavus Adolphus King of Sweden entered Germany,
Squadrons and Batallions of Pikes were to be seen in all Regiments and Brigades
of both parties, and that Pikemen were still accounted the Body of the
Infantry, yet after his Victory at Leipsick over the Imperial forces under
Tily, the Kings Marches were so quick in pursuance of his successes, which
followed one In Germany,
on the heels of another, and the retreats also of other Armies from him, were
so speedy, that first the Pikemans defensive Arms were cast away, and after
them the Pike it self, insomuch that all who hereafter were levied and
enrolled, called for Muskets. But notwithstanding this, when new Regiments were
levied after that great Kings death, Colonels and Captains were ever ordered to
levy and arm Pikemen proportionably to the Musketeers; yet after they had
endured some fatigue, the Pike was again cast away, and no Soldiers but
Musketeers were to be seen. Whether this was done by the supine negligence of
the Officers, especially the Colonels, or for the contempt they had of the
Pike, I know not. But I am sure that for some years together I have seen many
weak Regiments composed merely of Musketeers, without one Pikeman in any of
them, and surely they were so much the weaker for that. Nor did I find long
after that, that the Pike got better entertainment in other places than in
Germany; for in the year 1657, after the late King of Denmark had lost his best
Army, he gave In Denmark.
as I said in this same Chapter, Commissions to five of us to raise each of us
a Regiment of men of one thousand apiece, all strangers. We were bound by the
Capitulation to arm our Regiments our selves out of the moneys we had agreed
for, and expressly with Muskets, neither would those of the Privy Council, who
were ordered to treat with us, suffer one word to be mentioned of a Pike in our
Commissions, though the convenience, and sometimes the necessity of that weapon
was sufficiently remonstrated by us.

But there are two who write down right against the use of the Pike, these are
Declared useless by Two, an Italian, and an Englishman.
Brancatio an Italian Commander, and one Master Daniel Lupton an Englishman,
who I think traceth Brancatio his steps; for though I have not seen that
Italian piece, yet I have seen a Countryman of the Authors, Achilles Terduzzi,
who tells me he has read it every word. Master Luptons Book I have seen, and
will presume by his leave in the next Chapter to examine his arguments and
reasons.

CHAP. VI. Master Lupton's Book against the use of the Pike examined.
THIS Gentleman Printed his Book in the year 1642, and presented it to The Book
Dedicated to the Earl of Essex.
the Earl of Essex, who was declared General of the Parliaments forces that
very year; but it seems he had not got his Commission when this Book was writ,
for the Author gives him not that Title in his Epistle Dedicatory.

This Author does not seem to condemn the use of the Pike before the invention
of Fire guns, but only since, and magisterially takes upon him to pass sentence
against all Princes or States who in later times have composed the Bodies of
their Infantries of Pikemen. I shall relate to you the strongest of his
Arguguments (as they lie in order) whereby he endeavors to get Proselytes to
this new fancy, and shall give such answers to them as I conceive to be
pertinent, but shall not flatter my self with an opinion, that they will be
satisfactory to all.

In the first place he says, Officers choose the tallest and ablest men to carry
His first Argument,
Pikes, because they must be strong to carry both them and their defensive
Arms; and this, says he, is a loss to the Army to give useless Arms to men, who
could use the Musket with more advantage; for Pikemen, says he, can only
receive the messengers of death (Bullets he means) but Musketeers can send
them.

First, I answer, he begs the question, he declares the Pike useless, and that
Answered.
was the thing he undertook to prove. Secondly, I have already complained that
Officers choose not so often as they should, the ablest men for Pikes, and so they
are very ill used by Mr. Lupton and me, for he complains of them for doing it,
and I complain of them for omitting it. Thirdly, whereas he says, Pikemen can
only receive but not send the messengers of Death, it seems he thinks when
Pikemen fight, they are to stand fixed in one place; but he should have
remembered that in time of action they are no more obliged to stand still than
Musketeers, who are ever in action and motion; for let us suppose that in
Battle a Body of Musketeers is to fight with a Batallion of Pikes, he will
grant me that both the one and the other advances. Now he says, a Musket
kills at the distance of four hundred yards, so does not the Pike; let it be
so, what then, I will grant him more, that in the advance many P^kemen fall,
and no Musketeers; yet I hope he will grant me that these four hundred yards
(if so many) may be soon traced by men who make haste to come to the Charge,
and even before ten ranks can orderly and successively one after another give
fire, and after that I aver, If the Musketeers stand to endure the push of the
Pike, they are inevitably ruined; and if they fly, then the Pikemen have the
victory. I still suppose that which cannot be denied me, that is, that the
Pikemen and Musketeers are of equal courage; now in a close encounter what can
a Musket do against a Pike, or a naked man with a Sword against one in Armor?
If then the Pikemen fly before they come up to the Musketeers, they are
Cowards, and the fault is in their courage, not their weapons, if they lose the
Field; and if the Musketeers stay till the Pikemen come to them, they will
find that points of Pikes bring as inexorable messengers of Death as Bullets do.

Secondly, he tells us that nothing more disheartens Soldiers than the certain
Second Argument,
knowledge of disproportionable and unequal Arms; this I grant to be true, but
from hence he and I draw two very different Inferences; mine is, that
Musketeers will be sore afraid to buckle with armed Pikemen, if the Pikemen
have the courage to stand out a Volley or two, and it is like the Musketeers
will be afraid that the Pikemen will stand it out. But he makes another
Inference, and it is this, that the Pikemen will be afraid, because they know
their Pikes are of no effect, and can do no execution.

Certainly he tells me news, for I thought the Grecian, German, and Switz
Answered.
Batallions of Pikes had very frequently born down all before them, and so had
done execution; and is not this again to beg the question, for he is bound to
prove that the Pike can do no execution? I assure him I will not take his word
for it. But if he mean when an enemy is put to the rout, the Pikemen being
heavly armed, cannot follow the execution, I shall readily grant it to him; and
Vegetius will tell him, that the heavy armed are like an Iron wall, which can
neither run away from a Victorious enemy, nor pursue a flying one, for that is
left to the Horse and light armed Foot. But he offers to prove that Pikes can
do no execution by an instance, which I pray you hear and observe. There
happened a tumult between the English and Switzers in the Prince of Orange his
Leaguer, when he lay before Schencksconce, the Switzers went to arms, and being
in Battle presented their Pikes; here our Author is not ashamed to say, that
two English men with Swords only, entered among the Switzers Pikes, and cut off
(says he) several of their heads (of the Pikes, I hope, not of the Switzers)
and brought them away with them, the two English unhurt. If this be all true,
what will it evince, but the great modesty and patience of the Switzers, and
the prudence of the Officers of both Nations in appeasing the tumult, for our
Author was mad if he thought that any rational Creature would be persuaded by
him to believe, that two men with Swords could affront a Body of Pikemen in
such a manner, and go away so easily if the others had been pleased to resent
it.

Thirdly, he says only three ranks of Pikes can do hurt, the rest are useless;
Third Argument,
then he adds, that what with the terror of the alarm, the confusion of ranks
by the death of some of their number, the time of night when the enemy may fall
on, the hazard of wounding their own Commanders and Camerades, it appears
sufficiently that the Pike can do no feats. I must take this argument in
pieces, and answer it so. And first I say, if only three ranks of Pikes can do
hurt, then Pikes can do hurt, and this contradicts his second argument.

Next his assertion cannot be true, if what I have said at length in another
Answered.
place be true, that six ranks of Pikes can do hurt, or as he call it,
execution. His argument, if true, would be strong against the Grecian
Embattelling sixteen deep, and against his Masters too, for I find by his Book
he has had his breeding in Holland and Denmark, where in his time the Foot
were Marshaled ten deep. As to what he speaks of the terror of an Alarm, I ask
if that must frighten a Pikeman more than either a Horseman or a Musqueteer; I
think less, because he is better armed, but he speaks still of Pikemen as of
Cowards, for what reason I cannot imagine. For his confusion of ranks occasioned
by those who fall dead, he knows those behind them should fill up their places,
and this Musketeers are bound to do likewise. Fear indeed occasions confusion,
and he will still have Pikemen more fearful than other men. Besides, he will
have them to be ill trained, as if they durst not hazard to charge with their
Pikes, for fear of hurting either their Commanders, or their Companions. As to
the time of night, when the enemy may fall on, I know not well what he means by
it, unless it be that he thinks the darkness or horror of the night should put
a Pikeman in greater danger than a Musqueteer, and this I would gladly hear him
or any other for him demonstrate.

His fourth argument is, that Pikes are unfit and unserviceable for Convoys.

In answer to this, I ask, admit it were so, is it therefore not useful at all?
Fourth Argument,
Next I say he is mistaken, for many Convoys have made use of them, and many
Convoys must make use of Pikes, according to the nature of the ground they
Answered.
are to traverse, open Heath, and Champain Country, or as the enemies strength
is fancied to be either in Foot or Horse. Many great Convoys are composed only
of Firelocks, or Fusees, I hope Master Lupton will not thence infer that
Muskets are useless.

Fifthly, he says, The Musqueteer is overtoil'd and discouraged when he sees
Fifth Argument,
he must do the whole duty in Sallies, Skirmishes, Convoys, and Onslachts (as
he calls them) suppose Infalls or Surprisals, from all which the Pikeman is
exempted. In answer to which I ask who exempted him? Truly none that I know
Answered.
but Brancatio, and Master Lupton, who exempts him from all other duties, and
makes him unnecessary, nor can I divine where our Author has learned this
Discipline, that he offers to teach us. I have shown the Pikeman is necessary
for some Convoys, in all Sallies he is serviceable, sometimes with his Pike, or
sometimes with a half Pike, or a Halbert, sometimes a Morning Star, and
sometimes Hand granado's, with all which the Musqueteer many times must do
service; for in the medley of a Salley his Musket is often an unnecessary
Weapon, unless he be within a Parapet. As for Surprizals and Anslachts, the
Pikeman many times may be very useful, and more than the Musqueteer, unless he
change the Lock of his Musket, as I told you in the last Chapter. As to
Skirmishes it will be easily granted him, that neither the heavy armed Footman,
who should be the Pikeman, nor the heavy armed Horseman, who is the Curiassier,
are proper for them. These services were performed in ancient times by the
Velites, and now by Muskets, Fusees, Firelocks, and light Horsemen; the heavy
armed standing ready to sustain them, and either to give or receive the Charge.
Nor did I ever hear Musketeers make any such complaints as these our Author is
pleased to charge them with.

Sixthly, he tells us, That in Outworks before or besides an enemy, the Pikeman
Sixth Argument,
is useless, unless it be to stand Sentinel; for, says he, the Musketeers
defend the works, and while they are furiously giving fire, the Pikeman is
sitting in the Trenches taking Tabaco, or telling Tales.

For answer, I do not remember that ever I heard a Soldier tell such a tale as
this of Mr. Luptons; but I know not where this man is, he is just now in
Outworks, and immediately in Trenches. It seems they are all one with him; but
because they are not so, I must divide his argument into two parts, and give an
answer Subdivided.
to both. If it be in Trenches or Approaches to a besieged Fort, that the
Musque^eers are giving fire furiously, it must be either at a Sally of the
enemy, And answered.
and then sure the Pikeman is neither sitting, nor idle; or it is when a
Battery is a making near the Counterscarp, or that the Zap is begun there, and
then indeed both Cannon and Musque^ should fire furiously upon both Curtains
and flanks of the Wall, that from thence those who work may be as little
disturbed as may be, and at that time the Pikeman is busy working with a
Spade, Shovel, or Mattock in his hand, or is carefully attending to give
obedience to what else he is commanded to do; perhaps to receive the Sally of
an enemy.

In the next place I come to Mr. Luptons Outworks, and he must mean the Pike is
useless, either when an Outwork is stormed, or when it is defended from a
Storm. If the first, the Pike is more necessary than any Fire-gun, after those
who carry them, come to the ascending or mounting the work, and this is obvious
to sense. If the second, when an enemy is coming on to the Storm, it is the
Musketeers part to give fire to keep him off, and chase him away, but the
enemy being already at the foot of the work, and mounting, the Musket is
useless except from flanks, and the Pik^man then with stones, and
Hand-granado's does the service till the enemy be within push of Pike, and then
sure the Pike is not useless. But he says a Pike is too long a weapon for this
service. To answer which I shall tell you, that Outworks (whereof Mr. Lupton
speaks confusedly) are Tenailles, Ravelines, Half-moons, Crown-works, and
Horn-works, and for the defense of these, ordinarily there are other weapons
than either Pike or Musket, such are Hand-granado's, Stones, Halberts,
Partisans, Morning Stars, two handed and hangmans Swords, which are standing
ready within the work, that when the Pike cannot be made use of, the Pikeman
and Musqueteer both may make use of them, or any of them. And if none of these
weapons be in the work, a Pikeman may very soon make a Half-Pike of his long
Pike, which is a weapon much commended by Mr. Lupton. But there is no necessity
for that either, for in these Outworks I have spoke of, a Pikeman may with much
ease stand on the Rampart, and griping his Pike either at half or quarter
length, tumble down an enemy dead or alive from the top of the Parapet, and not
cut his Pike at all. And because our Author may mean Redoubts and Batteries
which are made at Sieges, (for truly I do not well know where to find him) I
say the Musketeers standing on the foot banks of these, and doing their work,
the Pikemen may stand in the body of the Redoubt or Battery, and kill or throw
over any enemy that is on the head of the Parapet. As a Corollary to this sixth
argument, our Author tells us of a Scout that was lost at the Siege of Stoad,
where the half of the Soldiers were Pikemen, to whom he attributes the loss, I
suppose he means by Scout, some Post, and why may not I say, the other half of
the Defendants, who were Musketeers occasioned the loss, and not the Pike-men;
but because I know not what he means, I shall grant him all he says, and yet
aver, that the particular oversight of Pike-men, will never conclude the Pike
universally useless.

Seventhly, he says, Pike-men cannot make a Retreat, for, says he, an Seventh
Argument,
Enemy will send Horsemen and Musketeers against them, who will kill them all,
and never come near them. To answer this I must tell him, that here, Answered.
and in most of his arguments he presupposes still a Body of Pikes subsisting
of it self, without either Horsemen or Fire-men; which alters the question,
and this is a speculative notion of his; for that which I defend is, that
Pikemen are necessary in an Army, and the strength and body of an Army, not
that they are the only necessary members of an Army; I never meant that, and
that which he undertook to prove is, that they are not at all necessary. And
here he mentions General Morgans Retreat with some English Regiments, from the
long line in the Bishopric of Verdun, in which, he informs us, that the
business was not performed by the Pikes. I shall not here speak of the nature
of Retreats, reserving that Discourse to another place; but because I have
traversed most of that ground oftener than once, I shall tell my Reader, that
Christian the Fourth, King of Denmark, having made an unprosperous War against
Ferdinand the Second, retired himself to his Duchy of H^lstein. General
Morgan's Retreat.
Morgan was forced by the Imperial Lieutenant General Tili, to retire from the
long line, to a place called Burg, within four English miles of Bremen; this
place being but pitifully fortified, gave him only time to breath, and leaving
some men in it, (who were given for lost) the English General marched toward
Bremerford, a strong Castle, and a Pass, twelve English miles from Burg: Tili
pursues, and in the pursuit kills and takes many English. At Bremerford, Morgan
rests but little, yet it being a Pass, it cast Tili so far behind, that Morgan
with some more los^; got into the Town of Stead with the gross of his Army:
Here he is besieged by Tili, which he gallantly defended, till for want of
succors, he yielded the place on honorable conditions. Now what does all this
militate against the use of the Pike? Nothing that I know of. Mr. Lupton says,
the Pikes performed not the Retreat; I grant, not alone; neither did the
Musketeers, but both did together; and in most of that ground the Pikes could
not but be very serviceable against the Imperial Horse. He says, many
Musketeers were lost, I believe him; and so were many Pikemen, and who knows
not, that in Retreats, both Pike-men and Musketeers must be left behind, and
given for lost; for they are the true Enfans perdus? There is no wise Patient,
but will choose rather to suffer his Arm or Leg to be cut off, rather than lose
his whole Body, and better save a part of an Army than lose all. And in that
place our Author takes occasion to instance some (as he thinks) disadvantages
that Morgan had by his Pike-men; I shall not contradict him, but shall tell him
for all that, that when that General returned to Holland, to the service of his
old Masters the Estates, I never heard that he offered to advise the then
Prince of Orange, to banish the Pike, as an unnecessary Weapon out of his Army;
or if he did, he prevailed as little with him, as Mr. Lupton did with the Earl
of Essex to do the like, to whom he dedicated this Book, which I now endeavor
to examine.

Eighthly, he says, Pike-men are not able to resist a charge of Horse. And
Eighth Argument,
why so? Truly, if they cannot do that, I agree they are useless. Because,
says he, the Horsemen may stand one hundred and twenty yards distance from
them, and bestow both their Pistol and Carabine shot upon them, and be in no
danger of their Pikes: I answer, first, If Horsemen come no Answered.
nearer Pike-men than one hundred and twenty yards, their Pistols will do them
little hurt. Secondly, This argument presupposes once more a Batallion of
Pikes, without either Fire-men or Horsemen, and therefore it is of no force.
Thirdly, It presupposes that the Pike-men are obliged to stand-still, and
receive all the Horse-mens shot, and never move. But I must add, that while the
Horsemen are firing, if the Pike-men advance upon them, it will undeniably
produce one of these three effects, either it will necessitate the Horsemen to
charge through the Foot, which they cannot do without loss, if they do it at
all, and so they will neither kill, nor rout the Pike-men at one hundred and
twenty yards distance; or it will force the Horsemen to stand still, which
will be a greater danger and loss; or it will make them quit the field, the
greatest loss of all. By quitting the F^^ld, I mean, the Horse men must either
fly or caragol, by either of which the Pike-men are masters of that ground the
Horse stood on, till another Squadron of Horse advance against them, and
endeavor to remove them from it, who perhaps may have the same success.

Ninthly, he says, The arming a Pike-man (he supposes with Defensive as Ninth
Argument,
well as Offensive Arms) is a great deal more expensive to the Prince or State,
than the arming a Musketeer; for he says, a Musketeer may be completely armed
for twenty two or twenty four shilling Sterling, a Pike-man not under thirty
five. But this is a superfluous argument, for if he once demonstrate Answered.
the uselesness of the Pike, it shall be readily granted him, that neither
Prince no^ State should bestow any thing for arming a Pike-man. But if a Pike
be still found necessary, then it will be an ill piece of frugality in either
Prince or State to save that money that should arm Pike-men.

His tenth argument he frames, by telling us how exceedingly troublesome Tenth
Argument,
and burdensome a Pike with Defensive Arms are, and how in time of excessive
heat, a Pike-man on a march, is imprisoned in his Arms, whereas a Musketeer
with a great deal of liberty is free and open to the air. In answer to which,
first observe, that the Musketeer has not always reason to complain Answered.
for doing all the duty (as Mr. Lupton maintained in his fifth argument) for
here the Pike-man endures the heat of the day. Secondly, If this Gentleman had
lived with the Ancient Grecians and Romans, and with many Princes since their
time, he had (if they would have been ruled by him) saved them a great deal of
money, and had given their best Soldiers a great deal of ease, for he had made
all their Infantries to consist of Velites, or lightarmed.

After all these arguments, Mr. Lupton shows us, that one Bran^atio, a famous
Brancatio.
Warrior (as he calls him) gives his Judgment for the uselesness of the Pike,
which (says Lupton) with all wise Commanders should be of great Authority. But
unless Brancatio give better reason for his opinion than Mr. Lupton has done,
his judgment shall be of no authority with me, and therefore, I must confess,
that I am none of his wise Commanders. I told you before, that I have not seen
Brancatio, but Terduzzi his Countryman, (for they were both Italians) in his
Book of Machines, says, he has read him. Now if he value neither his opinion,
nor his reasons, I think none should, for T^rduzzi himself was so little a
friend to the Pike, that he writes, he would have it broken, if he knew what
better Weapon to put in its room. Out of him I shall give you this short
description of Brancatio, and his Book.

His Book described.
The Title of his Book is this, Of the true Art of War, whereby any Prince may
not only resist another in the Field only with his own forces, and with little
charge, but also overcome any Nation. A very glo^ious Title. I think, we need
expect small performances from so vain promises. This man Himself a great
undertaker.
will prove an Alchimist, who promises to give us mountains of Gold, and has
not a sixpence to buy his own dinner. His Preface makes up the fourth part of
his Book, wherein he tells oftener than once, that he studied the Theory of the
Military Art fifteen years, and practiced it forty, so he has been no young
man when he wrote his Book: But he concludes (and I pray you mark it) that in
all these fifteen years he had read no Authors but Casar's Commentaries: And
thereafter he laughs and scoffs at all those Roman Authors and Histories, which
mention distinct Maniples in the Roman Legions, because he had read no such
thing in C^sar* Not only in this Preface of his, but all along in his Book, he
despises the Pike, and calls it the enervation, the weakening, and ruin of
War. I shall for a while leave Brancatio, and return to Mr. Lupton's citations
out of this great Italian Tactick, that I may answer them. And in the first
place, as it was a reflection on Brancatio, Mr. Lupton's citations out of
Brancatio,
first to cite Histories which he had either not read or not understood, and
next not to be acquainted with the customs of War in his own time, so Mr.
Lupton's credulity is inexcusable, for taking things on Brancatio his report,
the truth whereof he might have found in Books, of which many private* Answered.
Gentlemen are Masters. I shall very briefly run through the quotations he
cites out of this Italian man of War.

The King of Portugal (says he) was ruined and overthrown in Africa, because
First.
he had Squadrons of Pikes. But by his favor he was overthrown, because
neither his Pike-men nor Harquebusiers were rightly Ordered, Trained, nor
Commanded.

Next, he says, Charles the Eighth of France was the first that brought Pikes
Second.
into Italy. Indeed, there were Pikes in Italy before France was called France,
and if that French King brought them first there, what lost he by it? He
traversed it, took and conquered the Kingdom of Naples, and returned to
France, and made his passage good at Fornuovo, in spite of all Italy then
bandied against him, and, no doubt, his Switzers did him good service, and
Brancatio knew they were armed with Pikes, as to their Offensive Arms.

Thirdly, he says, The Turk these forty years by past (reckon them to begin
Third.
at the year 1540, and to continue till 1580) has been Victorious over the
Christians, Sempre in Ongaria (so writes Mr. Lupton) only because great
Batallions of Pikes, both of the Switzer and High Dutch Nation were opposed to
the Turkish Troops of Horse, well armed with Pistol and Harquebuss. I answer,
first Brancatio his assertion is false, for the Turk was sometimes beaten in
Hungary in the time of these forty years, and this Mr. Lupton might have
learned, by perusing Knolles his History, if he could light upon no better.
Next I say, If Pikes could not resist the Turks Cavalry, Harq^ebusiers on foot
(of which Brancatio would have all his Infantry to consist) would have done it
much less. But what a ridiculous thing is it to impute the loss of all Battles
to one cause, since Armies may be undone and overthrown by a thousand several
occasions? What can either Brancatio or Mr. Lupton say against it, if I aver,
that when ever the Turks were beaten (and beaten sometimes they were) it was,
because they had no Pike men to resist the charge of a stout and hardy Cavalry?

Fourthly, he avers, That John Frederick Duke of Saxe in Germany, and Piter
Fourth.
Strozzi in Tuscany, were both beaten, because of the multitude of their
Pikemen. To the first I answer, I do not remember that Sleidan gives any such
reason for his misfortune, neither did ever that Prince fight a just Battle
with the Emperor Charles the fifth, most of whose Infantry consisted of
Pike-men, as well as that of the Elector of Saxe did. To the second of Strozzi,
I say, he was routed, because he made his Retreat in the day time, in view of a
powerful Enemy, contrary to the advice given him by Marshal Monluc.

Finally, he says, The Battle of Ceresole gives a good proof of the weakness
Fifth.
of the Pike-mens service, and the Battles of Dreux and Moncounter proved fatal
(says he) to their Leaders, who were despised by their Enemies, because their
Foot consisted most of Pikes. Here Mr. Lupton does himself an injury, to insert
such three ignorant and unadvised citations out of Brancatio, which I will
clear.

At Ceresole, the famous Alphonso Davalo, Marquess of Guast, commanded Battle
of Cer^sol^.
the Imperial Army, and the Duke of Anguien the French. The Imperialists were
beaten by the cowardice of a Batallion of their own Horse, which fled without
fighting, which a great Batallion of Imperial Pikes seeing, opened, and gave
them way, the French follow the chase through that same lane, they being past,
the Pikes (who were no ^ewer than five thousand) closed again and kept their
ground. Another Imperial Batallion of Pikes, some Spaniards, some Germans,
fought with a great Body of Grisons belonging to the French, and beat it out of
the Field, and thereafter fought with the Gascone Batallion of Pikes, where
both parties stood to it valiantly, insomuch that the Duc d'Anguien, the French
General, seeing his Grisons overthrown, and his Gascons so shrewdly put to it,
despaired of the Victory. In this charge of the Imperial Pikes and the Gascons,
almost all the Leaders fell at the first shock, but in the mean time there came
a Batallion of Switzer Pikes, and charged the Imperial Pikes in the flank, and
notwithstanding they had to do with two stout and redoubted Enemies; one in the
Van, and another in the Flank, yet did they keep their Ranks, and the Field
too, after all the Harquebusiers on foot, and all their Cavalry, with Guast
himself (wounded as he was) had fled; and then, (and not till then) they cast
down their Arms, and cried for Quarter, which the Switzers gave them sparingly
enough. At this Charge was Marshal Monluc on foot in the Head of the Gascons
with a Pike in his hand, and he it is that gives us this relation. Will any man
say that the Imperial Pikemen lost this Battle to the Emperor? I suppose none
but Brancatio and Master Lupton.

Moncounter was lost for many reasons too tedious to insert here, whereof the
great number of Pikes was none. And what a madness is it in these two
Antipike-men to speak of Dreux, for there they who lost the honor of the
Battle of D^^ux.
day, that is the Prince of Conde, and the Admiral of France, had few or no
Pikes at all, and succeeded accordingly; for the Duke of Guise after a long and
doubtful fight, (Marshal St. Andre being killed, and the Constable taken)
routed their Foot with his Cavalry, so the having Pikes gained the Royalists
the honor of the day, (for the Switzers, though with huge loss kept the field)
and the want of Pikes lost it to the Protestants.

These are Brancatio his Instances to prove the insufficiency of the Pike, and
what little reason Mr. Lupton had to make use of them upon the others
authority, is cleared, I hope by my answers, which I thought fit to give, lest
I might have seemed to have undervalued Mr. Lupton, as Terduzzi has done his
Countryman Brancatio, who deigns not almost to afford one of his Arguments a
reply.

It rests now that I give an answer to both of them, who draw an argument
against the Pike, because the Turk uses it not, but rejects it as
unserviceable. To this first I say, that the Turk glories that his Batallions
resemble the Macedonian Want of Pikes in the Tu^ks Army a defect.
Phalanges, and therefore by this assertion he approves of the Pike, which was
the Macedonian weapon. But I confess it is his vanity to say so, for the staff
which many of his men carry is rather a Javelin than a Pike. But next I aver,
that the Grand Signiors want of Pikes is a defect in his Militia, which no
Prince or State is bound to imitate. And assuredly if Selimus his Cannon had
not terrified the Persian Horses in the Cald^ran Plains, he would have repented
Instanced.
that he had no Batallions of Pikes to withstand the furious and reiterated
Charges of Sophi Ismael, and his resolute Cavalry. And if the Treason of some
Mamaluck Captains had not assisted that same Turk against Campson Gaurus Sultan
of Egypt, where he was almost born down by the fury of the Mamaluck Horsemen,
the want of Pikes had lost him his Army, and it may be a great part of his
Empire. But I will let these two Gentlemen see, the Turk beaten with Pikemen in
Asia, two several times. T^chel, surnamed Cus^lbas, or Redhead, by Nation a
Persian, having but very few Horse, armed all his Foot (who were Turk beaten
with Pikemen.
but Country People, and newly levied) with long Pikes. One of Bajazets
Beglerbegs, Basha Taragio meets him at the River Sangar, where Tech^l beat back
and broke the Turks Horse with his ^ong Pikes, and obtained the victory. Not
long after that Techel meets with Hali Basha at Mount Oliga, with whom he
fought long, and at length by the courageous managing of his long Pikes, he
forced the Turkish Horse to run out of the field, in which skuffle the Basha
himself was kil^'d.

I am afraid it has been pure malice in these two Gentlemen to conceive the
Great Actions of the Switzers armed with Pikes. Charles Duke of Burgundy.
Beside Milan.
great Victories obtained by the Switzers by no other weapon than the Pike.
Ignorance it could not be in Brancatio, since some of them were the actions of
his own time, nor in Lupton, who might have read them in Modern History. They
overthrew Charles of Burgundy in three several Battles, and he was a very
Warlike Prince. They marched three miles out of Millain to attack a Martial
King, Francis the first, lodged in a well fortified Camp, environed with a well
ordered Infantry, a numerous Cavalry, and a huge Train of Artillery, they
stormed his Retrenchment, took some of his Cannon, fought till night parted
them, renewed the Battle next morning very b^times, fought long with doubtful
success, the event whereof might have proved fatal to the French King* if the
stout Venetian General Alviano had not come upon the Spur with three thousand
Horse to the rescue, and then the Switzers retired in good order back to Milan
in spite of both French and Venetians. A^ Novara they forced the French to
retire two miles from the Town, ten thousand of them follow the next day, and
fight At Novara.
with the French two hours; and observe it, that they were principally resisted
by the German Batallions of Pikes, who stoutly fighting, were killed every man
of them; the Switzers obtained an absolute Victory, they killed many of the
French and Gascon Foot in their flight, for they did not fight; they chaced the
French Cavalry out of the field, (who could not be detained by the Duke of
Trimoville and Trivultio, both of them great Captains) these the Switzers for
want of Horse could not pursue, but they took two and twenty pieces of
Artillery, with an infinite Booty, and so returned to Novara. An Action even in
the Heroic times, almost beyond belief. You may read these stories at large
both in Guicciardini, and Giovio.

At Meaux on the River Marne, the Prince of Cond^ and the Admiral of At Meaux
on the River Marne.
France had well near surpised Charles the Ninth King of France, and his
Mother Catherine de Medici, great were the fears of the Court, where there were
none to defend it, but eight or nine hundred Gentlemen, armed only with Swords.
But there arrived in a good time six thousand Switzers, who had come from their
own Country, and they after three hours refreshment courageously undertook to
bring the King and Queen in safety to the Louvre, which was ten Leagues distant
from thence, and performed it; in their march they chose the most open and
Champain fields, presenting their Pikes on all Quarters, where ever the enemy
offered to Charge, and came to Paris, with the loss only of thirty men, who
being weary, had fallen behind.

Let now Master Lupton tell us out of Brancatio, that Pikemen cannot make way
or pursue an enemy, that they cannot force a Guard, Street, or Passage, and
cannot make an assault, or use diligence on a March, or do other feats of War.
All these great and memorable actions were performed by the Switzers, armed
offensively only with Pikes and Swords, without Harq^ebusses, Muskets, or any
Fire-guns, without Cavalry or Artillery, which is enough, though nothing more
could be said, to confute both Brancatio and Lupton.

They both knew that it is a capricious humor to take away a thing that has
been used, unless there be reasons given either against the thing it self, or
the bad use of it, and this both of them think they have done, how
sufficiently, let the Reader judge; yet they have not done all, unless they give
us something in the room of the Pike, since they have taken it from us. And
this both of them promise to do, and you shall see how they perform it.

Brancatio admits no Foot but Harquebusiers, Muskets being rare when he
Brancatio his Engine instead of the Pike,
wrote, I doubt not but (if he were alive now) he would call them Musketeers,
as Mr. Lupton does, and by that name we shall call them hereafter. Terduzzi
tells us that his Countryman Brancatio undertakes to teach Princes an invention
how their Musketeers shall march in an open field, or a razed Champain, either
in Squadrons, or man by man, without running any hazard to be routed or
overrun by any Cavalry, be it never so strong, much less shall they be in
danger of any Batallions of Pikes. But Brancatio tells us not in his whole Book
what this invention is, but keeps it up as a secret, as that (to use his own
words) which deserves only to be whispered in the ear of some great Prince. I
am afraid he never met with that Prince in his lifetime who courted him for
that secret, and therefore it is more than probable, the secret has died with
him. Terduzzi tells us that after he had read this in Brancatio his Book, he
troubled his brain two or three nights in conjecturing what this invention or
secret might be. At first he imagined it must be a Machine, made with flanks
for defense of the Musqueteer, and to move some way or other, as the
Musketeers advanced or retired, and so to his thinking should be a moving, or
ambulatory Citadel. But he found he had not hit right when he read in Brancatio
that the invention is a most easy thing to make, but most difficult to
imitate, unless the order of it be explained by the Author himself; and withal
he calls it in the singular Number a piece of Armor; now Brancatio
acknowledges no Arms but Sword or Harquebusse for Foot, hence Terduzzi
concludes, the invention must be some kind Cannot be well conjectured.
of Defensive arms, and yet no great Engine or Machine. While Terduzzi is thus
puzzled, an Italian Gentleman told him, that Brancatio had showed him one of
them, and said it was a Pike with a certain Iron-triangle in the middle of it,
which being cast on the ground any way, always one of the angles should stand
up, but when the Pike was fixed, all the three angles stood in the air; which
when Terduzzi had learned, he looked on it as so frivolous a piece of folly,
that he neither troubled himself nor us, with any further discourse about it.
Could this Triangle (be it never so great) be any thing else than one of our
Calthrops; with these it seems Brancatio was to environ his Firemen, for he
says his invention was only to defend the circumference: whether the
Musketeers were to carry it, or some other appointed for it, we know not, and
many more Particularities of that great secret must we want.

Master Lupton is not altogether so squeamish as Brancatio, (though we shall
Mr. Luptons Musket and Half-Pike, one weapon,
presently find him reserved enough) for he tells us that instead of both
Musket and Pike he would have a thing which is both a Musket and half Pik^
serve the Infantry. He much commends this piece, and praises the Inventer of
it excessively, but he gives us no perfect description of it, at least not such
a one as can make me who never saw it, apprehend it aright. He calls it a
Musket and Half-pike; if so, then two weapons: but for most part he calls it a
weapon in the singular number, and therefore not two weapons. He tells us, by
this weapon the Musketeers are safe within the Barricado of their Steel*
Pallisado's* for so he calls it. By this the weapon should be sharp at both
ends, and should be used as the Swedish Feather; and if so, it will make but
one weapon, and the Musket will make another. He says, this weapon may be used
as a Musket* Rest; but if it have no more use than that, experience will make
it useless. And at length he assures u^* that this weapon, the
Musquet-half-Pike, will save a great deal of Treasure spent by Princes on
Pikes, Head-pieces, Backs and Breasts. He told us of such stuff before. But
good God! can a Barricado of Half-pikes defend a man's head and body so well
from a shot, as a Headpiece, or a Corslet can? And to conclude, he directs all
who desire to know this new weapon to go to the Artillery-Garden at London,
where they may be satisfied in all their Curiosities. But I humbly conceive the
knowledge of a weapon, which he cries up to be of so general a good, and can
bring so universal an advantage to Princes and States, should not have been
confined within so narrow a plot of Should not be made a Secret.
ground as the Artillery or Military Garden. And truly I think that either the
Author of that invention, or at least Master Lupton was obliged in charity to
have communicated it to the Hungarians, Transylvanians, Polonians, and
Croatians, to defend themselves by it from the Hereditary Enemy of Christendom,
and particularly to the Germans to obviate thereby the inconveniences and
disadvantages which follow the great number of their Pikes, the use whereof
Master Lupton has condemned.

Now, though all along this Chapter I have shown but small inclination to agree
with Mr. Lupton, for the laying aside the Pike, yet in the close of his Book,
Soldiers should be exercised and trained with both Musket and Pike*
and this discourse, we shall be good friends; for he desires if the Pike be
not altogether abandoned, that all who carry it may be taught the use* of the
Musket likewise: and this shall be my hearty desire likewise, provided* that
all Musketeers may be taught the use of the Pike also, for I conceive it to be
very fit, that every Soldier be so trained, that he may as occasion offers, be
ready to make use of both weapons. And for this I hope no discreet Commander
will fall out with either Master Lupton, or me.

CHAP. VII. Of Gunpowder, Artillery, its General, and Train.
IF the Chinois had the use of Guns twelve or thirteen hundred years before
Guns in China,
the Europeans knew what a thing a Gun was, as some fancy; then they had
Gunpowder also at that time, for without this, Guns were useless. They talk of
a King of China, who being a great Enchanter, had a familiar Spirit, by whose
help he invented Gunpowder and Artillery, by the help of* which he defeated the
Tartars, who had grievously afflicted him; and this King, they say, lived not
long after our Saviors Incarnation. If the use of Artillery in that Country be
of so old a date, I think the Natives should long e're now have attained to
such a perfection of Gunnery, that thereby they might have defended themselves
in their late Wars with these same Tartarians, better than to have let them
make a full conquest of their Kingdom; neither do I remember that the Jesuit
who writes the History of that War, speaks much of Ordnance. Curtius in his
History of the Great Alexander, gives occasion to some to imagine that in his
time (and that was some ages before the days of the Enchanting King of China)
some of the Indians knew the use of Fire-guns; for he says that that daring And
in India*
Prince was dissuaded from the Siege of a Town in India, because the
Inhabitants of it defended themselves against their enemies with Thunder and
Lightning from Heaven. And indeed nothing resembles these more than the fire
and noise of Powder from a Gun. But how soon soever men had the knowledge of
this Art in those remote Countries, it is the general opinion that in Europe it
was neither known nor heard of till in the year of God 1300, a Monk in Germany,
one Barthold Swarts (which in that language signifies Black) having for some
The Inventer of Gunpowder in Europe.
use or other mixed some Sulphur and Niter together in a Mortar, a spark of fire
falling accidentally in the mixture, blew it up with a crack immediately; the
curious Friar searching narrowly into the cause thereof, by little and little
found out Gunpowder, the Mother of all Fire-Engines and Works. To the Monks
Invention infinite additions have been made since.

I will not at all amuse my self here with the needless disputes of some,
whether this invention be destructive to mankind or not, since we read of many
more men killed in Battles and Sieges before the noise of it was heard, than
have been since. I shall only say that never any thing was invented before it
that offered Its admirable force.
so great violence to Nature, and yet is a ready servant and agent of Nature,
it being able to make the heaviest* bodies, stones, houses, and walls ascend in
an instant, and waters suddenly to leave their habitations in the bowels of the
earth, and appear on the surface of it; and all this perhaps, to avoid
something Instanced,
which nature does more abhor. Those Fireships which the Sieur d'Ald^gond sent
down from Antwerp to destroy the great and stupendous Bridge which the Duke of
Parma had made over the River of the Scheld, to obstruct the Hollanders On the
river* of the Scheld.
assistance to the besieged City, can witness the truth of Gunpowders force,
though it wrought not the intended effect. Some of the Stockads of the Bridge
(though fastened with all the art the wit of man could invent) were broke down in
an instant, the River forced to forsake his Channel, yea to give an unwelcome
visit to some of the Spaniards Sconces, out of which the stoutest of them run,
being in such a consternation, that they thought the Elements were to be
dissolved, and the day of Doom was come. At Delft in Holland in the year 1^54
(if I mistake At Delft.
not) by some mischance or inadvertency (as was conjectured) of him who was
entrusted with a Magazine of Ammunition in a Tower upon the wall, the Powder
was fired, which in the twinkling of an eye blew the Tower into the air, from
the very foundation, levelled all the houses of the nearest streets with the
ground, killed many people, and mutilated more; the place where the Tower stood
was not to be known, nor one stone to be seen of it, but in their room a Pool
full of water suddenly summoned from the bowels of the Earth. This blast made
many houses at Rotterdam (where I then was) shake fearfully, and that is six
English miles from Delft. But John Petyt in his History of the Netherlands,
writes, that a Magazine of Powder having been blown up at Mechline, At Mechline.
in the time of the Duke of Alva's Government, made a whole Town shake, which
was four Dutch Leagues, that is twelve English miles distant from Mechline.

The materials of which Powder is composed, are three, Saltpeter, Coal,
Materials of Powder.
and Sulphur. The first is called by Gunners, the Soul; the second, the Body;
and the third, the life of Powder. I shall not trouble my Reader with a
Discourse of Saltpeter, or of its nature, which is the subject of some
Philosophical contemplation, as having exactly the qualities of all the four
Elements in it, and that it is the Quintessence of qualities. It is hot and
dry, and so easy to be fired. It can be made up to a hard stone, so it is
earth; yet dissolve it, (which is easily done) and put it in a vessel, it will
cool Wine in the heat of Summer, so it is water. It grows in Subterraneous
places, Caves, Caverns, Vaults, and Natural Saltpeter.
old ruinous walls, so it seems a sullen, dull, and humid air is the father of
it. But this natural Niter would not make so generally a loud noise over all
the world, if it were not mightily helped by art, and therefore it is
cultivated, nourished, and invited to grow in Mud-walls, Loom-floors, Cellars,
Dovehouses, and Stables, the dung of Beasts, especially that of Hogs (if the
floor be rightly watered with Saltpeter, well ordered, produces good
Saltpeter. How these floors should be prepared, preserved, and used, and how
often pared, how Artificial Saltpeter.
the Saltpeter should be put in half-tubs, one above another, the one (wherein
the Saltpeter is) filled with water, the other without water, and after that
how it should be boiled and skim'd, and put in Brass-pans and coolers till it
congeal, and how thereafter it is refined, is superfluous here to set down; it
is neither my work, nor is it necessary for every Soldier to learn, but those
who will, may Brimstone.
read it in several Authors. The second material of Powder is Brimstone, which
must be well cleansed and purged; and the third is Charcoal, of wood made
Charcoal.
first clean from the bark and knots; the wood that is said to be properest for
it, is that of young Hazel, Elder, Willow, and Birch. These three Materials
must be thoroughly mixed and incorporated, for therein consists much of the
essence and force of Powder. These three must be wrought together in a Horse or
Water-mill, or in a Mortar with Pestles, and while it is a working, care must
be taken to keep it moist.

Though all agree that the mixture and incorporation of these three Materials
makes Powder, yet all agree not of the quantity of each of these Materials. And
for these disagreeing opinions it is that Princes and States set down their own
rules for the composition of Powder, and so it is fitting they should. This is
a general rule that the Powder is the finest, quickest, and of greatest
efficacy that Several kinds of Powder.
has most Saltpeter, and that Saltpeter which is most refined, gives the
greatest perfection. Gunners generally divide Powder into three kinds; first,
that which has the allowance of one pound of Brimstone, and one pound of Coal
for four or five pounds of Saltpeter, and that is ordinarily called
Cannon-powder. The second has one pound of Brimstone, and one pound of Coal
for six pounds of Saltpeter, this they say is for Muskets. The third is the
finest, and has seven or eight pounds of Niter for one pound of Sulphur, and
one pound of Charcoal; this is for birding, for fowling-pieces, or if you will
for Pistols. Powder, for fear of its mischief must be kept in upper rooms, but
in dry and warm places; for age and moisture corrupts it, and renders it
improper for any use, but it may be again renewed by an addition of Saltpeter.

The Gunners Art is a necessary Appendix of the Modern Art of War, but not
necessary for every Soldier to learn, yet the more he knows of it, the
perfecter Soldier he is: I shall speak but of a few things of Artillery, which
I think are convenient (for necessary I say they are not) for most Officers and
Commanders in the War to know, leaving the Art in its entire compass to the
taught by those ingenious persons, who profess it, wherein I have no skill, and
profess as little.

Pieces of Ordnance that shoot in a direct line (for I speak not of Pot-pieces
Three sorts of Guns.
or Mortars which cast their shots in crooked and oblique lines) are either of
Leather, of Iron, or of Copper. These Guns which are called Leather-Cannon,
Leather,
have Copper under the Leather, and are made with great art, and are light to
carry, which is the greatest advantage they have. Iron-Guns are accounted
better than the Leather ones, but experience has taught us that they Iron,
are not so good for many uses as those of Copper. It is true, they are not so
costly by far, neither do they burst so readily; and some think the firing
them, makes them firmer and faster.

In the casting Copper-Guns the Founders differ in the quantity of Bell-metal
Copper,
with it, some allowing more, some less; and Bockler the Engineer informs us,
that now the Germans allow no Bell-metal at all, but for every eight pound of
Copper, one pound of rough Tin; their reason for this is, they have found by
experience, that Bell-metal makes the Piece brittle, and subject to breaking,
Bell-metal.
and Tin makes it hard. The English and French allow both Bell-metal and Tin.
And some allow also a mixture of Latten and Lead.

Time and Art has brought Powder to have a greater force than it had in its
Infancy: The Saltpeter being more artificially refined, the Sulphur better
purged, Powder better now than a 150 or 200 years ago.
and the Coals of more proper wood, and better burnt, the Powder now being
corned, which then it was not. This change of Powder has occasioned a very
great alteration in the fortification of Ordnance; for Powder having now a
double or a treble force more than when it was first found out, a Piece
requires a proportionable fortification of her metal, to resist the violence of
the Powder. As by example, an hundred and fifty years ago, and upward, or
rather two hundred, Founders allowed for a Cannon, or Demi-Cannon, 80 pound
Therefore the Fortification of Ordnance must be the stronger.
of metal for every pound of their shot; by which account a Piece that shot a
Bullet of 48 pound weight, did but weigh in metal 3840 pound, whereas now, and
sixty years ago too, she weighs with the Germans 9000 pound, which will be
above 187 pound of metal for every pound of the Bullet. But in all the sorts of
Culverines there is a stronger fortification required than in Cannon, in regard
they being of a greater length, they are able proportionably to receive in
their Chambers more Powder than the Cannon, and therefore must be better
fortified. After the first practice of Guns, a Culverine that shot 16 pound of
Iron had but a 100 pound of metal allowed for every pound of her shot, and so
she weighed but then 1600 pound but now and long before this, she weighs 4300
pound, and consequently has the allowance of near 270 pound of metal, for
every pound of her shot for smaller Ordnance in times of old, 150 pound of
metal was allowed for every pound of their shot, now above 300, or near 400.

How the Moulds for founding Cannon should be made, of what earth, what Gunners
to look carefully to the defects of Guns.
defects a Gun may receive from a faulty Mould, or from the melting the metal,
and running it in the Moulds, what overplus of metal is allowed, which the
German Founders call the Wolf; how a Gun in founding comes to be weaker of one
side than the other; how she gets chinks, flaws, and honeycombs, and how
Gunners ought to be careful to try their Guns, if they have either these or any
other defects, and how they shall mend them, belongs properly to Gunners to
discourse of, from whom the Courteous Reader may easily learn them.

There are three Fortifications of Ordnance, the ordinary fortified, the
lessened, Several Fortifications of Ordnance.
that is less than the ordinary, and the reinforced, which is the double
fortified. All Pieces are to be more strongly fortified at the Touchhole and
Musle and Trunions, than in the other parts of them. The Trunions equiballance
the Piece, and on them she is mounted and imbased* The Bore which goes from
the Musle to the Touchhole, is called the Cylinder or Concave, it is also
called the Soul of the Piece. And hence, when a Piece is equally bored, and
has no more metal on one side than another, Gunners use to say, her Soul lies
right in her Body. So much of the Concave as contains Powder, Bullet, and
Wad, is called the Charged Cylinder, or Chamber, the Rest, the vacant Cylinder,
or guide of the shot. The Touchhole at Sallies is often nailed, and The names
of the several parts of a Piece.
therefore Gunners ought to be skilful to know how to unnall them, and there be
several ways for it, yet often none of them prevails, and therefore they are
forced to bore a new Touchhole, which will cost them some hours labor. The
rest of the parts of a Piece not yet named, are the Pommel, called also the
Cascabel, the Breech, the Vizier, or Base-ring, the Trunion-ring, the
reinforced ring, the Coronice ring, which is also called the Astragal; the
Neck; and the Musle-ring, which is also called the Freeze: These denominations
a Piece has from a Column or Pillar, which a Piece resembles, as Mr. Norton
tells us in his practice of Artillery, and can be more easily demonstrated by
the Finger to the Reader, than intelligibly described.

Great Guns, or pieces of Ordnance, take frequently their denominations from
the Inventers, or from Beasts and Birds, whom for their swiftness, rapacity,
and cruelty, they seem to represent. And though the word Cannon, Cannon,
properly so called.
be generally now taken for all manner of Ordnance, yet properly it is that
Piece which is ordained for battering of Walls, Towers, and Castles, and Ships;
the French call them Battemurs, and the Germans, Maurbrechern, both which
signify Batter-walls. But there is a difference of founding this piece, among
the French, Germans, and English. The Sieur de Preissac allows no more The
French Cannon.
weight of metal for a French whole Cannon, or Battemur, than five thousand six
hundred pound, the Bullet to weigh about thirty four pound (that will be one
hundred sixty four pound of Metal for every pound of the Bullet) she must have
eighteen pound of Powder, and is more than ten foot long. The Germans divide
their whole Cannon (which they call Carthaun) into the Heavier and the Lighter.
The first weighs in Metal nine thousand pound, and shoots a Bullet of forty
eight pound of Iron, for which she takes twenty four pound of fine, and thirty
two pound of common Powder. The lighter Carthaun weighs six thousand four
hundred in Metal, and shoots about forty two or forty three pound of Iron, the
half of fine, and two thirds of common Powder. They both shoot alike far, to
wit, one thousand ordinary paces point blank, and at random six thousand steps:
Three Italian miles, says Bockler, which seems to be very far, especially the
first. But the Germans of a long time have forborne the use of the heavier
Carthaun, and have founded none of them, they being found too chargeable and
expensive, too heavy and troublesome to draw, The German heavy whole Cannon
laid aside.
and more destructive to Batteries, Bulwarks, and Walls, on which they stand,
than useful, being she breaks, tears, and shakes in pieces the strongest
Vaumures, Defenses, and Embrasures, that can be made for her: And therefore
they are now thought more fit to stand on Walls, or in Arsenals for ornament,
than for use: The lighter Carthaun either for Offense or Defense, at The
Lighter still used.
Sieges doing as much service, and not so much hurt as the greater. And if this
be true, we may easily observe, what great trouble and almost insurmountable
difficulties the Great Turk's Gunners meet with in managing these excessively
heavy pieces of his, the Metal whereof he carries about with him on Camels
backs, or in his Soldiers Knapsacks. And though I believe many Turks Cannons.
of his Cannon be of an extraordinary wide bore, yet I cannot be persuaded to
believe, that at the Siege of Scodra he had two pieces which shot twelve
hundred pound Bullets, and one whose-Bullet weighed thirteen hundred pound of
Iron; I suppose Mr. Knolles has been too credulous both in that particular and
many others, as many more Historians are. The Germans have their half Carthaun,
which shoot twenty four pound of Bullets, their quarter Carthaun of twelve, and
their Demi-quarter Carthaun, which shoot six pound of Iron. And for most part
that Nation gives the denomination of their Guns from the weight of the Bullet
they shoot, as a four and twentieth pounder, a twelfth, a sixth, and a three
pounder: The Cannon, or Battering Ordnance, is divided by the English into
Cannon Royal, whole Cannon, and Demi-Cannon. English Cannon.
The first is likewise called the Double Cannon, she weighs eight thousand
pound of Metal, shoots a Bullet of sixty, sixty two, or sixty three pound
weight. The whole Cannon weighs seven thousand pound of Metal, and shoots a
Bullet of thirty eight, thirty nine, or forty pound. The Demi-Cannon weighs
about six thousand pound, and shoots a Bullet of twenty eight or thirty pound.
All of them will take the half of the weight of their Bullet of fine, and two
parts of ordinary Powder, and may take much more, if they be reinforced. These
three several Guns are called Cannons of eight, Cannons of seven, and Cannons
of six; suppose Inches, as being so many Inches high of the Diameter of their
Bores. For most part all Cannon, properly so called, are not above eighteen or
nineteen Diameters of their bores in length.

The English Gunners do accurately divide all kind of Ordnance into four
English Division of all Ordnance.
kinds. Each whereof is sub-divided into several sorts, according to their
several bores. The four kinds are, the Cannon, the Culverine, the Pierior, and
the Mortar. Of the Cannon I have spoke already: Of the other three I shall
speak a little.

The Culverin is longer in her chase than the Cannon, and therefore shoots The
Culveverine,
further, because she is able to receive more Powder proportionably in her
Chamber, I say, proportionably to her Bullet; as by example, a Cannon that
shoots thirty two pound of Iron, will take but sixteen pound of fine Powder,
and that is but half the weight of her Bullet: But a Culverin that shoots a
Bullet of sixteen pound weight, will take eleven or twelve pound of fine
Powder, and that is three parts of four of her shot: The reason is, because the
Cannon (as I said before) is but about eighteen Diameters of her bore in her
length, whereas the whole Culverin will be twenty eight, thirty, or thirty two
diameters of her bore in length: And if a Culverin be reinforced, a Gunner may
give her the full weight of her Bullet in fine Powder, and neither put himself
nor her in hazard.

The Culverin is sub-divided, into whole, and half, or Demi-Culverin, Saker,
Subdivided into several sorts.
Minion, Falconet, Rabinet, and Base Culverine. How high every one of these are
in their bores, how many Diameters of their bores in length, of what weight
their Bullets are, what each of themselves weighs in Metal, belongs properly
to Gunners, from whom those who are desirous, may learn these particulars, or
may find them in several Authors. Only take these few general observations.
First, That all those sorts of Culverins take proportionably Observations
concerning them all. First.
more Powder than the Cannon, because their Chambers are proportionably longer;
the reason whereof is, that their Chases are in length many more diameters of
their bores, than the Cannon, and by that reason, shoot further. As by example,
the Minion shoots but a Bullet (...) three pound and a half, she takes two
pound and a half of Powder, and shoots her Ball at random seven thousand
ordinary paces or steps, and that is one thousand steps further than the Cannon
can cast her Bullet. Secondly observe, that no Second.
general rule can be given for the quantity of Powder for all Guns, but for all
Guns of one sort there may; some requiring half, some two thirds, some three
parts, and some the full, or near the full weight of their Bullet. Thirdly,
observe, that all these sorts of Culverines must be more strongly fortified in
Third.
their Metals, than the Cannon or Battering-pieces are, some of them having two
hundred and fifty, some three hundred, and some of them three hundred and fifty
pound of Metal for every pound weight of their Bullet. Whereas the Cannon takes
but some one hundred and thirty, some one hundred and forty, some one hundred
and sixty, or at most one hundred and eighty pound in their Metal for every
pound of their shot; the reason is, because they proportionably take more
Powder than the Cannon, and that is now double and treble of more strength and
efficacy, than it was in the Infancy of Gunnery. Fourthly, observe, the more
ponderous and heavy the Bullet is, so it be expelled with Fourth.
a due proportion of Powder, it shakes the more the battered place, provided
that place be within the range of the Piece, and therefore the Cannon shakes
more than the Culverine, though it pierce not so deep, if the Culverine have
her due loading: Hence it is, that in Batteries Culverins and Demi-Culverins
are used to shoot cross wise, or to flank, to cut away that which the Cannon
has shaken.

The Third kind of Ordnance is the Stone-caster, which the French call
Stone-caster*
Pierrieros, or Pierrieras, from Pierre, which in that language signifies a
Stone. The Germans call them Steinbuchsen, which is to say Stone-Guns. They are
cast and ordained to shoot Stones, yet may shoot either Lead or iron, if
sparingly charged with Powder. They are handsome Pieces, and very like Cannon,
or Pieces of Battery, the longest of them will be but eight diameters of the
height of their bore; they are not strongly fortified in their Metal, neither
need they be, for they require not much Powder, and hence they are light to
carry: Being duly laden, they serve well enough to defend a breach, or the
Port of a Town; they are good against Troops or Companies in the Field, and can
commit Murder enough with small expense, for they save abundance of Iron, and
very much Powder.

The fourth kind of Ordnance, is the Mortar, under which comprehend Potpieces,
Mortar.
Square Murderers, Tortles, and Petards. The Pot-piece shoots Granado's,
Fireballs, and Stones. These Mortars are of several and very far different
greatnesses, for some of them shoot but five, some six, some eight Its Use.
pounds, others 300, 350, and 400 pound. They are only useful at Sieges, and at
them they can serve both the Assailants and Defendants. The besieged use them
for shooting in the Batteries and Approaches of the Enemy, to ruin their Works,
destroy their Men, burn their Ammunition; and by their Cometlike light, while
they are in the air to discern where they are working. The Besiegers use them
to terrify and annoy the Defendants, to burn their Houses and Magazines with
Granado's, or break them down with stones, which sometimes will be of that huge
weight that scarce a double Vault can resist them. The operation of the Mortar
is (as I said before) altogether in oblique and crooked lines. Those Gunners
that are appointed to oversee them, had need to be skilful (the Art being
difficult) for Granado's are very expensive, and therefore must not be cast
away, yet I have seen as many (yea a great deal more) miss, than hit the mark.

Bullets for any kind of Ordnance or Fire-Guns, may be of any metal you please,
yea of Gold or Silver; the first is too costly; the second some fancy to Silver
Bullets.
be able to pierce such as are (by some black art or other) hard, or
Bullet-proof. But to charge a person that is Bullet-proof, with a Silver-ball,
to me seems to be like the Assaulting an Enchanted Castle. The Bullets which
are ordinarily used, are threefold, Stone, Lead, and Iron. Of the Stone I have
spoke; Lead-Bullets Leaden Bullets.
are for all Hand-guns, but are not fit for Ordnance, except in case of
necessity, which seldom arriveth. They weigh a third more than Iron, and so are
costlier; they pierce not so far into an Earthen-wall as the Iron ones, and in
stone-walls they batter themselves out in breadth, without doing much hurt to
the wall. Ir^^ bullets are of two kinds, massy ones, and those that are empty
Iron Bullets.
or hollow within. The empty are called Granado's, and are filled with such
Hollow Iron Bullets, or Granado's.
stuff as the Engineer or Gunner thinks effectual for the business or errand on
which he intends to send them. The massy Iron-bullet should be exactly round,
and Gunners ought to be sure that they fit the bores of their several Pieces,
for if the Bullet be too great, and stick in the vacant Cylinder, it hazards in
the discharge, the bursting the Piece; and if too little, it is impossible for
any Cannoneer to make a just shot with it, they use to help the smallness of
the Bullet by tying Hemp, Flax, Hay, or Straw about it, for all Bullets must be
a little less than the bore of the Piece, for which they are made. And
therefore it was long a general rule to make all Bullets for Ordnance one
fourth part of Massy Bullets of Iron.
an inch lower in its Diameter, than the height of the bore of the Piece. But
this is now condemned by Gunners as an error, because they think for a Falcon,
or other small Pieces, the fourth part of an Inch is too great an abatement,
and for either a Culverine or Cannon, it is too little. Bockler tells me that
they agree now that the twentieth part of the Diameter of the bore of all
Pieces, is a reasonable abatement for their Bullets. There be also Chains,
Chained Bullets, and Cartridges shot out of Pieces of Ordnance. The first at
Sea-service, and all of the other two in the fields against Troops, or
Companies either of Horse or Foot.

I shall forbear to say any more of great Ordnance, leaving the rest to the
Gunners art, which all Soldiers are not obliged to learn: Only I cannot omit to
tell my Reader, that notwithstanding all I have said, there is an History
extant of that Siege which the famous Marquis Spinola formed and maintained at
Breda in the years 1625, and 1626, written originally in Latin, and approved by
the said Marquis, and thereafter translated into several Languages; in which we
are told that during the time of the Siege, Philip Count of Mansfield went to
Count Mansfield his rare Invention of Guns, at the Siege of Breda.
Brussels, and there by his great art and industry founded forty Brass-Guns,
and twenty three Murderers, for so our Historian calls them; thirty of these
shot Iron Bullets of six pound weight, all the rest shot twenty five pound. The
metal of every one of the six pounders weighed no more but a 180 pound, and
those of twenty five Bullet, weighed no more but 750 pound. If you will
calculate this, you will find that these Pieces had just thirty pound of metal
(and no more) allowed for every pound of their Bullet: this was a weak
fortification; for we must suppose Spinola wanted not for Powder of the best
sort. The Author adds that these new Pieces shot their Bullets further than the
old ones did, and required but the third part of Powder formerly allowed for
Pieces of their Bores. He adds also, which he needed not, that the lesser new
Guns were drawn by two Horses, and the greater by four; for it is certain, the
lighter the Piece is, the fewer Horses, Men or Oxen it will need to draw it.
This Invention of Count Mansfield has been assuredly as to Ordnance, the best
and most profitable these three bypast ages could boast of, both to save
expense, and to further expedition. But this good man tells us not how the Earl
did all this, only he informs us, that he knew so well to boil the melted metal
in the fire, that though it had less thickness, yet it had equal hardness with
the greater Guns; but I thought that not only the hardness, but the thickness
of the metal should resist the violence of the Powder, and therefore Pieces are
more fortified at the Touchhole, Trunions, and Musle, than at any place else.
But not having heard that this rare Invention was practiced afterward in all
these long and bloody Wars, which have been in Christendom since that famous
Siege, nor read any thing of it in those who write of that Art, I shall suspend
my belief of the thing till I hear that it is approved by Judicious Gunners.

An indifferent Train of Artillery, especially if there be battering Guns in
it, The great trouble and retardment a Train of Artillery brings to an Army,
their Carriages, Powder and Bullets, with all fitting Instruments, will
require very many Horses to draw it, which may the more easily be conceived if
we cast up an account how many one Piece will need. Le^ns suppose this Piece to
be a French Cannon, or an English Demi-Cannon, any of them weighing 6000 pound
of metal, let her Bullet be thirty pound of Iron, for which she requires twenty
pound of common Powder. This Piece may be discharged safely ten Demonstrated by
what is requisite for one piece of Cannon,
times in one hour, and consequently in twelve hours 120 times; 120 being
multiplied by thirty, (which is the weight of the Bullet) the product is 3600.
You are to multiply again a 120 by 20, which (is the weight of the Powder)
produces 2400. Add 3600, and 2400 to 6000, the aggregate is 12000 pound. In
the next place let every Horse be bound to draw For one day only.
272 pound weight, and divide 12000 by 272, you will find the Quotient 44, with
a Fraction of 32; so you see forty four Horses necessary to draw one Piece with
Powder and Bullets needful for the service of one day, without the addition of
the Carriage, or of Wagons and Carts. Hence you may conclude, that a numerous
Train must of necessity retard the march of an Army either in pursuing or
retiring. In the first case all or most of it may be left with convenience to
follow; but in the second, there is very great difficulty, and many times the
endeavoring to save it, has occasioned the loss of Armies.

There is no doubt but Artillery serves to good purpose to make an Enemy either
remove his Camp (if it be within the range of the Ordnance) or come out and
fight. That it forces Towns and Forts to yield we know; but we must confess
(for all that) that few Battles have been won by Artillery; for as Monluc says
of the Cannon, Il fait plus de peur, que du mal* It frightens more Artillery
very expensive.
than it hurts. The loss of a Train of Artillery is of exceeding great
consequence to a Prince or a State, therefore the less the Train is, the
expense will be the less, and the expedition the greater. There are some who in
their Writings of Trains of Artillery, and other essential members of Armies,
instance the Princes of Orange. But I say other Princes and States are not to
take up their measures either in their Trains of Artillery, or other points of
War by the Estates of the United Provinces, in regard few or none of them (that
I know) have such advantages of the Situation of their Country, as those
Estates have, who by water for most part may transport their Ordnance, their
Provisions, their Munitions, their Instruments, and sometimes their Soldiers,
which other Princes must carry all by land with Horses and Wagons, (except the
men) unless they have the benefit of some Navigable River, which seldom falls
out.

It is not every Army that either is or can be allowed either a full Train, or
yet a General of Artillery. Many of these called flying Armies have no Guns at
all with them, and many of them have only some Fieldpieces, which being drawn
with very few Horses, need not much obstruct the speedy march of an Army. I
have known diverse Armies at one time in Germany under Christina Queen of
Sweden, each one whereof had but a petty Train, and that ordered by a Colonel,
or a Lieutenant Colonel, but there was only one General of the A great Train
not necessary with every Army.
Artillery, who had the supreme Command of all the Ordnance in all the Armies;
and he staid constantly with the Felt Marshal of the principal Army. I knew the
late King of Denmark in the year 1657, have two brave Armies (though both
unsuccessful) the one ordained for the defense of Holstein and Jutland, the
other for Schonen, the Train appointed for each of them was ordered by a
Colonel, and there was neither General, nor Lieutenant General of the Ordnance
with either of them. Whether it be fit for a Prince or a free State to keep one
General of the Artillery to have inspection over all the Ordnance, all the
Munitions of War, and all the Arms within that Kingdom, or Republic, or
rather to entrust several persons with the several Magazines, shall not be the
subject of this Discourse. But that all Princes and States should have
Storehouses, Arsenals, and Magazines, well stuffed with all manner of Arms
offensive and defensive, with great and small Ordnance, with Powder, Match, and
Ball, and all the several Materials of their Composition, with Mortars, Pot
pieces, Petards and Granado's of all kinds, is, as I suppose a thing which will
be granted as necessary beyond all Controversy.

In such an Army as passes under the name of an Army Royal (which some Army
Royal.
think should consist of eighteen thousand Foot, and six thousand Horse) that
takes the Field with a design to fight with any that oppose it, and a
resolution to do that for which it was levied, whether that be to fight
Battles, pass Rivers, or take in Towns and For^; in such an Army, I say, there
should be so great a Train of Artillery, as is suitable with the greatness of
the attempt, wherein Its Train.
nothing must be wanting, that can help to carry on the design. In it there
should be Cannons for Battery, Culverines of all sorts, Fieldpieces, Mortars,
great abundance of Powder, Match, and Ball, and Granado's, with all Instruments
and Necessaries for all manner of Ordnance; for this Train are required a great
many expert and ready Gunners and Constables, besides the Gentlemen, Captains
and Conductors, as also a huge number of Horses and Oxen, Wagons and Carts to
draw and transport it from place to place.

The Swedish Trains of Artillery since their first footing in Germany have had
Swedish Train of Artillery.
the reputation to be the most exactly composed, and conducted by the most
experimented Artists of any in Christendom. And no doubt but their Artillery
helped them much to take so deep a footing in Germany, that they have not been
since expelled out of it, though that has been much endeavored. When the late
King of Sweden invaded Poland in the year 1655, the perfidy of the Polonians
was such that they delivered almost that whole Kingdom into his hands. But
after they had returned to their Duties, and that the Swede was at Zamoiskie in
the year 1657. it was by the help of his Artillery (whereof John Casimir was
destitute) that the Swedish King traversed much of the length of Poland in
spite of eighty thousand Polonians; crossed the Weichsell, and joined with
Ragoski; and after he was forced to part with the Transylvanian (being invited
to come nearer home by the King of Denmarks unseasonable declaration of a War
against him) he came out of Poland and Prussia too with a very inconsiderable,
ill appointed, and harassed Army, without any loss at all, merely by the
advantage he had of his Train of Artillery.

Sweden furnishes abundance of both Copper and Iron, whereof great Guns Sweden
abounds in all things necessary for a Train.
and Hand-guns are made, and by art and industry that Country has as much
Saltpeter as any Kingdom can have; and it being full of Woods, it cannot want
Coal for making Powder, whereof they make such abundance, as they are able not
only to serve themselves, but to help their neighbors and friends. They also
make within the Kingdom, greater store of Arms both for offense and defense,
than they have use for. I have seen some little Towns in Sweden, wherein few
other Artificers were to be found, but Armourers and Gunsmiths. These
advantages encourage them to entertain full and well appointed Trains of
Artillery.

He who commands in chief over the Artillery is called by the English, General,
or Master of the Ordnance; by the French, Grand Maistre del Artillery, Great
Master of the Artillery; by the Germans, General fetz Eugmeister, which is
General Overseer and Master of the Munitions for the Field, a term very proper,
because he has not only the inspection of the Ordnance, but of the Munitions
of War, such are the Guns, greater and lesser, all manner of Arms A General of
the Artillery,
and Weapons, all Materials belonging to Smiths and Carpenters, Powder, Match,
Bullets, Granado's for Pot-pieces, and to be cast by the hand, store of
Instruments and Utensils for Artificers Shops, Bridges or Materials for them,
Boats or Materials for them, to be made and joined quickly, for passing
unfordable waters, all kind of Instruments for working in Fortification or
Approaches, such as Spades, Mattocks, Pickaxes, and Shovels. In Scotland we
call this great Officer, the General of the Artillery. The Ancients, though
they wanted Fire-guns, yet they had their great Artillery; those were their
great Machines and Engines whereof I have formerly spoken; and they had
likewise a Master of their Artillery, who had the inspection of it, which I
have also made appear in the fourth Chapter of the Roman Militia. But since the
Invention His Trust.
of Gunpowder, the Charge of General of the Artillery has been looked on as
most honorable, as it indeed deserves to be, and with none more than with us
in Scotland, and was always conferred by our Kings on persons of eminent note
and quality, James the Fifth King of Scotland, made the Gentleman who had
married his Mother Margaret Daughter to Henry the Seventh King of England, Lord
of Meffen, and General of the Artillery of Scotland. As Lesly Bishop of Rosse
(that active and loyal servant to his Mistress Queen Mary) tells us in the
Ninth Book of his History, in these words, In hisce Comitiis Rex His Charge
honorable in Scotland.
Henricum Stuartum Reginae Maritum confirmavit Dominum Meffensem, ac eundem
omnium bellicorum Tormentorum praefectum (quod munus apud nos est long
honorificum) munifice constituit. The King, says he, in this Parliament
confirmed Henry Stuart the Queens Husband, Lord Meffen, and bountifully made
him General of the Artillery, which Charge with us is most honorable.

He who bears this Office in either Kingdom, Republic, or Army, ought to His
Qualifications.
be a person of good Endowments; but if you take his description from some
notional writers, you may justly conclude, there is not such a man below the
Moon. Indeed I shall tell you there are two qualifications absolutely necessary
for him, these are to be a good Mathematician, and to be something, if not
right much, experimented in all the points of the Gunners Art, he must be of a
good judgment, and a very ready dispatch. The rest of his parts and abilities
(which some require in him alone) I think he may divide among those who are
under his His great Command.
command and authority, who truly are right many; as the Lieutenant General of
the Ordnance, two Colonels, if not more, Lieutenant-Colonels, Captains, and
Gentlemen of the Ordnance, Master Gunner, and all inferior Gunners, Conductors,
and Comptrollers, Engineers, the Clerk of the Fortification, Master of the
Mines, and Mineers under him, Master of the Artificial Fires, and his
Conductors and Petardeers, those who have a care of the Tools for
Fortification, for intrenching and approaching, the Master of the Pioneers (in
some Armies) and all his Pioneers; the Master of the Batteries, and all under
him, for to the General of the Artilleries direction and inspection belongs the
Entrenching the Camp, the making the Approaches, Redoubts, Batteries, Zaps,
Galleries, and Mines, and other works at Sieges of Towns and Castles. He has
also his own Commissary, Quartermaster, Waggon-master, Minister, and
Chyrurgeon. If then you will consider that he and all those under him are to
have pay and wages, and what a ^ast sum of money is spent in maintenance of
this Train, and how much Powder, match and Ball, may be spent in an active War;
you may conclude that Achilles Terduzzi the Italian Engineer The vast expense
of a Train.
(whom I have often mentioned) spoke within bounds, and but modestly enough,
when he said he conceived the fourth part of the Treasure of an Army, was spent
on the Train of Artillery.

I think it something strange to read in Bockler the German Architect, that it
is of late condescended on by the greatest Practitioners of Artillery in
Germany, that for an Army of forty thousand men (whereof thirty two thousand
should Thirty Pieces of Ordnance thought lately a sufficient Train for an Army
of forty thousand men.
be foot, and eight thousand Horse) thirty Pieces of Ordnance are enough,
either to besiege a strong place, or to attack an enemy, though never so
advantageously lodged. For the last I shall be easily induced to believe it,
but for the first part of his affirmative I know not how to reconcile it with
the opinion of those knowing Gunners, and experimented Captains, who formerly
thought eight Cannon, six Culverines, and four Demi-Culverines, no more than
necessary to make one sufficient Bresch, whether in Courtine, or Bastion,
whereof I shall have occasion to speak more in my Discourse of Sieges. His
thirty Pieces of Artillery he divides thus: Eight whole Cannon (which he calls
Carthaun) nine Demi-Cannon, six Quarter-Cannon, and seven Field pieces. The
whole Cannon (for I suppose he means the lighter sort) shoots a Bullet of forty
pound, the Demi-Cannon twenty four pound, the Quarter Cannon six pound, and I
shall be contented, that each of the seven Fieldpieces shall shoot three
pound. But if the former opinion hold, of eighteen Guns for one Bresch, and
that the Town besieged have five Bastions or more, as mostly they have, Bockler
furnishes us not with Guns enough to Brasch two of them. But let us see what
Powder and Iron his thirty Guns will spend in one artificial day, that is
twelve hours time; you may allow his eight whole Cannon to fire eight times
What Powder and Bullets thirty Guns may shoot in twelve hours.
in one hour, and at every time twenty pound of Powder for the forty pound
Bullet of Iron. Multiply twelve (the number of the hours) by eight (the number
of the whole Cannon) the Product is ninety six. Now every whole Cannon firing
eight times in the hour, makes ninety six shot in twelve hours, and therefore
spends three thousand eight hundred and forty pound of Iron; for ninety six
multiplied by forty, produces three thousand eight hundred and forty, for
every pound of the Bullet, I allow but half Powder; to wit, for forty pound
Bullet, twenty pound Powder. The whole Cannon then discharged eight times every
hour spends a hundred and sixty pound, multiply a hundred and sixty by eight,
(the number of the whole Cannon) the Product is a thousand two hundred and
eighty. Thus much Powder eight Cannons spend in one hour; multiply a thousand
two hundred and eighty by twelve (the number of the hours) the Product is
fifteen thousand three hundred and sixty, so much Powder must be allowed for
eight whole Cannon to play twelve hours, and twice as much Iron, to wit, thirty
thousand seven hundred and twenty.

The nine Demi-Cannons shall fire ten times every hour, this will make ninety
shot in one hour, multiply ninety by twelve (the number of the hours) the
Product is one thousand and eighty. You may remember we allow twenty four pound
of Iron for every shot of a Demi-Cannon, then for one thousand and eighty shot,
twenty five thousand nine hundred and twenty pound of Iron; for multiply one
thousand and eighty by twenty four, the Product is twenty five thousand nine
hundred and twenty; so much Iron does the Demi-Cannon spend in twelve hours,
and the half so much Powder, is twelve thousand nine hundred and sixty.

The six Quarter-Cannon shouts seventy two pound of Iron, (to wit, each of them
twelve) they may be discharged twelve times in one hour, and therefore the six
are discharged seventy two times in twelve hours, and all six make in twelve
hours time eight hundred sixty four shot, multiply eight-hundred sixty four by
twelve (the weight of the Bullet) the Product is ten thousand three hundred and
sixty eight; so much Iron does these six Quarter-Cannon shoot in twelve times,
for that you are to reckon the moiety of Powder, which is five thousand one
hundred and eighty four.

The seven Field Pieces (each of them shooting a Bullet of three pound) shoot
at one time twenty one pound of Iron, this they may do safely fifteen times in
one hour; multiply then twenty one by fifteen, the Product is three hundred and
fifteen. Multiply three hundred and fifteen by twelve (the number of the hours
they are to play) the Product is three thousand seven hundred and eighty, so
much Iron do these seven Field Pieces shoot in twelve hours time, and the half
of that in Powder, which is one thousand eight hundred and ninety.

By this account which will be granted to be rational enough, Bocklers thirty
Pieces (though far fewer than other Trains) in twelve hours time will spend
seventy thousand seven hundred eighty eight pound of Iron, and of Powder thirty
five thousand three hundred and ninety four. By this you may make a reasonable
good conjecture of the expense of Ammunition for great Guns.

Milton in his Poetry plays with this matter, and makes the use of Cannon very
old, as being practiced by Lucifer against the Omnipotent. See his Paradise
Lost.

CHAP. VIII. Of Musters, and Muster-masters, Pay, Proviant, and Service, of
Treasurers, Commissaries, and Proviant-masters, and of the Military Oath.
AFTER Foot-Soldiers are levied and armed, and Horsemen armed and mounted, it
is fit they be Mustered, that it may be known whether the Colonels and Captains
have raised their full numbers of sufficient men, according to the several
Capitulations made with the Prince or State whom they serve. This word Muster,
or Monstre, signifies a Show which is made by Muster-masters.
those Officers who are appointed to view the Soldiery; those with us are
called Muster-masters, and are either General or particular. The General
Muster-master has the inspection of the particular ones, and to him they are
bound to give a particular account of their deportments, and from him they
receive their directions. In all Musters the Colonels and Captains are bound to
deal uprightly and honestly, and to make a show of none but such as are really
in their Regiments and Companies. The Muster-masters duty is to take a strict
account, and a particular view of every man's person and name, (having Lists and
Rolls in his hand) of his age, of his Arms and Equipage; and if he muster
Musters,
Horsemen, he is to see that the Horse be serviceable, and of such a height, as
is appointed by the Prince or States order, and such as the service requires,
whether he be a Curiassier, or Harquebussier. In some places, especially in
Italy, the Muster-masters inquire the names of the Soldiers Parents, the
Country and place of their birth, and write down the complections of their
faces, and colors of their hair, and some private mark which the Muster-master
observes. It is, and indeed should be infamy to any Captain to make a false
Muster either of borrowed men, Horses or Arms; and the same punishment does the
Mustermaster deserve, if he either subscribe to, allow of, or connive at any
such juggling, for thereby the Prince is not only cheated of his money, but
grossly abused to his great disadvantage, when he is made believe that he has
either more men, or more sufficient men than really and effectively he has.
For this reason, and that the Captains may be hired to be honest, some allow
Passevolants, Passevolants, what.
that is, for such a number of real and visible men, such a number of invisible
men, as the Swedes used to allow to every Company of Foot, d'en Pasvolants,
whereof six belonged to the Captain, two for the Lieutenant, and two for the
Ensign. Every one of these had the allowance of half a Rix-dollar every ten
days, but this custom wore out, and there was reason for it, because many
Captains notwithstanding that Indulgence, endeavored still to keep void places
in their Companies, as a mean to make their Purses full.

These Muster-masters by the Dutch, Danes, and Swedes are called Commissaries,
Commissaries.
over whom the Commissary General of the Army has the superintendance. This
difference there is, that those Commissaries keep the Purse, and so are
Pay-masters; but our Muster-masters are not so, the paying belonging to our
Treasurers, as among the Romans it belonged to the Questors. They have power to
muster as often as they please, acquainting him first who commands in chief,
either in Field or Garrison: And indeed in those Countries they muster oftener
than they pay.

After the first Muster, the Troops and Companies get their Standards and
Ensigns, and then take the Military Oath, which we call to Swear to the
Colors. I have spoken of the Roman Military Sacrament: This Oath we now speak
of is the same for Officers. Troopers and Soldiers swear, with hands lifted up
to Heaven, To be faithful and loyal to their Prince, or his Generals, Military
Oath.
never to desert or leave the Service without permission of their Superiors, to
be stout in time of Battle, Rencounter, Skirmish, or Assault, and rather to
choose to dye, than desert their Standards or Colors, never to turn their backs
on an Enemy, and to reveal all Conspiracies, Treasons, and Mutinies, intended
against the Prince or State, or their Generals, and other Commanders: So help
them God in the great day. If this Oath were punctually kept, all Battles would
be so well fought, that there would not be such a thing, as the slight of an
Army to be seen or heard of in the World. After this Oath, the Articles and
Laws of War should be publicly and distinctly read, that they may know what
punishments (for most Articles speak more of them, than of rewards) they may
expect, if they commit such crimes as are there mentioned. This is a thing most
necessary to be done, that none may pretend Ignorance; for where there is no
Law, there can be no Transgression: Of these Articles I shall speak in the next
Chapter.

Being that most men who follow the Wars over all the World, receive wages,
they justly deserve the name of Mercenaries; but if you will consider how their
wages are paid, I suppose, you will rather think them Voluntaries, at least
very generous, for doing the greatest part of their service for nothing. It is
said of the Switzers, that they will not fight, unless they be paid duly. If
other Nations were of their humor, Princes and States would be necessitated to
agree better than they do, because seldom would their Armies fight for them,
because seldom they are paid by them. The Baptist insinuates, that Soldiers
should be paid their wages, because he bids them be contented with their wages,
and do violence to no man. But few or no Evangelick Precepts are obeyed, and
this as little as any; Soldiers get not their wages, and violence is done to
many men. At the first view, it would seem strange, why Princes pay their
Soldiery very well and duly in the time of Peace, when they have little or
nothing to do with them, and very ill and very seldom in the time of War, when
they have most to do with them. But the reason is soon found, they need far
greater numbers in time of War than Peace, and many are not paid with so little
money as a few are. In the Wars of Europe these last fourscore years and
upwards (wherein his Majesty's Dominions were free, except in the late unhappy
Civil War) we find that the Estates of the United Provinces have paid their
Armies better than any other Prince or State; this makes the Mercenary Soldier
run to their Service, and capacitates them to make great levies in a very short
time. The effects of the bad payment of the Spaniards appeared, when their King
stood most in need of their service seventy Armies universally ill paid.
years ago and a little upwards; and many times since; for that gave a rise to
those terrible Mutinies, in which they possessed themselves of Towns, and
treated with their Generals and Superiors, as if they had been Free Estates.
This incapacitated the Spanish Ministers to prosecute the War against the new
Estates, in which time, it is not to be thought, that either they, or the
Prince of Orange were idle Spectators. The most considerable Army the Sweeds
had in the year after the death of their Victorious King Gustavus Adolphus, lay
idle at Donaverth, losing the time of Action, and treating for their pay.
Boccalini informs us, that once the Gardiners complained to Apollo, that they
Boccalini his R^gg^agl^.
had no Instruments to make all the weeds of their Gardens run and dance after
them, as Princes and Free States, who could make all the idle and unprofitable
members of their Principalities go out of the Gardens of their Commonwealths,
with the rattling of a Drum, and the sound of a Trumpet. But I think, Princes
and States are to be much more admired for another secret art of their own,
whereby they get these Drones to do them both laborious and hazardous service,
for very little Money, and at a low expense. The Pay and Wages for Officers and
Soldiers of both Horse and Foot, are different according to the establishments
of several Princes and States. I shall speak a little of some of them; for to
speak of all, though I could, were needless.

The German Emperors establishment during the time of the long War, was German
Emperor his Pay.
fair enough, for there was promised to every Colonel of Horse 300 Dollars, to
a Lieutenant Colonel one hundred and eighty, to a Major one hundred and twenty,
to a Ritmaster one hundred, to a Lieutenant sixty, to a Cornet fifty, besides
allowances of fodderage for so many Horses, proportionably according to their
qualities, monthly: To a Quartermaster twenty four Dollars, to a Corporal
twenty two, to a Clerk fifteen, to a Trumpeter as much, and to an Einspanneer
or Trooper twelve. The Pay for the Officers and Soldiers of Foot was much
less: But they got not three months Pay of twelve in a whole year. But Bockler
tells us, that in the year 1658. at Frankford on the Maine, Pay of the
Confederated German Princes, An. 1658.
the Electors and Princes of the Empire, who had joined in a League, (whereof
there are many made in that Country) had unanimously agreed upon a Pay to be
given to their forces, so long as the League continued, (most of their Leagues
are broke in shorter time than they are a making) and it was this. A Rit-master
was to have for himself every month sixty Dollars, and allowance for six
Horses, which amounted to forty eight Dollars, so he had in all one hundred and
eight Dollars monthly. But because all the Officers of Horse had allowance for
some Horses, beside their own Pay, I shall for brevity set down the allowance
for themselves and Horses together. A Lieutenant had monthly forty four
Dollars, a Cornet as much; a Quartermaster twenty three; a Corporal twenty
one; the Clerk, Trumpeter, and Surgeon each of them eleven; and the Smith as
much; a common Trooper eight. Before I speak of the Foot-pay, I shall premise,
that the Kings of Denmark and Sweden, and most of the German Princes allow a
Wagon with four Horses, and two Saddle-Horses for a Captain of Foot, and the
like number between the Lieutenant and Ensign. The Princes then of this German
League allowed for a Foot-Captain, himself and Horses monthly forty eight
Dollars; for a Lieutenant twenty one; for an Ensign-bearear as much; for a
Sergeant six; for a Fourier, Furer, Captain at Arms, Clerk, Drummer, Piper, and
Gentleman of the Company, each of them two Dollars, and the fourth part of one;
for the common Soldier every month two Dollars.

I shall not speak here either of the Danish or the Swedish pay; they being
Swedish, D^nish and French Pay,
much about one with this agreement, except that their allowance is a little
more and greater both for the Underofficers, and the common Soldiers. The
French Pay will be much about one with the Swedish: And therefore, my Reader,
if he know any thing of his Majesty's establishment, will quickly All far short
of his Majesty's.
perceive, that his Pay is greater than any of those I have spoke of, and is
better paid than all of them.

How the German Princes paid their Soldiery in their last short War* I know
not, but in the long one, I am sure, they paid very ill, and so did the Sweed.
Bad Pay in the long German War.
Those who were in Garrison got sometimes three, but for most part but two
Lendings in the month, every Lending being but a little more than half a
Rix-dollar, to which was added the assistance of some proviant Bread. Why they
call this a Lending, I know not, unless it be to make the Soldiers believe
they lend them money, when they are but paying them a part of their own. But
the poorest witted Soldier knows well enough, that his Pay* masters, under the
notion of lending them a third part, borrow from them to a very long day, all
the rest of their Pay. This is for their Garrisons. In the Fields, they may
happily deceive themselves, whether they be Officers or Soldiers, that expect
any Money, but must be contented with Commis Bread, till by some Victory, any
of their Generals be enabled to quarter his Army in a plentiful Country, and
there it is, where the common Soldiers may put themselves in Clothes, the
Officers in good equippage, and the Colonels make themselves rich; for the
German, Danish, and Swedish Colonels play too often the Roytelets, and petty
Kings in their several Regiments. But some Officers there be, who never meet
with such opportunities, and some are not dextrous enough to lay hold on such
occasions when they offer themselves; for at such times, there is something
else required, than to receive Pay from the Clerk of the Company. I remember, a
Countryman of mine told me once, that he had served the Crown of Sweden eight
years, whereof he had been a Captain three, and that in all those years he had
never been Master of fourscore Crowns at one time.

One hundred years ago, Armies were better paid than now they are, and Officers
and Soldiers could tollerably well subsist, great care was then taken, by a
seasonable distribution of money to prevent Mutinies, and desertion of the
service; why it is not so yet, perhaps want of Money may be the cause, though
there is now much greater store of money, than was then; if Princes and States
have other reasons for it, they are not to communicate them to Soldiers, who
are very improper Judges of them. I thought it strange to see sixteen Too many
weak Regiments cause of bad pay.
or seventeen years ago, the native Spaniards to whose keeping the strong
Citadel of Antwerp was entrusted, begging publicly in the streets of that
City. But I thought it a more lamentable sight to see both there, and in
Germany, and elsewhere, Lieutenant-Colonels, Majors, and Captains begging an
Alms. In former times Regiments were thrice, four, or five times stronger than
now they are, and consequently Troops and Companies were for their numbers as
strong if not stronger, than now half Regiments are. Hence it is* that I
believe there are hundreds of old men yet living, who have seen private
Captains in higher esteem than Colonels are now. And I suppose if Princes and
States thought it ^it to follow the old way, and make their Troops and
Companies three times stronger than now they are at their first levy, they
might be as well served, and save a vast exp^nce of Treasure. If an army of
twenty four thousand men were to be raised, whereof eighteen thousand were to
be Foot, and six thousand Horse, six Colonels might as well now command the
18000 Foot divided into six Regiments, as six Colonels did the like fifty years
ago, and four Colonels might command the six thousand Horse, divided into four
Regiments, allowing to each one thousand five hundred Horse. The expense that
would be saved here of the pay of complete Officers of twelve Regiments of
Foot, and two of Horse, would exceedingly help to pay the other eight.

Be pleased to see the truth of this instanced by an observation I made in the
year 1649, after the Peace of Munster, Christina Queen of Sweden had in her
Numbers of Swedish and Hessick Regiments, after the Peace of Munster.
pay in Germany, (besides her forces in the rest of her Dominions) four hundred
and twenty Troops of Horse and Dragoons, and threescore Regiments of Foot. In
some Reg^ments there were twenty Companies, in some twelve, in some ten, and in
some eight. All the Companies in the whole sixty Foot Regiments were reckoned
to be six hundred and thirty. Her Con^ederate the Landtgrave of Hessen, had a
hundred and eight Troops of Horse, and a hundred and eighty Companies of Foot;
all the Horse* Troops should have been at their first levy eighty Riders
apiece; every Foot-Company a hundred and twenty six at least; therefore the
Queens four hundred and twenty Troops of Cavalry, should have been at their
first levy thirty three thousand six hundred, and her six hundred and thirty
Companies should have been at their first levy seventy nine thousand three
hundred and eighty men. The Landtgrave's a hundred and eight Troops of Cavalry
should have been eight thousand six hundred and forty Horse. His hundred and
eight Companies of Foot should have been (at a hundred and twenty six men a
piece) twenty two thousand six hundred and eighty men. Be pleased to add the
Landtgrave's eight thousand six hundred and forty Horse to the Queens thirty
three thousand six hundred, the aggregate is forty four thousand two hundred
and forty. Add the Landtgrave's twenty two thousand six hundred and eighty
Foot, to the Queens seventy nine thousand three hundred and eighty, both the
Infantries amounted to a hundred and two thousand and sixty. Now it is well
known that when their Armies were Cassed, they did not exceed, nay nor come
near the half of these numbers; for if you add the number of the Infantry to
that of the Cavalry, the Aggregate will be a hundred forty six thousand three
hundred. Now I conceive thirty Colonels might have commanded all the Cavalry,
and thirty three Colonels all the Infantry, these would have been in all but
sixty three Regiments. And I am very sure there were not so few Colonels as a
hundred and forty. So there might have been saved the expense of the Officers
of eighty Regiments, both in the time of War, and at that time too when they
were to give their Officers a little satisfaction-money (for so it was called)
in lie^ of all their Arrears, when they disbanded them.

And truly I should think that unless some new emergency, or some unlooked
Recruits better than Levies.
for disaster seemed to require it, the constant recruiting old Troops and
Companies might advance a Princes ^ervice as much, and save his Treasure much
more than the levying new Regiments does, which still draws both trouble and
expense along with it. But it is time for me to forbear, for perhaps I have
gone too far.

Since Money is generally scarce in the Wars, in so much that Soldiers cannot
receive their Wages duly, let us see what allowance of Meat and Drink
(ordinarily called Proviant) Princes allow their Soldiery, to furnish which
every Army should have a General Proviant-master; and truly I conceive him to
be an Officer as necessary and useful, if not more, in the fields, where mostly
our Modern Armies are entertained with Proviant, as either a General
Commissary, or a Treasurer. His Charge is to provide Victuals, Corn, Flesh,
Wine, Bread and Beer; he has the inspection of them, and should see them
equally and proportionably divided to the Regiments according to their several
strengths; for which purpose he should have all the Rolls and Lists A
Proviantmaster General, his Duties.
by him, which his Secretaries should carefully keep. He has no power to sell
any Proviant under what pretense soever, without the Generals express Warrant.
All Mills where the Army comes are under his protection, and he is obliged to
protect them. He has the ordering of all the Magazines for Victuals, and to
him belongs the care of seeing the Garrisons, and fortified places sufficiently
provided with such Meats and Drinks as are Provisions for fortified places.
most fit to preserve; these are Corn, Grain, and Meal of several kinds,
Stock Fish, Herrings, and all other Salted-fishes, Salted and Hung-fleshes,
especially Beef and Bacon, Cheese, Butter, Almonds, Chestnuts, and Hazelnuts,
Wine, Beer, Malt, Honey, Vinegar, Oil, Tabaco, Wood and Coal for Firing, and as
many living Oxen, Cows, Sheep, and Swine, Hens and Turkies as can be
conveniently sed; for which purpose as also for Horses, he is to provide Straw,
Hay and Oats. This General Proviant-master has under him a Lieutenant, a
Secretary, a Clerk, a Smith, a Waggon-master, and a Waggon-maker, a
Quartermaster, and some Officers who are called Directors.

There are few Princes who have not their particular establishment for their
Proviant both in Field and Garrison, as well as for Money; the order Allowance
of Proviant.
whereof commonly is this, they allow so much Bread, Flesh, Wine or Beer to
every Trooper and Foot* Soldier, which ordinarily is alike to both; then they
allow to the Officers according to their dignities and charges, double, triple,
and quadruple portions; as to an Ensign four times more than to a common
Soldier, a Colonel having commonly twelve portions allowed him. The ordinary
allowance for a Soldier in the field, is daily two pound of Bread, one pound of
Flesh, or in lieu of it, one pound of Cheese, one pottle of Wine, or in lieu of
it, two pottles of Beer. It is enough, cries the Soldiers, we desire no more,
and it is enough in conscience. But this allowance will not last very long,
they must be contented to ma^ch sometimes one whole week, and scarce get two
pound of Bread all the while, and their Officers as little as they, who if they
have no provisions of their own carried about with them, must be satisfied with
Commis-bread, and cold water, as well as the common Soldier, unless they have
money to buy better entertainment from Sutlers. I have known Captains give a
very great demonstration of their patience, and their affection to their
Masters service, by satisfying their appetites with water, and very coarse
bread, one whole Summer, and part of the next winter.

But they will be refreshed when I tell them of free Quarter which Princes Free
Quarter, very burden* some to a Country, though never so well regulated.
and their Generals are many times forced for want of money to grant, where
they can Quarter their Armies in Towns and Villages, and this proves often the
destruction* of a Country: for though no exorbitancy be committed, and that
every man both Officer and Soldier demand ^o other entertainment than what is
allowed by the Prince or State where they serve; yet when an Army cannot be
Quartered but close and near together, to prevent Infalls, Anslachts and
Surprisal of an Enemy, it is an easy matter to imagine what a heavy burden
these places bear, whom in poor men's houses, six, seven, eight, it may be
fourteen or fifteen Soldiers are lodged, for in such cases it is ordinary to
quarter two thousand Foot, or a thousand Horse in a little Town, where perhaps
there are not above three or four hundred houses. And withal it is very hard to
get Soldiers and Horsemen kept within the limits of their Duty in these
Quarters, after they have endured hunger, thirst, and other hardships in the
field. It is true; all Princes who for preservation of their Armies from
extreme ruin, and for want of Treasure, are necessitated too often to make use
of this* free Quarter, do not only make strict Laws and Ordinances, how many
times a day Officers and Soldiers are to eat, and how many Dishes every one
according to his quality is to call for, but likewise set down the precise
rates and values of the Dishes, that the Host be not obliged to do beyond those
limitations, yet the grievance continues heavy and great.

The Ordinances concerning free Quarter of the Emperor, the Kings of
Ordinances for free Quarter.
Denmark and Sweden, and German Princes, are upon the matter with little
difference all one, as thus: A Colonel is to have twelve dishes of meat, each
at the rate of the eighth part of a Dollar, ten pound of Bread, and ten
measures of Wine. A Lieutenant Colonel, eight dishes, eight pound of Bread, and
six measures of Wine. A Major or Captain six dishes of Meat, six pound of
Bread, and six measures of Wine. A Lieutenant and Ensign, each of them four
dishes, four pound of Bread, and three measures of Wine. Every Sergeant three
dishes of Meat, two pound of Bread, and one measure and a half of Wine. Every
Corporal, and every Drummer two dishes of Meat, two pound of Bread, and one
measure and a half of Wine. A common Soldier or Trooper so much Flesh* Bread
and Wine as I spoke of before, when I told you what Proviant was allowed him.
If the Army be not in a Wine-Country, then all those I have spok^ of, have a
double allowance of Beer. This is besides the Hay, Straw and Oats the Country
is bound to furnish to the Horses, not only of the Cavalry, Artillery, and
General Officers, but to those Horses likewise that belong to Foderage.
the Infantry. And this grievance of Foderage proves many times heavier than
the free quarter, all being often eaten up in a short time, wherewith the
Inhabitants should maintain their Horses and Beasts. In these Countries where
the Country People receive a little money for what the Soldiers spend on their
Marches in their transient Quarters, as for most part in his Majesty's
Dominions is more tolerable than where they receive no moneys at all, though
the Hosts of both Foot and Horse must be considerable losers, when they get but
a Twopence or a Groat for a nights entertainment.

Service is that which every Host is bound to furnish either in Town or Country
Service.
to those that are lodged with them, whether they be Officers, Troopers, or
common Soldiers, whether they be on free quarter, or to pay for their Diet.
Service comprehends a Bed, Lodging, Table, and Table-linnen, Fire, Salt and
Vinegar. It is a grievance likewise, because many times the Soldiers are
extremely extravagant in demanding more of those than they need. I find in some
Histories of France, that ninety years ago or thereby, this Service was called
French Service.
Vstence, and when they got pay, they were to seek no other Vstence or Services
but a Bed, a Table, and a Table-cloth, and liberty to dress their Meat at the
Hosts fire. Nor might they invite one another to their Quarters, because that
proved troublesome to their* Landlords. But when moneys were wanting, then the
Soldiers were to have free Quarter, which was so well regulated, that none
might demand any other entertainment than what the Host was pleased to give
them, provided that was sufficient to satisfy nature. And withal, five
Shillings sterling in money every month, wherewith to buy shoos, or other small
Necessaries. And truly this was a better order for free Quarter than any I have
yet spoken of. A very especial care was taken to punish all such who transgrest
any of these Ordinances. And about that same time I find that the Protestants
pay was very frugal, the Foot was paid thus: A Captain had every Month a
hundred Protestant pay eighty or ninety years ago.
French Livers, the Lieutenant had fifty, the Ensign thirty, the Ser^eant
fifteen, every Corporal, Pipe^, and Dru^mer twelve, and the common Soldier had
nine.

CHAP. IX. Of Military Laws and Articles, of Courts of War, of the
Judg-Marshal, and Provost-Marshal-General.
THE Laws of God and Nature would not be sufficient to keep wicked man within
the bounds of his duty, if the Municipal Laws of the Land were not superadded,
and those would signify but little too, if the punitive execution of them did
not follow the transgressors of them. I know not indeed why Soldiers should
not be governed by those same Laws whereby other subjects of that same Prince
and State are, if it be not for two reasons: First, an Army being in the field,
and making no long abode in one place, Reasons for the sever^ty of Military
Laws.
Criminals and other guilty persons cannot be so formally and legally convened
before the ordinary Judges of the Land, as the constant Inhabitants may,
especially when an Army is out of a Prince his own Dominions, as many times it
is. Secondly it is found not only fit but necessary, that more severe Laws be
made in Camps than in Cities, for I know not by what authority, for what
reason, or by what instinct men who follow the War, assume to themselves a
greater liberty to sin than other Mortals do, as if the entering themselves in
a Militia, did let them loose from all Civil bonds and ties of humane Society,
and that which in a Commonwealth is a Capital crime, were but a venial
Peccadillo in an Army. That some Armies are better governed than others, is
easily granted, and that fewer gross crimes are committed in some, than in
others, will not be denied, being some Generals are more just, more exact, and
more severe than others are; and which is more than that, some Armies are
better paid than others be; for Theoderick King of the Goths said well,
Disciplinam non servat jejunus exercitus: A hungry Army observes no Discipline.
But that the Roman Armies in ancient times, and some since their decay, were so
well governed, and all the members of them so orderly, is but a dream; their
terrible disorders and extravagant deportments are to be seen in History, and
some of them I have touched in the beginning of my Discourses of the Roman
Militia. And if in an Army some offenses be not instantly punished, it will be
found peradventure within a few hours impossible to punish them at all. Hence
it is that a Commander in the War is not only permitted to do that which the
Civil Judge may not do, but is liable to censure if he does it not, as to
inflict present death, either by his particular order, or with his own hand
without formal process, as in the Soldiers in some cases may be put to death
without process.
case of mutiny, to kill one in the beginning of it, and so to terrify others
from prosecuting it, or in the case of disobedience, when the appearance or
pursuit of an enemy, will not suffer the Delinquent to be legally proceeded
against, or upon a march when an enemy is either in Van, rear or flank; a
Marshal-General may be ordered to hang all without process, whom he finds at
such a distance from the Army without his Colone^s Pass; and in this last case
Officers may kill those Soldiers that stragle or lag behind. But I should
advise all Commanders not to make themselves Boureaus, and to be very sparing
to kill with their own hands, except in extraordinary cases.

These reasons have given a just rise to Military Laws, which ordinarily are
called Articles of War, there are, or at least, should be as many several
Military Articles of War.
Constitutions as there are Princes or States, who wage War, for every one of
them has his several Laws and Statutes, yet all or most agree in these
following particulars.

First, strict Laws are made for the observance of Religious Duties, a
submission For Religion.
to Church Discipline, and a due respect to be given to all Ecclesiastical
persons, against Atheism, Blasphemy, Perjury, and the profanation of the name
of God. Secondly for the maintenance of the Majesty and Authority For Loyalty.
of the Prince or State, in whose service the Army is, that nothing be done or
spoke to the disparagement of himself, his Government, his Undertakings, or the
Justice of any of his actions, under all highest pains. Thirdly for honor,
respect, and obedience to be given to all superior Commanders from the highest
For Obedience.
to the lowest of them, and none of their Commands are to be disputed, much
less are they themselves to be affronted, either by gestures, words, or
actions. But this is to be understood that the command be not diametrically
contrary, and prejudicial to the Prince his service; but indeed such commands
would be so clear that they need no canvasing, otherwise any disobedience opens
a door to resistance, that ushereth in sedition, which often is supported by
open rebellion. To clear which, suppose what frequently falls out, that the
Governor of a well fortified, and a well provided place offers to deliver
Disobedience to unlawful Commands, lawful.
it up to an enemy without opposition, those under him may resist so unjust and
so base a command; and they not only may, but ought to resist him, for the
disobedience in such a case of the subaltern Officers and Soldiers is a piece
of excellent service done to their Master; and if they do it not, they are
liable to those Laws of War, which for giving over a Fort in that fashion,
sentences the Governor to an Ignominious death, the inferior Commanders to be
shamefully casheer'd, and the common Soldiers to be disarmed, and made serve as
Pioneers to the Army; which were acts of great injustice, if Inferiors were
bound to give a blind obedience to all the Commands of their Superiors,
whatever they be, without exception. And such a case it is, when an Officer
commands those under him to desert their Post, whether that be in Town, Camp,
Leaguer, or Field, and go over with him to the Enemy. If they do so, and are
ever retaken, he is punished for his treachery, and they for their obedience to
so illegal a command.

Fourthly, Articles of War are made for due and strict keeping of Guards For
keeping strict Guards, and Watches.
and Watches; and here (as in many other points) observe the severity of
Military Law, for he who after tap-too discharges any Hand gun, be it Pistol,
Musket, Fusee, or Carrabine (unless against an enemy) or he who sleeps on his
Sentinel, or deserts it, or he who is drunk on his Watch, are all to die; these
be crimes which the Municipal Laws of most Nations do not punish with death,
yet in the Laws of War this severity is thought no more than necessary.

Fifthly, Laws are made against those who stay behind, or straggle in ordinary
Against straglers.
or extraordinary Marches.

Sixthly, Against Fugitives and Runnaways, either such as leave their Colors
Against Runnaways.
when they are in Garrisons or Quarters, and desert the Service under any
pretense, without a Pass, or such as run away from their Colors, or their
Officers in the field, in time of Skirmish or Battle, or such who in storms and
assaults desert their Posts, till either they are wounded, or have made use of
their Swords, all these are liable to death, and those who wound or kill any of
them in their flight, in their going or running away, are not to be accountable
for it.

Seventhly, Against those who make any Treaty or agreement in the field Against
Treaties with an Enemy.
with an enemy, without the command or consent of him who commands in chief.
And here again observe another case wherein Inferiors are to refuse obedience;
the Military Law condemns a Colonel for such a Treaty, and every tenth Soldier
of his Regiment to die with him, for giving obedience to so unjust a command.

Eighthly, Against those who surrender fortified places, unless extreme
necessity Against needless Surrender of Forts, and several other crimes.
require it, of which I shall speak in a more proper place.

Ninthly, Against those who mutiny, burn houses, without the Generals command,
commit robbery, murder, theft, or violence to those who have the Generals
safeguards, and against those who keep private correspondence, unless ordered
to do it by the General; all these crimes by most Military Laws are punished
with death.

Tenthly, Against private Combats or Duels, the Combatants and Against Duels.
their Seconds are to die; and if superior Officers knew of the Combat, and did
not hinder it, they are to be casheer'd with Ignominy; a necessary Law enough,
yet seldom put in execution.

Eleventhly, Against those who sell, play, or pawn, or change their Arms
Against sellers or pawners of Arms.
either defensive or offensive, whether he be a Horseman, or a Foot-Soldier; he
who does any of these, is not only punishable, but likewise he who bought, won,
or took them in pawn.

Twelfthly, Against false Musters, whether it be of Men, Horses, Arms, Against
false Musters.
Saddles, or other Furniture, by these Articles not only those who make the
false Muster, but all those who help to make it, are punishable.

Thirteenthly, Against those who detain the pay of either Horsemen, or Against
those who detain the Princes Pay.
Foot-Soldiers, any Officer guilty of this deserves to die. Neither if an
Officer have lent money to a Soldier, may he pay himself, or retain in his hand
what he pleases, but must give him as much of his pay as can entertain him to
do his Masters service.

Fourteenthly, Against those Officers whatsoever they be (except the General)
Against those who give Passes.
who give Passes. The Swedish Articles order a Colonel (who presumes to give a
Pass) to lose his life, and to lose his charge if he permit any under his
command to go home without the Felt-marshals knowledge.

Other abominable crimes, such as Adultery, Incest, Sodomy, Beastiality,
Greater Crimes.
Parricide, are examined, tried and punished according to the Municipal Laws of
the Prince or State who is Master of the Army. And many smaller Smaller faults.
faults are left to the cognizance, discretion and arbitrament of a Court of
War.

A Council of War, and a Court of War, are commonly by ordinary A Council of
War.
Soldiers confounded, as if they were one thing, whereas they are very
different; the first being composed of those persons whom the Prince or his
General calls to consult with concerning the managing the War, and these are
indeed but Counselors, and have in most Armies their President, who is
nominated by the Prince or State, they do but advise for the Prince or his
Captain General, have a negative voice, and retain a power to themselves to do
what they please. A Court of War consists of those Officers who are called
together to be a Jury in the examining, processing, and sentencing Delinquents;
and it is twofold, a General or high Court of War, and a Regiment, or a low
Court of War.

The Causes belonging to the General Court of Wars cognizance, are A General
Court of War.
matters of Treason against the Prince or State, injuries and affronts done or
offered to the person or honor of their General; differences between the
Cavalry and Infantry, between one Regiment and another, between Officers of one
Regiment, or between Officers and Soldiers of one Regiment. To the decision of
a General Court of War belong all Civil affairs and business, though they have
been determined in the lower Courts; for in Cases to be determined by it.
these cases Appeals are permitted to the higher Court; neither can the
sentence of the lower Court be executed, till the process be fully heard in the
superior, if the parties concerned have appealed to it. When the business
concerns the Prince or State, or that any General person or Colonel is
criminally accused, the General or Commander in chief of the Army is obliged to
preside himself. But in those other cases which I have mentioned, The President
of it.
He may appoint a Lieutenant General, or a Major General to preside. I know the
Swedes give the Presidency in General Courts of War, constantly to the
Auditor-General, or Judg-Marshal, in the General or Felt-Marshals absence. But
truly I think this is not done without some derogation to those General
Officers who assist; for though upon the matter the Auditor-General orders the
proceedings of the Martial Court, yet in point of honor he should not preside
in a high Court of War no more than a Regiment-Auditor (in the Discipline of
these same Swedes) presides in a lower Court. The Assessors should be twelve in
number at least, (for they The Assessors.
may be, and ordinarily are more) besides the President, and in some places
fourteen besides the President. These be the General of the Artillery, the
Lieutenant General of the Army, the Generals of the Cavalry and Infantry, the
Lieutenant-Generals, and Major-Generals of Horse and Foot, the Quartermaster
General, and such Colonels as the General, or Auditor-General thinks fit to
appoint. After they are convened, they take their places thus: At the head of
the Table, the President sits alone, upon his right hand at the side of the
Table, sits the General of the Artillery, and under him the General of the
Cavalry. Upon the Presidents left hand at the side of the Table, sits the
Lieutenant General of the Army, and under him the General of the Foot. Under
the General of the Cavalry sits the Lieutenant General Their Precedence.
of the Cavalry, and under the General of the Foot, sits the Lieutenant General
of the Foot; and in that same order the Major-Generals, and next them the
General Commissary, and General Quartermaster. Next them, all the Colonels who
are called there, take their places according to the time they have served as
Colonels in that Prince or States service; the right side of the Table (which
is that on the Presidents right hand) being more honorable than the other.
After they have all taken their seats, they rise again, and hear an Oath read,
wherein they swear with hands up, to be free Their Oath.
from all malice, envy, hatred, revenge, fear, and affection, and that they
shall judge righteously and impartially, according to the Laws, Constitutions,
and Articles of War, and their own best judgment, and conscience. So help them
God in the great day. The Provost-Marshal General is to be the Accuser, The
Accuser.
with the help of the Princes Prolocutor-fiscal, and to him belongs also the
execution of the sentence.

The lower Court of War is that which is kept in the several Regiments, whether
Horse or Foot, which the Colonels, and in their absence the Lieutenant-Colonels
may call, when ever they think the necessity of their affairs A Regiment Court
of War.
require it. A Regiment Court-Marshal may judge and determine in all causes,
both Civil and Criminal, and of all persons (except the three Field-Officers)
within that Regiment. The Colonel presides, in his absence the
Lieutenant Colonel, The President.
and in his the Major; or if none of these be present, the oldest Captain, but
the Regiment-Auditor, never, nay not in the Swedish Armies. In the Regiments of
Horse, the Colonels Assessors are his Lieutenant Colonel, His Assessors.
and Major, three Rit-masters, as many Lieutenants, as many Cornets, and as
many Corporals, or more, if the Colonel pleases. In a Regiment of Foot, two
Captains, two Lieutenants, two Ensigns, two Sergeants, two Furers, and two
Fouriers, where such Officers are allowed; where not, more of the Sergeants,
and two Corporals. They may be in all more than thirteen, Their Number.
but fewer they may not be. The Regiments Provost-Marshal presents the accused
party with a Guard to the Court of War, after the members have sworn as the
General Court of Wat uses to do, and formally delivers The Accuser.
his accusation; from this Court, there may be (as I told you before)
appellation, The sentence to be approved by the General.
in Civil affairs, but not in Criminals, yet no sentence of death past by a
lower Court of War can be executed, till the General approves of it, and
sometimes he remits the examination of it to a superior Court; especially when
he has ground to believe that the Regiment-Court has past either too
rigorous, or too mild and favorable a sentence. And this superior Court called
in such cases, is commonly called a Court of Error, because it cognosceth Court
of Error.
of the Errors of the inferior ones. The Prince or State still retains power to
moderate and mitigate the sentence of either of the Courts, or graciously to
remit and pardon the offense; and in their absence their Generals may do the
like, except in the cases of Les Majesty. But after the sentence of either the
one Court, or the other, is prohounced, no man that bears charge or office in
the Army is permitted to speak for pardon or mitigation, unless it be Ensigns
(to whom something of that nature by custom is indulged) and in some places
Officers who transgress in this point are punished with the loss of their
places, and such as have done so, may be sure none will be so kind as to plead
for their restoration.

These Laws, Ordinances, and Courts of War, the sentences of these Courts, and
execution of these sentences, makes up that part of a Militia which ordinarily
Discipline of War.
is called the Discipline of War; for the right ordering and regulating
whereof, an Auditor-General, Inferior Auditors, a Marshal-General, Inferior
Provosts, Marshals, and their Lieutenants, with Executioners, or Hangmen, are
absolutely necessary members in all Armies.

The Auditor-General is he whom we call Judge Marshal, and whom some Judge
Marshal.
call Judg-Advocate. He ought to be a grave and judicious person, who fears
God, and hates vice, especially bribery. A Lawyer he should be, in regard most
Articles of War have their rise from Law, and many cases chance to His
Qualifications, and Duty.
be voided in Courts of War, where no Military article is clear, but must be
determined by the Civil, or by the Municipal Law of the Prince, to whom the
Army belongs, and the Judg-Marshals duty is to inform the Court what either of
these Laws provides in such cases. Some Princes remit the whole Justice of the
Army so absolutely to the Judg-Marshal, that they give him power to punish
Soldiers who transgress public Proclamations, of himself, without the Colonels
consent, yea, whether he will or not. The Provost-Marshal General, and all
Officers of Justice of the Army, whatever name they bear, are to obey the
Judg-Marshals directions and orders. He may cause Delinquents to be
apprehended, and send them to the Regiments to His Power very great.
which they belong, with direction to the Colonels to call Regiment Courts of
War, at which he may appoint the Provost-Marshal, or his Lieutenant to be
present, and to appeal from it in case any unjust or partial sentence be
pronounced. All complaints whether in matters Civil or Criminal use to be
brought before him; and in many of them he has power to give judgment himself
without any Court, and in others he has authority to oblige Colonels to do
Justice, wherein if they fail, he may bring them before a General Court, to
answer for their partiality. All differences that are among Merchants,
Tradesmen, Mark-tenters and Sutlers, who are permitted to frequent the Army, or
that happen between any of them, and the Officers and Soldiers, are brought
before him, and in them all (after due examination of the whole fact, and
witnesses) he has power to judge and give sentence. He has power to call
together a General Court of War, and to call such Colonels to it as he thinks
fit, but herein he seldom acts till the General or Feltmarshal advise the
matter with him. Such Colonels as he cites to be Assessors, and do not appear,
he may fine, and by the Fiscal exact the Fines he has imposes. He is bound to
examine all Prisoners of War, as also all such as frequent the Army, and may be
suspected to be spies. All Testaments, Contracts, and Obligations between party
and party, are judged to be in force when they are signed and attested by him.
He has power of the Measures and Weights within the Army, and may order the
Marshals to set fitting Prices on all vendible things that are for Back or
Belly. And he is to have a care that the Provost-Marshals neither wrong the
Soldiers, nor the Merchants, Victualers or Sutlers, and he is Judge in any
difference that may arise between any of them.

A Provost-Marshal General is by those who do not well understand his Office, A
Provost-Marshal-General,
taken at best to be but a Jailer, but by some to be a Hangman. But no Jailer
ever durst assume the power which all Military Laws and Customs give a Marshal,
for he may by virtue of his Office, without any command or permission of his
Superiors apprehend those he finds actually transgressing the Articles of War,
or in any other gross misdemeanor, and according to the quality of the fault,
either detain them Prisoners with a Guard, or yet clap them in Irons. But he
His Power in an Army.
may neither dismiss them, nor yet impose further punishment on them without
order from either the Commander in chief of the Army, or the Judg-Marshal
General. At some times, and in some occassons he is permitted, yea commanded to
hang or shoot to death such as he finds (in contempt of late Proclamations)
straggling, robbing, burning, or Plundering. And for that reason a Guard of
Horse is allowed him, these the French call Archers. Whosoever offers to oppose
him in the exercise of his charge, be what he will, is to die for it. All
Provost-Marshals of Regiments, Troops, or Companies, whether of Horse or Foot,
are to swear obedience to the Commands of this Marshal-General; and whoever
pays it not, is by the command of the Auditor-General turned out of the Army,
with the consent of the Colonel or Captain, according as he is a Regiment or
Companies Marshal. All Marshals of Regiments are bound when they are in the
field every morning and evening to wait on the Marshal-General to receive his
directions according to Emergencies, and he who fails in either attendance or
obedience, is punishable according to the quality of the fact. I have told you
that in General Courts of War, he is the Accuser, and is to see the sentence
put in execution. He is to have a strict eye over his inferior Marshals that
they do their Duties uprightly and impartially, and that they permit not the
Soldiers to wrong the Victualers and Sutlers, nor those to wrong the Soldiers,
by taking greater Prices, or selling with less measures or weights than those
appointed by the Auditor-General. He ought to take pains to learn what the
Prices of things His Duty.
are in these Towns where the Mark-tenters buy their Wine, Beer, Tobaco,
Vinegar, Oil, Bread, Bacon, and other Provisions, that accordingly the General
Auditor may know with the greater justice to impose the Prices. But the truth
is, the Buyers are too often abused, and the Prices set too high by the
collusion of the Provost-Marshal with Sutlers, and the Sutlers bribing the Judge
Marshal. The Provost-Marshal General has a Jailer under him, who must be paid
by His Jailer.
every Prisoner his Jail-money, and if Irons be clapped on him, he must pay for
them besides. He is to have a pottle of Wine or Beer of every Hogshead that is
brought to the Camp by the Sutlers, and the Tongue of every Beast that is
slaughtered in it, and for these he agrees with the Regiment-Marshals. The same
power he has in the field with an Army, the like he has in all Garrisons,
though he come to any of them but accidentally, or upon some emergency.

Under the Marshal-General are Hangmen, and those are the fellows who glory
that all this great show and parad of Justice, of Courts of War, of
Judg-Marshals, of Provost Marshals, and Clerks, would be but a fanfare, and
signify nothing at all, if it were not for them. They avouch that they are the
Pillars, the props, and supporters of Justice; for if, say they, the Executive
part of the Law, be the life of the Law, then Hangmen, who are the true and
unquestionable Hangmen.
Executioners of the Law, keep life in the Law, by taking away the lives of the
Breakers, contemners, and transgressors of it.

I have known another high Justitiary in Swedish Armies of equal power with the
Marshal-General, for what power this last has in Quarters, Garrison or Camp,
the same has the other in the field on a March; he is qualified with the title
of Rumor-master General, whether he be made use of in other places,
Rumor*master General.
is more than I have learned. His charge is to ride with a Guard of Horse, and
some Hangmen on the Van and Flanks of the Army, and in a Retreat; in the Rear,
to save all the several Quarters and Country from being pillaged or plundered,
and the Country people from being wronged; and many times he is commanded to
use Summary Justice and execution on the offenders, in the place where they are
taken, but for most part only to apprehend them, and deliver them over to the
Marshal General.

The Laws and Articles of War of every Prince and State ought to be promulgated
to all the Armies, and read over to every particular Regiment, Troop, and
Company every month, or at least every quarter of a year that none may have
reason to pretend ignorance. In all Courts of War, higher or lower Officers How
the members of a Court of War give their sentence.
of equal quality, as Major-Generals, Colonels, Majors, Captains, Sergeants and
Corporals, (after a full examination, and hearing of parties, and witnesses) go
apart by themselves, and after some debate agree upon the sentence, which he
who has the Precedence among them, whispers in the ear of the Clerk, who after
he has written all the several sentences, gives them to the Auditor, whether
General, or Particular of a Regiment; and he observing wherein most agree,
makes that the sentence of the Court which is signed by the President, and so
sent to the General. if he have not presided himself. In Regiment-Courts of War
such inferior Officers, suppose Sergeants and Corporals ought to be chosen ^o
sit, as know in some measure what it is to judge according to equity and reason:
for I have seen many of them in several places of* the world, who thought they
gave their verdict like wise men, and gallant fellows, (even when Articles of
War were clear) when by their sentence they referred an offender guilty of a
Capital crime, to the mercy of the Lord General, or the Colonel. The French
Councils of War now may consist of seven Officers, and in them Lieutenants,
sub-Lieutenants, and Ensigns must only stand with their hats off, but give no
sentence.

CHAP. X. Of Exercising, Drilling, and Training the several Bodies of the
Cavalry, and the Infantry.
HAving levied and armed our Soldiers both of Horse and Foot, and sufficiently
entertained them with goodly promises of Pay, Proviant, Service, and free
Quarter, and shown them under what Laws and Discipline they are to live, it
will be time to teach them the Duties of Soldiers, and this is done by
Exercising and Drilling them. What kinds of Exercise Officers and Soldiers were
inured to in ancient times, has been abundantly told you in my Discourses of
the Gracian and Roman Art of War. Wrestling, Running, Leaping, Swimming, all
which harden and enable a man's Body, and render the Soldier active and
dexterous in Battle, at Storms and Assaults, in pursuit of his enemy, and
sometimes in flight to save his own life, were the duties imposed in ancient
times, and to them properly belongs Exercises properly so called.
the word of Exercise. But this kind of Exercise is now rather permitted than
commanded. The using the Spade and Mattock in making Ramparts and Ditches,
building Walls, Sconces, Forts, and Castles, constantly practiced in time of
peace by the Ancients, especially the Romans, is not now at all thought of,
till either the Siege or defense of a Town, or the necessity* to fortify a
Camp render it necessary, and then six Soldiers (not accustomed before to that
manner of Exercise) are not able to work so much as one Country-fellow newly
taken from the Plow. The custom of shooting at Butts with Bow and Arrow in
Scotland and England is much, if not wholly worn out. In foreign places their
shooting with Firelocks and ri^^ed Guns at Marks every Holy Day, may make them
good Firemen, and good Marksmen, but does not strengthen the nerves and arms of
men as the Bow did. But to bring these Exercises so much conducing to the
health and strength of an Army in fashion again, must be the work of no private
person, but of a Prince or State.

Another part of Military Exercise consists in teaching the Soldiers both
Training and Drilling divided into two parts,
of Horse and Foot to fight orderly and readily with an Enemy, and this is that
which properly we call Training and Drilling. It consists of two parts, the
first is, to teach them to handle and manage their offensive Arms (whatsoever
they be) handsomely, readily and dexterously, and this is ordinarily called the
Postures. The second is to make them when they are in a Body, to cast
themselves in such a figure or order as shall be commanded them, and this is
commonly called the Motions and Evolutions.

Before I speak any more on this Subject, I shall say that though this Drilling
and Training, be not so much forgot as those other Exercises are, whereof I
have but just now spoken, yet it is too much neglected in many places, Much
neglected.
neither do I think it is so much used in any place of Europe, as in his
Majesty's Dominions, in which the Ancients are well imitated who trained their
Armies very punctually in time of Peace, as well as in time of War. I wish all
Companies who otherwise are well enough trained, were accustomed to make
Marches when they are exercised, as I said in my Discourse of Defensive Arms.
For though I do not desire they should be made to run or walk twenty, or five
and twenty miles in five or six hours time, and in full Arms as the Romans did;
yet I think they would be much strengthened, and Marching a necessary point of
Military Exercis^.
made more healthful, and more able to endure fatigue, if they were made twice
a week, march in a Summer-morning seven or eight miles and back again in the
afternoon, and proportionably as far in the Winter. This being frequently
practiced in time of peace, would make long and speedy Marches (which often are
necessary in the time of War) even with Defensive Arms very easy, and it would
accustom the Soldiers to keep their ranks and files punctually, provided
Officers be attentive to see them do it on that March. This would be to some
better purpose than for Commanders to march with Squads, with half or whole
Regiments a half hour, it may be a whole one, up and down, to and again, upon
one spot of ground; a right Mockmarch A Mockmarch.
whereby some* Officers contrary to their intention (for they think they are
doing a very handsome feat) make themselves ridiculous to both the spectators,
and their own Soldiers. The Grecians and Romans in time of War drilled their
Armies in the Fields, but Training is looked upon now as an unnecessary thing,
not only in the Field, but in Towns and Garrisons likewise. This is not the
Prince or States fault, but is an inexcusable neglect and carelessness of
Colonels, who make not their Captains do their duty in so necessary a point of
War. I have seen in Germany and Denmark Regiments newly raised, and some also
sent out of Sweden in the time of the long War before the Peace of Munster,
only exercised and drilled three or four times, and that was enough for them
Supine carelessness of Colonels.
for the whole time they were to serve; for a man would have made himself
ridiculous if he had spoken of drilling old Soldiers, to keep them in mind of
their Postures and Motions; this would have been looked on as a disparagement to
them, for it would have been presupposed that they stood in need of
Exerciseing, as in truth most of them did. It is a pity, and sometimes matter
of sport, to hear men glory that they are old Soldiers, who either never have
learned, Old Soldiers.
or have forgot, what belongs to their profession, and so upon the matter prove
themselves to be old fools. Nay, I have seen in these same Wars many new levied
Companies, Troops and Regiments never Trained or Exercised at all; nay, not so
much as one lesson given to a Soldier for the handling his Arms. It is true,
most of those who were levied in my time, had served in those Wars, which were
before my time, but all had not, and therefore some were raw and unexperienced,
and the oldest Soldiers of them needed exceedingly to have had their memories
refresht. This was the condition of five thousand Foot, and three Troops of
Horse which the City of Dantzick levied and entertained in the time of the late
Swedish War against Poland, from the year 1656, till the year 1660. I have not
seen braver men, nor better equipped in any Militia than these were; but in one
whole Summer that I was there, I never saw one Company, or one man of a Company
drilled or exercised. Since the Estates of the United Provinces made their
Peace with the King of Spain, their Officers have been negligent enough of this
duty, which might have been easily observed in most of their Garrisons, wherein
I have been. But I suppose their late alarms have made them resume their
ancient care and diligence.

These Military Exercises were so far worn out of use, that I knew Count
Koningsmark in the year 1655, (when he raised some new Regiments for his Master
the King of Sweden) take some old Officers to be Drill-masters to the
Drill-masters.
new levied Companies, which notwithstanding were provided with all the
Officers belonging to them, and these Drill-masters he entertained with Monthly
wages, which I thought was not done without some blemish to the reputation of
all the Officers, especially of the Colonels and Captains.

That part of Training which teaches the handling Arms is different, to wit,
that which teaches a Horseman to manage handsomely and readly his Pistol,
Carbine, and Sword, whether he be a Curiassier, or Harquebusier, and that which
teaches a Foot soldier to handle his Musket and Pike, and his Swedes Feather,
if he have one. And as a Horseman is obliged to learn to Saddle and Drilling of
Horsemen.
Bridle his Horse quickly and well, to mount and dismount handsomely, to ride
decently, and carry his body well, or as it is called to have a good seat in
his Saddle, and how to use his voice, his hand, his leg, and his spur; so he is
obliged to teach his Horse to obey him, whether it be in trotting, galloping,
running, standing, stopping, turning, or wheeling. The Horseman ought to be
taught how to keep his Pistols and Carbine fixed, and bright without rust, how
to charge them quickly, and prime them, how to fire them, and readily charge
again. And he must be especially careful not to ride a shie-horse, for such a
one may not only bring his Rider in danger and disgrace, but disorder the whole
Troop; Exercise, and accustoming his Horse to all feats of Horsemanship,
especially to see fire, to stand when a Pistol or Carbine are discharged close
by him, and to hear the Trumpet, will by degrees banish shieness from him, and
therefore frequent Drilling-troops of Horse, teaches both man and horse their
duties. Troops should in some points be exercised by sound of Trumpet, that
Horsemen may know the several points of War by their several names, as, to the
Watch, to Saddle, to Horse, to March, to Charge, to R^tire. The particular
words of command for Drilling a single Horsem^^* that is, to teach him the
right and true use of his Arms, whether he be a Curia^^^^r, Harquebusier, or
Carbiner, are too tedious to be set down here, and indeed needless, for they
are vulgarly known, and so are those for the Arms of the Infantry, whether for
the Pike, or the Musket.

To teach either Horsemen or Foot-Soldiers their Motions and Evolutions
Motions, or Evolutions of Bodies both of Horse and Foot.
when they are in Bodies greater or smaller, is the second part of Training or
Drilling. The words of command for both Horse and Foot in these Motions are the
very same, only the Distances are different. Three Foot are allowed between
files of Foot, and that is order, six is open order, and twelve is open open
order, or double double distance; and these you may make use of in Exercising,
Marching, or Fighting, as you think convenient. In Marches the length of the
Pike requires six foot of distance between ranks. Some allow in Distances.
exercising Bodies of Horse, six foot for single distance between ranks and
files, and twelve for double distance. The Germans ordinarily allow ten for the
one* and twenty for the other. All these Motions and Evolutions may be reduced
to four kinds, these are Facings, Doublings, Countermarchings, and Wheelings. I
do not intend to trouble either my Reader or my self with the several words of
command, ordinary Drill-masters have most of them, though not all. But he who
would have those for Horse exactly, may find them in the Supplement to the
Complete Body of the Art Military; and both for Foot and Horse in the famous
Earl of Straffords Instructions for the Discipline of his Army* And those for
the Foot alone, very well done by Sir Th^mas K^lli^, and completely indeed by
Lieutenant Colonel El^on, in his complete Body of the Art Observations
concerning Training.
of War. Yet I shall desire my Reader with me to observe in Exercises of Foot
and Horse these few Particulars.

First, That none of the three ordinary ways used for doubling of ranks in
First Observation.
Bodies of Foot, can be made use of in exercising Bodies of Horse, as now they
are Marshalled in most places of Europe, that is three deep, or three in file;
nor can it be where they are five in file, as in some places they were all odd
numbers, being improper for doublings either of ranks or files.

Secondly, That the Facing of a great Body of Horse to either right or left
Second.
hand, or about by either right or left hand is a difficult work, (though with
Bodies of Foot it is the easiest motion of all the rest) and cannot be suddenly
done, and therefore is dangerous if an enemy be near to take advantage of the
disorder of the motion.

Thirdly, If all the three Countermarches, Laconian, Macedonian, and Chor^an,
Third.
be of very little use and great danger in the Infantry, (as I have endeavored
to make appear in one of my Discourses of the Grecian Militia) then I suppose
it will be easily granted that the use of any of the three is as little, and
the danger as great in Bodies of Cavalry.

Fourthly, That I conceive Wheeling a more proper motion, and more easy Fourth.
for the Horse than for the Foot, it is a motion that has been much used by
Horse in fight, for unless in wheeling they are charged in the flank (and if so
they are ill seconded) they are quickly reduced to their first posture, but it
is not so with the Foot, for if the Body be but indifferently great, suppose
fifteeen hundred men, standing at three foot distance in files, and six in
ranks, you must first make them come both ranks and files to their close order
before you can wheel your Battle, and that requires some time, for it is a
motion of it self; and the greater the Body be, the longer time it will have to
make that first motion for great Bodies move slowly. Next, the motion it self
of wheeling the Battle, is not soon done if well done, for if it be not ordered
discreetly, the Body is immediately in confusion. Thirdly, when you have
wheeled this Body of fifteen hundred men, you must beg yet a Cessation of Arms
from your Enemy, till you put your Battle in a fighting posture, which you
cannot do till you reduce them to their first order; for at close order your
Musque^eers cannot fight, and therefore you must cause your Battle to open* it
is true, the ranks will quickly open backward, but the files being no less in a
Body of fifteen hundred men than two hundred and fifty, must have such a time
to open, (though they do it with all the have imaginable) that a resolute Body
of Horse will Charge thorough them before you end these three motions. But a
Body of Horse being in rank and file at that distance at which it is to fight,
needs no command to close ranks and files before it wheel, nor no command to
open them after it has wheeled, being constantly in a posture to receive an
enemy. And with submission to great Drill masters, I should think the motions
of Facing and Countermarching of Bodies of Horse, whether greater or smaller,
might be spared in their Exercise, because you may face an enemy with a
Squadron of Horse either in flank or rear, by wheeling either to the right or
left hand, or by either of the two about, a great deal sooner, with a great
deal of more ease, and with a great deal of less danger than you can do by
either Facing or Countermarching.

Fifthly, Observe that no man can or will attain to a perfect understanding of
Fifth.
either postures, motions or evolutions in the Training particular men, or yet
Bodies of Horse and Foot by reading the words of command in a Book or Paper, or
looking upon the figures of them, for the Military Art is practical, one shall
understand what belongs to Drilling and Training, more by looking on the real
practice of it three days, than by the contemplative study of it three years:
when you see a Countermarch in the Field, you will quickly understand what an
Evolution it is when you see the figure of it in a Book; but you will not so
soon know what it signifies when you see the figure before the practice.

And lastly, I avouch it to be the essential duty of a Captain to Exercise his
Sixth.
Troop, or company himself, whether it be of Foot or Horse, nor should it be
permitted that his Lieutenant should do it when he is present, much less a
Sergeant (as I have often seen) for thereby he Uncaptains himself, and changes
places with his Lieutenant. And this is too ordinary a Military grievance,
against which the Earl of Swafford guarded by an express instruction that no
Lieutenant should exercise a Company, unless the Captain were absent, which he
might not be, without either sickness, or that Lords own permission; a very
just command. And by the same reason all Colonels should exercise their
Regiments, and in their absence their Lieutenant Colonels, but when either of
them are present, the Major ought neither to be commanded, nor of himself offer
to do it, and this is contrary to the opinion of many, who will impose so many
duties on a Major, that they make thereby Colonels, and Lieutenant* Colonels,
Ciphers, or very insignificant Creatures.

CHAP. XI. Of Compaies, Regiments, and Brigades of Foot, what they have been,
what they are, how they are Marshaled, of all their Officers, their Duties and
Qualifications.
I Suppose most Military men acknowledge the Infantry to be the Body of an Army,
with it the Artillery, Munitions, and Provisions lodge, and so does he who
commands in chief. The members of this Body are Regiments, or Brigades, and the
sinews and arteries of these are Companies. A Company is a Band of armed men
Marshaled in rank and file; a rank and file differ in this, that the first
consists of men, whether on horseback or foot, standing in one A Rank and a
File.
front side for side; the second of men standing in one row or lane, one behind
another, so they may easily be converted, a file into a rank, and a rank into a
file. The number of these ranks and files must be determined by the number of
men appointed to be in each Company, for which there is no general rule, every
Prince and State ordering that as they please, neither do they restrict
themselves constantly to one number, but appoint their Companies to be stronger
and weaker as the emergency of affairs, or the present Ratio Belli seem to
require it.

In former times ever since Gunpowder was invented, it has been so likewise,
for sometimes Companies were more numerous than at other times, yet never were
the weakest of them of so small a number, as generally now they be.

The first time I remember to have read of a Company of one hundred in the
Modern War, was in the Civil Wars of France in the Reign of Charles the Ninth,
about one hundred years since; in them I find that the Protestant
Foot-Companies Company of one hundred strong.
were but generally one hundred strong; for which I can guess at no reason,
unless it were that many Gentlemen who were forced to take Arms, and durst not
stay at home, might be invested with Charges and Employments suitable to their
qualities: yet methinks it had conduced more to the advancement and prosecution
of the grand design that Troops and Companies of Gens d'Armes, or Curiassiers
had been made up of those numbers of Gentlemen, a service very fitting for
them, and suiting well with the French humor.

But in those Legions of France instituted by Francis the First, (whereof I
have spoken in my Discourse of Levies) which consisted of six thousand men a Of
three hundred:
piece, every Legion had twenty Companies, and every Company three hundred men.
And though these Legions fell a great decadency from their Primitive
Institution in Charles the Ninths Reign, yet the number of three hundred in a
Company continued long after that; for I do not find in all Monluc's
Commentaries (which he continues till near the end of Henry the Third's Reign)
mention made of any French Company of Foot under three hundred Combatants. The
Spanish Companies were either four hundred, or three hundred, till our own
time. In the days of the Emperor Charles the Fifth, the German Foot-Companies
were for most part five hundred. Paolo Giovi^ writes that Alpho^s^ Davalo
Marquess of Guast, related to him that when his Master the Emperor invaded
Provence, and thought to have taken Mars^illes, he had in his pay fifty
Companies of Germans, each Company of five hundred Foot-Soldiers, and Of five
hundred.
mark what he adds, according, says he, to the custom of Germany. I find in
Maximilian the Second's Reign, that in his Military Institutions he ordered all
his German Foot-Companies to be four hundred fighting men. And so strong for Of
four hundred.
most part did they contin^e in the Reigns of the Emperors Rodolph, and
Matthias. Ferdinand the second in all his Wars with the Bohemians, the Duke of
Brunswick, Marquess of Baden, Count Mansfield and Bethlem Gabor, the King of
Denmark, and in the beginning also of his long War with the King of Sweden, had
never fewer than three hundred men in a Foot-company at the first levying Of
three hundred.
of it. But thereafter when the War was of a long continuance, his Companies
were not levied so strong, and in end came to be but of one hundred. But it was
not so neither in Tily, nor in Wallensteins time. The Estates of the United
Provinces in the beginning of their War with Spain, ordinarily gave Commissions
for raising Companies two hundred strong. Christian the fourth of Of two
hundred.
Denmark his German Companies were all three hundred strong, but so were not
his S^ots and his English. Of what strength the Swedish Companies were till the
days of Gustavus Adolphus I know not, the actions of that Kingdom, except with
Denmark, and a little with Sigismund their Hereditary King, that was Elected
King of Poland, having made no great noise in the World till that Glorious
Kings Reign. He ordered each of his Foot-Companies to be of one hundred Of one
hundred twenty and six.
twenty and six men, these for their number resembled the Grecian Taxiarchies,
which consisted of eight Files, every File being sixteen deep, and so the
Taxiar^hy consisted of one hundred twenty and eight men, as I have told you in
my Discourses of the Grecian Militia. But some years after that Kings death,
the Swedish Feltmarshals ordered every Company of Foot to consist of one
hundred One of a hundred forty and four.
forty and four Soldiers besides Officers.

Assuredly, as I have said before in my Discourse of Levies, Princes found that
by strong Regiments and Companies they saved much Treasure spent upon the
Officers of weaker ones. But it seems they have in latter times found they were
better served by many Officers and weak Companies, than Most Foot-Companies now
are but a hundred strong.
by few Officers and strong Companies, since all are alike paid, and therefore
almost universally in Europe, no Foot-Company at first levying is above one
hundred Soldiers, unless in some places, especially in Holland, where the
Colonels Company is allowed to be fifty stronger than those of private
Captains. And though the Swedes in the long German War ordered every
Foot-Company to consist of a hundred and forty four men, yet in their Dutch
levies, when they invaded Poland in the year 1655, they appointed each to
consist of one hundred Soldiers.

Formerly scarce the fourth part of a Company was armed with Fire-guns, whether
Harquebusses, or Muskets. In every one of the seven Legions which were
ordained by Francis the First, to be a constant Infantry in France, How a
Company was formerly armed in France.
there were at most (in the latter end of his Reign) but eighteen hundred
Harquebusiers, all the rest of the six thousand were heavily armed, their
offensive weapons being long Poles or Perches, most whereof were Pikes, to
which were added Pistols and Swords. The Forces of the Emperor How in Germany.
Charles the Fifth, and his Brother Ferdinand King of the Romans at Vienna,
when they expected Soliman, were reckoned to be at least one hundred and ten
thousand Horse and Foot, whereof eighty thousand belonged to the Infantry, and
of these only twenty thousand were Harquebusiers, the other sixty thousand were
heavy armed; and for the offensive they had such weapons as I have described in
another place. Maximilian the Second ordered (as I told you before) his
Companies to be four hundred strong, whereof one hundred and forty were
appointed to be Harquebusiers (the Musket not being then in request) with
Headpieces and Rapiers, among whom ten of the lustiest and strongest were to
carry each of them a Harquebuss, a Croc, the Calibre whereof was made to
receive six Balls cast of one pound of Lead; all the rest of the Company were
to carry Pikes, Halberts, and Partisans, and all of them were to be in full
defensive arms, with Swords, and each of them a Pishol at his Girdle, or as it
is called in the establishment, a short Fire-gun. In process of time when
Soldiers became expert at the Musket, Companies how strong or weak soever were
divided into three parts, two thirds whereof were Pikemen, and one third
Musketeers; thereafter the Musket craved the half of the Game, and got it, so
that each Company was equally divided into Pikemen and Musketeers. But
equality How for the present.
for most part is short lived, and so fared it in this, for very soon the
Musketeers challenged the two thirds, and obtained them, leaving but one third
for the Pikemen, which for most part yet they keep, though in several places
(as I have said before) Pikes are sent to look for their fortune elsewhere.

Let us then suppose that which is mostly true, that every Foot-Company
consists now of one hundred men, before we can marshal it, we must know how
many men the Prince or State allows to be in one file, which makes that which
we call the depth of the Battle; the Latin and high Dutch Languages call it the
height; the files being known, the ranks are quickly found. I am Depth of
Modern Bodies of Foot.
not here to tell you of the Square-root, by which many have studied to marshal
their Batallions, for I intend to speak fully of that in a Discourse a part.
But I speak in this place of the depth that every Prince appoints for his Foot.

Before the Reign of the Great Gustavus Adolphus, for any thing I could ever
learn, Foot-Companies were marshaled ten deep almost universally, but he
marshaled Ten deep.
all his Infantry in six ranks. And after he had invaded Germany, the Emperor
with most of the European Kings and Princes kept their Foot still at ten deep;
but before the end of that War which he began, all of them followed his way,
and made the file of their Foot to consist of six men, except the Prince of Six
deep.
Orange, who still kept ten in file: I should except likewise the Earl of
Strafford, who in his Instructions for the better Discipline of his Army,
ordered every Eight deep.
Captain of Foot to draw up his Company eight deep.

In a business of this nature, where there is difference, a man may tell his
opinion without affectation of singularity; and therefore I suppose it will be
granted me, that the more hands a Captain can bring to fight, the more shrewdly
Reasons for six deep.
he will put his enemy to it, provided still his Batallions be of that strength
as to receive the shock of a resolute Impression, and in case of the worst,
that he have Reserves to come to his rescue. Of Reserves I shall speak
hereafter. Now I am hopeful it will not be denied me but that more hands are
brought to fight by eight men in a file, than by ten, and more by six men in a
file, than by eight. Take a second argument, The more able you are to save your
self from being surrounded or out-wing'd by an enemy, or the more able you make
your self to surround and out-wing that enemy of yours, the greater advantage
you have over him. Both these are done by a large front, now it is undeniable
that eight in file enlarge the front more than ten, and six more than eight,
and consequently eight deep contributes more than ten, and six more than eight
for gaining the victory.

That more hands are brought to fight is very soon instanced, first by a Body
The great advantages 1500 Musketeers six deep have of 1500 Musketeers ten
deep.
of Musketeers, and next by a Body of Pikemen. Let us suppose a Body of
fifteen hundred Musketeers marshaled ten deep is to fight with a Body of
Musketeers of equal number, that is fifteen hundred, six deep, and that they
are equally stout and experienced, and equally good Firemen. The fifteen
hundred ten deep must give fire by ranks, as the fifteen hundred six deep must
likewise do; now the fifteen hundred ten deep can make no more but a hundred
and fifty in rank, for a hundred and fifty multiplied by ten, produces fifteen
hundred, but the fifteen hundred six deep make two hundred and fifty in rank,
for two hundred and fifty multiplied by six, produces fifteen hundred; so that
the fifteen hundred six deep at every Volley pours one hundred Leaden Bullets
more in the Enemies bosom, than the fifteen hundred ten deep; and consequently
when six ranks of both parties have fired, the fifteen hundred ten deep have
received six hundred Ball more than the fifteen hundred six deep, which without
all doubt has made a great many men fall more of the one side than the other.
Next one hundred and fifty files of the fifteen hundred six deep, take just as
much ground up in front as the whole Body of the fifteen hundred ten deep, and
therefore the other hundred files of the fifteen hundred six deep, may fall on
the sides of the fifteen hundred ten deep, if they be not flanked either with
Pikes, or with Horsemen. It is the like case, mutatis mutandis, between fifteen
hundred eight deep, and fifteen hundred six deep; for fifteen hundred eight
deep will make but a hundred and eighty eight in rank, for a hundred eighty
eight multiplied by eight produces fifteen hundred and four; now the fifteen
hundred six deep make two hundred and fifty ranks, and so shoots at every
Volley sixty two Bullets more than the fifteen hundred eight deep.

Make the like trial of two Batallions of Pikes, each of them fifteen hundred
The same advantages Pikemen also have.
strong, equally armed for the defensive, and their Pikes of equal length, the
hundred files wherewith the fifteen hundred six deep out-wings the fifteen
hundred ten deep, will likewise enter on their sides, and very soon ruin them
if they be not flanked by their friends; and though they be, yet these hundred
files of the fifteen hundred Pikemen six deep, being otherwise idle may happily
give their flanks some work to do. Nor has the fifteen hundred Pikemen ten
deep any advantage of the fifteen hundred six deep, in the force of the
impression; for I have demonstrated in one of my Discourses of the Grecian
Militia, that six ranks of Pikemen may either give or receive the charge
abundantly, and therefore where Pikemen are ten deep at their charge, the last
four ranks should keep their Pikes ported, because the presenting the points of
them is altogether useless. Neither was it the apprehension of the weakness of
his Body of Musketeers drawn up six deep, that made the King of Sweden make
use of his Feathers to defend his Musketeers against the Polonian Horse; for
these Feathers may serve a Body of Firemen drawn up ten deep as well as a Body
of Firemen drawn up six deep; neither indeed is it the deepness of a Body of
Musketeers that can resist a resolute charge of Horse, it must be Pikes,
Halberts, or these Feathers, or something like them.

Nor do I think after the Invention of Gunpowder, that ten deep was thought fit
for Foot, in imitation of the Romans, as some fancy, for I have shown in
another Reasons for ten deep.
place, that Vegetius (who is looked on by many as the Oracle of the old Roman
Militia) does make the Roman file to consist of eleven men, but I think it was
out of this consideration, that after the first rank had fired their Guns, they
could not be ready to fire again till the other nine ranks had all fired, and
withal a Musket* rest was taken to help; with so much wariness did our
Ancestors walk when first they made use of the new found Engines of fire. We
read of a Count of Va^d^mont, who within thirty years after the Invention of
Gunpowder, made use of two Culverines in his Wars with the Duke of Bar, and by
their help defeated his enemy; but at every time the Pieces were discharged,
the Count himself fell to the ground for fear. But as Great C^sar says, Vsus
est rerum Magister, Use and Custom over-master things, and therefore the Cannon
is not now so dreadful as it was, nor is the Musket so unmanageable as it was
thought; daily experience lets us see, that the first rank of six can fire,
make For fine deep.
ready, and stay for the word of Command, before the other five have discharged
their shot, even in the hottest Piece of service, and without the help of
Musquet-rests. And I suppose it needs be thought no Paradox in me to say that
five ranks of Musketeers can fire one after another without intermission, and
Five deep.
the first of the five be ready to fire again, before the last have discharged;
let any Commander try it with expert Firemen, he will find it will be done
easily enough. And that you may see that this is no new conceit of mine, I
shall tell you that Giovio informs us that at Vienna the twenty thousand
Harquebusiers that were in the Christian Army, were all marshaled five deep,
and so made four thousand files. It is without all peradventure that the best
Commanders then in Europe were there, who would not have permitted this if they
had not known that the first rank could have fired and made ready again, before
all the other four had discharged; neither must you impute this to the
ignorance of the Historian (as being a Churchman) for he is so punctual as to
write nothing of any Military action but what he had from the relation of the
greatest Captains that were upon the place.

And truly if you will consider all I have said, or all that may be said on
this subject, Reasons for it.
you may perhaps think with me that both Musketeers and Pikemen may be
marshaled five deep with no inconvenience at all to the service. I think I hear
some speculative persons cry out, that this is against the rules of all
Tacticks, who reject odd numbers as unfit for doubling. But stay, do you
exercise for show only, or for use. If only for show, I grant you should
neither have odd ranks Objections against it.
nor files; but if for use, I say, that five deep is better than six deep, for
those very reasons that made six deep better than eight deep, and eight better
than ten. You say you cannot double your ranks at five deep, what then? I say
you need not, for I would have your ranks no fewer than five when you are ten
Answered.
deep; why double you your ranks, is it not to make them five? and thereby to
enlarge your front, and why then may you not be five ranks at first, and
thereby save your self the labor of doubling? And as it is not at all
necessary to double your ranks, when your Batallion consists of no more but
five ranks, so I conceive the doubling of ranks not necessary when your Battle
is but six deep, for three ranks of Pikes is not strong enough either to give
or receive a Charge, nor are they numerous enough for Musketeers to fire one
rank after another without interruption, it not being feasible for the first
rank to fire, and be ready before the third rank have discharged, so that when
six ranks are made three, it is only for a parting blow, for the Musketeers to
fire kneeling, stooping, and standing. Now you may order the first three ranks
of five to fire in the same fashion, kneeling, stooping, and standing, and you
have by the bargain two ranks in reserve, till the first three recover, and
those two ranks may afterward fire, the first rank kneeling, and the second
standing; and then all the five ranks have fired, and are as ready either with
Buts of Muskets or Swords to receive the enemy if he advance, as the six ranks
doubled in three, and in far better order. Either then your doubling of ranks
is unnecessary in service, or five deep at first is as good (if not better) as
ten ranks to be doubled in five, or six ranks doubled in three. And though five
ranks cannot be doubled, the inconvenience of that is not so great as the
advantages it has of a large front, and bringing many hands to fight; and if
upon any emergency (which will fall out very seldom) you conceive your front
too large, you may quickly help it, The Authors private opinion.
by causing your files to double, and then you are ten deep. But I shall
quickly part with this opinion, when I hear a stronger argument against it than
that, which says, that thereby ranks cannot be doubled; for the truth is, it is
my private opinion that there be many superfluous words in Exercise, and though
I think doubling of ranks and files too, sometimes convenient before the near
approach of an enemy, yet I hope none will deny that both of them are very
improper in the time of service. But, Loquendum cum vulgo, is a Golden sentence.

Well, we have our Foot-Company no stronger than one hundred men, and Seventeen
Files in a Company of one hundred men.
divided into three parts, whereof two are Musketeers, and Pikemen are glad to
be admitted to make the third. These must be marshaled six in one file, now
seventeen times six is more than one hundred, and sixteen times six is less
than one hundred. Add therefore three Corporals to the hundred Soldiers, you
shall have seventeen complete files, and one man over, whom you may appoint to
help the Ensign to carry his Colors, for a Furer is not allowed him in all
establishments. A Company being thus marshaled in seventeen files, eleven must
be Musketeers, and six Pikemen, to wit, on the right hand of the Pikemen, six
files of Musketeers, and on the left hand five files.

The Captain is to teach his Soldiers to keep their just distances between file
The several kinds of Distances.
and file, end between rank and rank. Distances are ordinarily threefold,
Order, open Order, and close Order. The first of three foot, the second of six,
the third of one foot and a half, to which in some case is added open open
order, which is of twelve foot. At Exercisings both ranks and files should
stand at open order, in Marches the files at order, but the ranks at open
order, because of the Pikes which must have more ground than Musketeers
require, and in service both the files and ranks of Musketeers must be at
order, that is three foot distance, but the Pikemen both in file and rank at
close order, that is at the distance of one foot and a half. I must tell you in
this place of a general mistake, Mistakes in reckoning Distances.
and is the very same I accused Vegetius of in the Roman Militia, and it is
this: All say that the files when they stand in Battle, should be at order,
that is at the distance of three foot, as indeed they should. But if you ask
how many foot of ground seventeen files (whereof our Company consists) possess
in front, they will immediately answer you, fifty and one. And here there is a
double Distance of Files.
error, first, no ground is allowed for the Combatants to stand on, for the
distance of three foot between files, takes up that one and fifty foot, or very
near it. Secondly, they make seventeen files to have seventeen distances,
whereas they have but sixteen. This oversight I have observed in most Tacticks,
Lieutenant Colonel Elton is very clear in his definition of a distance, which
(though I told you of it before) I shall again give you. Distance, says he, is
a place or interval of ground between every rank and rank, and every file and
file, as they stand. By this description then, three foot of distance being
allowed between every file and file, there are in seventeen files sixteen
distances or intervals, which make but forty and eight foot, then you are to
allow seventeen foot to the Combatants, that is one foot for every man to stand
on, seventeen being added to forty eight, make sixty five, and so many foot of
ground does a Company possess in front, if it consist of seventeen files; for
the ground of the ranks you are to compute it thus: Six ranks take six foot to
stand on, and thirty foot for five intervals (six foot being allowed for open
order) in all six and thirty foot, which a Distance of Ranks.
Company, Regiment, Brigade, or Army of Foot, constantly possesses from the
toes of the Leaders to the heels of the Bringers up, unless you bring the ranks
to stand at order, which you may frequently do with very good reason, and then
the five Intervals take up but fifteen foot, which being added to the six foot
on which the ranks stand, make but twenty one foot. And when Pikes are to give
or receive a Charge, you may bring them to close order, that is one foot and a
half, and then the five Intervals take up but 7 foot, these being added to six,
make 13 foot. Observe that in Exercising this Company of seventeen Files, you
are to set aside one of the Files, because it is odd, and so The Colors.
will hinder the doubling the Files. The Colors of the Company are to be on
the head of the Pikes, neither can they conveniently be between the second and
third rank in time of Battle, as some would have them to be, for you may easily
consider what room an Ensign can have with his Colors between ranks when they
are at order, much less at close order, as they should be in the time of Battle.

It will be fitting before I go further, to meet with an objection concerning
Objection against my Distances of Files,
Distances, it is this: The three foot of distance allowed between Files, say
they, must be reckoned from the Centers, that is from the two middle parts of
the two File-leaders, as from the middle part of the right hand File-leader to
the middle part of the File-leader, who stands on his left hand. I wonder at
this notion, for hereby two File-leaders take up one foot of ground, and so
does the rest of the File, and there are but two foot of Interval between the
two files, and this cannot at all quadrate with the definition of distance, for
that is an Interval between Files, and not betwixt the two middle parts of two
men's Bodies. And the Authors of Tacticks should have been clearer in their
expressions, and have said, two foot between Files which they knew was too
Answered.
little, and have added that every File should have one foot of ground to stand
on, for what language is this, a man shall have half a foot for his right
middle part, and another half foot for his left middle part; for this way of
their reckoning of the three foot of distance, amounts to just so much, and no
better language, which I conceive is very improper? besides, by this account
the right and left hand Files, would have each of them one half foot of ground
more than any of the rest of the Files, the right hand Filemen has it by the
right middle parts of their bodies, and the left hand Filemen by the left
middle parts of their Bodies, because these two Files on these two hands have
no Sidemen, which you may easily conceive if you please a little to consider it.

Let us in the next place see what Officers are appointed to have the command
Of Officers of a Company.
and inspection of this Company, and here we may find some difference in the
several establishments of Princes and States, yet in this we find all agree to
have a Captain, a Lieutenant, an Ensign, Sergeants, Corporals and Drummers,
except the Spaniard who rejects the Lieutenant as useless; some allow no more
Officers than those I have spoken of, some allow more, to wit, a Captain of
Armies, a Furer, a Fourier, and a Clerk or Scrivener. And besides, some allow
Lancepesats, or Lancpresads (as they are commonly called) as also Reformado's,
and Gentlemen of a Company. But neither Lancepesats, Gentlemen of the Company,
nor Reformado's are Officers, and though Corporals be, yet they carry Arms and
march in rank and file. I shall describe all these, and all the Officers of a
Foot* Company, beginning with the Reformado, and ending with the Captain.

Those are called Reformado's, or Reformed, who have been Officers (suppose
Reformed Officers.
Commissionated, and those only) and are out of charge, and bear Arms, till
they can be preferred. In some places they are permitted to be without Arms.

A Gentleman of the Company is he who is something more than an ordinary
Gentleman of a Company.
Soldier, has a little more pay, and does not stand Sentinel. In French he is
called Appointe, and with the Germans he is called Gefreuter. They march and
watch with Arms, they go common Rounds and Patrouills; and near an Enemy they
are to be the forlorn Sentinels, whom the French call Perdus. Lancespesate is a
word derived from the Italian, Lance spesata, which signifies a broken or spent
Lance. He is a Gentleman of no ancient standing in the Militia, for he draws
his Pedigree from the time of the Wars between Francis the First, and his Son
Henry the Second Kings of France, on the one part, and the Emperor Charles the
Fifth, and his Brother-in-law the Duke of Savoy on the other part, in those
Wars when a Gentleman of a Troop of Horse in any Skirmish* Battle, or
Rencounter, had broke his Lance on his enemy, and lost his Horse in the
Scuffle, he was entertained (under the name of a Broken-Lance) by a Captain of
a Foot* Company as his Comerade, till he was again mounted. But as all good
orders fall soon from their Primitive Institution, so in a short time our
Monsieur Lancespesata (for so he was called) was forced to descend from being
Lancespesata.
the Captains Comerade, and became the Corporals Companion, and assisted him in
the Exercise of his Charge, and therefore was sometimes called by the French,
Aid Caporal. But when the Caporal grew weary of the Comradeship of his
Lancespesata, he made him officiate under him, and for that had some allowance
of pay more than the common Soldier, which he enjoys in those places where he
is made use of, and still keeps the noble Title of Lancespesata, (though
perhaps he was never on Horseback in his life) corruptly Lancepresado* The
Germans, Swedes, and Dan^s, acknowledge Reformado's and Gentlemen of Companies,
but reject the poor Lancespesat. The Hollander in his Militia acknowledges all
the three, and so I believe do the French. But to our establishment at home, I
believe they be all three strangers, and so most of them are in other places.
Companies of hundreds are divided into three Corporalships, two Corporals are
Musketeers, and one is a Pikeman. His right Title is Caporal, A Caporal, or
Corporal.
an Italian word, derived from Cap^, which signifies a Head; this Caporal being
the Head of his Squadron. And from the same word Capo, it would seem the The
way of a French Caporals punishing Soldiers by making* them stand long
Sentinel, is prejudicial to the service.
Captain of a Company, or of an Army has his denomination. A Caporal ought to
be an experienced, vigilant, and a laborious Soldier; he has an absolute
command of his Squadron, neither may any in it disobey him, if any do, the
Caporal may beat* him with his Sword, and commit him to prison; when a
Musquet-rest was in fashion, he was permitted to beat with it. He is to warn
all his Squadron, or a part of it, (according as he receives order) to the
watch, or to be sent on party, or other duties. Upon the watch the Corporal
(having got orders from his Superiors) appoints, when, where, and how long each
of his men are to stand Sentinel, and he is bound to teach them how they His
Duties.
are to behave themselves when they are Sentinels, and is to visit them
frequently, but if he find any one of them asleep, he must not leave him as he
found him, as an Athenian Captain did, (who killed a sleeping Sentinel) but he
must bring him to the Corpse de Guard, and there make him Prisoner till further
order. The Caporal is to receive the Rounds at his Court of Guard, and take the
word from them. But of this I shall tell you more in another place. He is also
obliged when he is not on the watch, to teach all that belong to his Squadron,
their postures, and to handle their Arms. So you see this Caporal of ours has
work enough to do for all the pay or wages he gets.

In some places a Piper is allowed to each Company: the Germans have him, A
Piper.
and I look upon their Pipe as a Warlike Instrument. The Bag-pipe is good
enough Music for them who love it; but sure it is not so good as the Almain
Whistle. With us any Captain may keep a Piper in his Company, and maintain him
too, for no pay is allowed him, perhaps just as much as he deserves.

Two Drummers are universally allowed in every Company of one hundred Drummers.
men, and more (as also of the Caporals) according as the Company is strong.
They ought to be skilful to beat a Gathering, a March, an Alarm, a Charge,
Retreat, Travaille or Dian, and the Taptoo. If they can do that well, and carry
a message wittily to an enemy, they may be permitted to be Drolls; for to be
graduated Doctors, is a thing not at all required at their hands.

The Officers of a Company who march not in rank and file are divided into
Under* Officers.
Commissionated and Uncommissionated; the Captain, Lieutenant, and Ensign, are
called Commissionated Officers; all the rest are Uncommissionated, these are
the Clerk, the Fou^ier, the Furer, and Captain of Arms; all these four where
they are made use of are called Underofficers, and the last three of them are
under the command of the Sergeant, who is also an Uncommissionated Officer.

The Clerk or Scrivener is he who keeps the Rolls of the Company, receives
Clerk.
the Pay, and gives it out according to the directions of the Captain, to whose
command he is only liable, and to whom only he is accountable, and in his
absence to the Lieutenant. He ought to have so much literature as to read and
write fair, and to have some skill in Arithmetic; this under Officer is
allowed in all establishments.

A Fourier is a French word used now in most Languages, It is he who makes
Fourier.
Quarters for the Company in Towns and Villages by Billets, and in the Fields
by a designation of a plot of ground appointed for the Quarter of a Company. He
is to wait upon the Regiments Quartermaster, and what commands he receives
from him, he is to communicate them first to his Captain, and then ^ut them in
execution. He is Quartermaster of the Company, and should have skill to give
to every Soldier the ground allowed him for his Hut, and to give to all alike;
it is his duty to see all the Huts built of one length and breadth, that there
may be an uniformity of them all; it is also his duty to receive the Companies
Proviant by the Regiment Quarter Masters direction, whether it be at the
Quarter Masters own lodging or Hut, or at that of the Proviant-master General.
A Fourier is allowed with the French, Germans, Danes and Swedes, but neither
with the Hollander, nor with us at ho^e.

A Captain of Arms is he who has the oversight of the Arms, that they be
Captain of Arms.
fixed and bright; I think he should be a Gunsmith, that he may make them fixed
and bright, he is a member necessary enough, though not allowed in all
establishments.

The Furer is he who is allowed to help the Ensign to carry the Colors, for
which he has pay; the Germans call him Gefreuter Caporal, which is, Corporal
Furer.
of the Gentlemen of the Company, for with them they are properly under his
command. And both he, the Captain of Arms, and Fourier do duty with Halberts
among the Germans, Danes and Swedes; we have no Furer with us.

A Sergeant is a French word, for those who are appointed by the Justice to A
Sergeant.
apprehend and imprison men for either Criminal or Civil matters, are called
Sergeants; yet this word is now become universal, for that Officer of the
Company who commands next the Ensign. In the high Dutch he was called
Feltwebell, but now the word Sergeant has prevailed over all. When Companies
were three hundred strong, there were three Sergeants in it, now for most part
all Companies have two. It is a charge of very much fatigue, for to him it
belongs His Fatigue and Duties.
to see all his Captains commands obeyed, he gives all the Underofficers
(except the Clerk) their directions, what they are to do almost in every
particular, and the like he does to the Caporals. He receives the watchword
and all other Orders from the Major of the Regiment, carries them to his
Captain, receives his, and delivers both to his Lieutenant, and Ensign, to his
fellow Sergeant, to the Caporals, and when it is his turn, watches with his
Halbert, either on a Post alone, or under a Commissionated Officer. Yet for all
this his place in many parts of the world, is not thought creditable, (but sure
it is not dishonorable.) I cannot conceive for what reason, unless it be that
his title of Sergeant makes him be thought one of that Canaille who drag people
to prison, and these indeed are of the very dregs of the Rascality.

Louis de Montgomery says that in his time (and that was about sixty years ago)
His Charge too much undervalued.
no man of an honest family in France would accept of a Sergeants place, which
could have been for no other reason but that I have mentioned, the very name of
a Sergeant deterring men from the charge; and it is so still in most places,
especially in the Low Countries, and here at home. And I have wondered very often
to hear mean Gentlemen say, they scorn a Halbert, but if you will give them a
Pike, they will gladly accept of it, for which they have not above the third of
a Sergeants pay; and when they are Pikemen, they must punctually obey the
Sergeants commands, or bear the weight of that Halbert over their Heads, which
they scorned to carry on their shoulders; for a Sergeant has power to beat
both with his Halbert and his Sword. And sure if his Charge be not honorable,
it is honest, and should not be so much vilipended, which superior Officers
might soon help if they would cherish Sergeants more than many of them do. I
encountered once with a Country man of my own at the Busch, who told me he had
served the Estates full forty years; I asked him if in all that time he had ever
got the preferment to be a Sergeant, he replied, he might have had a Halbert
often, but scorned it: I inquired then if he had attained to any degree better
than a Sergeants place? he told me, yes; for at that very time he said, he was
the oldest Gentleman of a Company in the Estates service. To which dignity I
could not choose but wish him much joy.

The Ensign is more properly called the Ensign bearer, than any other title
Ensign-bearer.
we give him in English; for Ancient seems to be an improper and corrupt word.
In the French Tongue he is called Port ensign. In the low Dutch, Fandrager, in
high Dutch, F^ndrich, all which signify a Carrier of Colors. His title shows
his Office, his principal charge (where Lieutenants are allowed) is to have a
care of the Colors in time of action, whether it be Battle or Assault, he
ought In France, except in Regiments of Guards, there be now only two Ensigns,
one of the Colonel, the other of the Lieutenant Colonel.
to be valiant, and rather die than lose the Ensign recommended to his care.
After he has marched a mile out of his Quarters, he may ride and give the
Colors to another to carry, which other is ordinarily a Pikeman, (whose Pike
his Companions are obliged to carry by turns) but at the sight of a General
Officer or his own Colonel, the Ensign-bearer is bound to alight and take his
Colors in his own hand. In France in the time of Henry the Great, he was
allowed to have a young fellow to assist him to carry his Colors, who for that
service had half a Soldiers Pay. But I have shown you that in other places a
Furer is allowed for that, who in Quarters or Camps does the duty of an under
Officer with a Halbert.

If you will have the description of a Lieutenant, as ordinarily it is given,
he A Lieutenant.
should be valourous, well experienced in matters of War, and who has given
proof of it, vigilant, and patient of fatigue should know the wants of the His
Qualifications.
Company, and should endeavor to get them supplied, should know to exercise
the Company in its postures, motions and evolutions, and should be of such a
behavior as to gain both love and respect from the Soldiers. But I ask, if he
be all this, what hinders him to be Captain, or if he must still keep the title
of Lieutenant, what needs any Captain at all? It is answered, the Captain
should have all these qualifications, but when he is absent, the Lieutenant
represents him: true, but when the Captain is present, whom represents the
Lieutenant then? I suppose no body, for his title shows him to be a Deputy, who
is no more a Deputy when the person (whose Deputy he was) is present. Next it
is Whether needful, or not.
said the Lieutenant is in the rear, when the Captain is in the Van, and in the
Van when the Captain is in the Rear; true, but so may the Ensign bearer be,
having his Colors carried by another, whose wages shall not be the fourth part
of those of a Lieutenant. And since in all Charges of an Army the inferior
still Officiates in the absence of the superior, why should a Colonel have a
Lieutenant Colonel, and a Captain a Lieutenant, whose duty is only to officiate
when the Colonel and Captain are absent? for when they are present to speak
strictly, the Lieutenant Colonel, and Lieutenant, have not one word to say, no
commands to give, nor punishment to inflict; and therefore when the Colonel is
absent, the Major may as well do his duty as the oldest Captain does the
Majors. I suppose for these reasons the Spaniards (a warlike people) have
struck Lieutenants and Lieutenant-Colonels quite out of their Rolls in all
their Spanish Regiments. I have heard that Gustavus Adolphus intended to have
done as much but that the Swedes would not part with their ancient custom, nor
would give way to bring Spanish Abfero's in their Armies; and therefore the
King (who it seems thought not the Lieutenant very necessary) ordered the
Ensign-bearer to have equal pay with the Lieutenant, and to do equal duty with
him in Watches and Guards. It is hard to persuade some people to part with an
ancient custom; and they say all Innovations though for the better, are
dangerous; and therefore Innovations dangerous.
Lieutenants need not be angry with me for my private opinion, that they are
none of the most necessary Officers in an Army, will do them but little hurt.

But the truth is, that which mostly makes Lieutenants necessary is, that at
first Levies, Captains are chosen who are unexperienced, yet because of their A
Captain,
birth and quality are thought fit to have the command of Companies to be
raised in those places where the authority of themselves and their friends
conduces much to the furtherance of the Levy, whether it be made by the
authority of the Prince, or by a voluntary Enrolling. And for this reason the
Lord C^rbousin requires a Captain to be a Gentleman of good birth, young,
valiant, and liberal, and does not at all require experience. But if you like
not that, but will have another description of a Captain, then I pray take that
which I have given of a Lieutenant, and I suppose you will believe, it may
serve them both. Having given you the description of so many Officers of a
Company of one hundred men, I think you will conclude that Company will in a
very short time consist of able and well exercised Soldiers, I wish it may be
so, and I am sure it should be so.

In former times a Captain marched in the head of his Company with a Headpiece,
a Corslet, and a Gorge, all high Proof, and so did the Lieutenant in Captain
and Lieutenant in Harness,
the Rear. But you may now travel over many places of Christend^m before you
see many of those Captains and Lieutenants. The difference of the Armor was
none but that the Captains Helmet was decored with a Plume of Feathers, the
Lieutenants not. The Feathers you may peradventure yet find, but the Headpiece
for most part is laid aside.

The Spanish and French Captains and Lieutenants likewise carry Pikes, the With
Pikes.
Spaniards shouldered, the French comported: The Germans, Swedes, Danes, and
almost generally all others carry nothing in their hands but Canes; but indeed
besides that it was not the custom formerly to do so, I hope it will not be
denied but that in time of action, Officers should have some other offensive
Weapons in their hands than either Canes or Swords, and on a march their
servants may carry these whether they be Pikes or Partisans. The Marquess of
Guast, Alphonso Davalo, who had the command of several Imperial Armies, when
his Master Charles the Fifth took a view of his numerous forces at Vienna,
marched in the head of the Infantry with a Pike in his hand. Marshal Monluc at
the Battle of Ceresole carried a Pike, because he led a great Batallion of
Pikes; but on all other occasions he used a Halbert or Partisan, as he tells us
in several places An Halbert, or Partisan.
of his Commentaries, in one whereof speaking of the Halbert, he says, Il a
tousiours aim, de me jouer de ce baston la: I loved always, says he, to play
with that batton. And assuredly a Partisan or Halbert is a more manageable
weapon for an Officer, than a Pike. The Sergeant is distinguished from the
Captain and Lieutenant because he shoulders his Halbert, they comport theirs.
And I suppose it were fit the Captain and Lieutenants, Halberts or Partisans
should be diversified by several trimmings, that the one may be distinguished
from the other. The word Captain is a general word for all Commanders, as
Captains of fifties, Captain a general Title.
of hundreds, and of thousands; and he who commands over all the forces, is
called very properly a Captain General, but now it is most ordinarily taken for
him who commands a private Company or Troop, and so passes current in all
Languages that I understand.

A Company being thus described with all its Officers, a Regiment is soon
understood, A Regiment,
which I shall define to be a certain number of Companies joined in one body
under one head. This definition agrees with all Regiments, of whatever strength
they be. There is not a definite number of Companies ordained for each
Regiment, some consisting of six, some eight, some twelve, and some of twenty,
but ten is now most ordinary, and formerly it was so when Regiments were three
thousand strong, and each Company three hundred; yet I find that in every
French Legion (which consisted of eighteen Companies) there were about three
hundred three and thirty men in each Company, for every Legion was six thousand
strong. Nor is this word [Regiment] one hundred year old, nor do A new word.
I know of what Language it is; in the French and Italian Tongues it was called
a Legion, and so it was in Latin, and he who commanded in chief over it was
called Colonel, and Colonello. In Spanish it was called Terzo, and its
Commander, Maistro del Campo. In high Dutch it was called Faulein, and he who
commanded it, Oberster, which signifies Superior, or Supreme. But Colonel is
now und^rstood in all Languages, and the word [Regiment] however barbarous it
be in it self, has suppressed all other names and titles, and is now only used
in all European Tongues. The Swedes in my time ordered all their new levied
Regiments to consist of eight Companies, and each Company of one hundred and
twenty six men, and this made the Regiment to be one thousand and eight men;
Regiments consisting of ten companies, and each company of one hundred men,
wants but eight of the former number, and both of them resemble the Grecian
Chiliarchy, which contained one thousand and twenty four men; so that
Chiliarcha is a Colonel.
you may call our Modern Colonel, Chiliarcha in Greek, more properly than you
can call him Tribunus Militum in Latin.

A Regiment thus composed of ten Companies has Officers (besides those of
Companies already described) whose charges belong equally to all the ten, those
are called Officers of the Staff, in high Dutch the Etymology of the word I A
Regiment-Staff.
cannot give you; these are the Colonel, the Lieutenant Colonel, and the Major,
these three are called likewise Officers of the Field. Besides them there
belongs to the Staff, a Preacher, a Surgeon, a Quartermaster, and a Provost
Marshal; these four are entertained in all Regiments, by all States and Princes
who maintain Armies, and some have also a Regiment-Scrivener, or Clerk, an
Auditor, and a Hangman. The Scrivener receives the Pay according
Regiment-Scrivener.
to the Muster-rolls, whereof he is the Keeper, and gives it out to the
particular Clerks of Companies, according to the directions of the Colonel, to
whom when present the Scrivener is only accountable, and in his absence to his
Lieutenant Colonel. The Auditor has that same power in a Regiment that Auditor.
a General Auditor or Judg-Marshal has in an Army, and what that is I have
told you in the ninth Chapter of our Modern Art of War. In some places to save
expense, they make the Quartermaster supply this Scriveners place, nor do some
Princes allow any Regiment-Auditor, though I think him a very necessary
Officer, for without him our Regiment-Courts of War (especially if the business
be of any intricacy) are very disorderly; nor do some allow wages to
Regiment-hangmen, and where they are wanting, capital crimes must be punished
Hangman.
by Harquebusiers, and scourging must be converted into the Gatloupe. The
Regiment Provost-Marshal has power to apprehend any Soldier whom he sees
Provost-Marshal.
transgressing the Laws and Articles of War, from doing whereof no Officer may
hinder him; but he has not power to set any Prisoner at liberty, no not those
whom himself has imprisoned. He is Jailer, and keeps those who are committed
to him, either in Irons, or without Irons, for which he has a Guard allowed
him. He is to present the Prisoners to the Court of War, and to desire that
Justice may be done on them for the crimes they have committed, which he is
obliged to specify, and he is to be present at the execution of every
sentence; and when a Soldier is to run the Gatloupe, he is to give him the
first lash; he is to impose prices on Wine, Ale, Beer, Mead, Tabaco, and all
manner of Meats, according as he receives directions from the Provost-Marshal
General. And if the Victuallers, Sutlers and Mark-tenters transgress, he is to
make price of those Wares, in venting whereof any of them did fail, the half
whereof belongs to the Judg-Marshal, and the other moiety to the Princes
Procurator Fiscal, and he has an allowance of every Hogshead of Wine, Ale,
Beer, and Brandy.

The Surgeon must be skilful in curing all manner of wounds (so they be
Surgeon.
not mortal) for many brave Gentlemen get their bones broken with Bullets,
which would not so frequently prove deadly to the Patients if they were
attended on by good and experienced Artists. The Surgeon should be a sober
man, and ought to do his duty warily and carefully, since the lives of both
Commanders and Soldiers are often in his hands. Besides his monthly pay he
should have his Surgeons Chest furnished with all manner of Necessaries for
curing Wounds of all kinds; and this Chest is to be furnished at the Princes
charge, and all Wounds received in the Prince or States service, he is obliged
to cure (if he can) without demanding any thing from the Patients, but all
other got accidentally, or by quarreling and Duels, he is not obliged to cure
but for payment, in which the Officers are bound to assist him.

The Preacher be he Priest or Minister, whether Lutheran, Reformed, or Roman
Preacher.
Catholic, his Office is well enough known, there is much respect to be paid
him, and the Laws of War provide severe punishments to those who offer any
injury or offense to his person or charge. His duty is to have Curam Animarum,
the care of Souls, and it is well if he meddle with no other business, but
makes that only his care.

The Quartermaster should be an understanding man, he it is that should
receive Quartermaster.
provision from the Proviant-master General, and divide it proportionably out
to the Fouriers of the several Companies according to their strengths, having
first received orders for it from his Colonel, for properly his business is not
with money. If the Regiment march alone, he is to go before and take the
Fouriers along with him, and he makes Quarters, and gives the Billets of the
several Companies to these Fouriers, which they ought to draw by lot, but he
His Duties.
is obliged to deliver out of his own hand the Billets to the Field and
Staff-Officers. If the Regiment march with an Army, or a part of it, he is to
receive such Quarters as the General Quartermaster assigns to him, and divide
them proportionably to the Regiment. But if the Army be to encamp, he is to
receive from the Quartermaster General such a proportion of ground as the
strength of his Colonels-Regiment requires, which plot of ground he is
immediately to mark at the four corners of it with four long staves, upon which
should be some cognizance whereby to know for which Regiment that Quarter is
designed, and then the Quartermaster is to divide that piece of ground, taking
first so much as ordinarily is allowed for the Colonel and all his
Regimentstaff, and then measuring to each Fourier as much ground as is allowed
for a Company with all its Officers; he is to see the Fouriers mark the ground
assigned to the particular Companies, with four lesser staves at the four
corners of the designed Quarter, and then subdivide that ground into so many
parts for Huts, and to mark every Hut at its four corners with four little
sticks or twigs, and for all this he and his Fouriers should have measures such
as are appointed by the Quartermaster General, and approved by the General,
all which shall be spoke to more fully in my Discourse of Castrametation. But
the Regiment Quartermaster must see all these things done himself, and not
trust the particulars to his Fouriers, who oft-times are very careless or
ignorant, or both; and indeed our His Qualifications.
Modern Armies produce but too many Quarter Masters of little better stuff,
though you see they should be men of metal, who have learned some Arithmetic,
and have some skill of Castrametation. Formerly the Eldest Captains and
Ritmasters in Swedish Regiments used to be their Quarter Masters, but that
custom is worn out; at home our establishment joins the Quartermaster, and
Proforce, their charges in one person, which conjunction agrees not with all
humors.

In some Establishments a Wagon-master is one Officer in a Regiment-staff,
Wagon-master.
for which there may be very good reason: of him I shall speak in my Discourse
of the Baggage of an Army.

There is another inconsiderable Staff-Officer in most Armies, yet necessary
enough in all Regiments of Foot, and that is the Drummer-Major, the French call
him Colonel-Drummer: He is to receive his directions from the Major of
Drummer-Major.
the Regiment at what hour he is to beat to the watch, when the Dian, and when
the Taptoo wherewith he is to acquaint the several Drummers of companies, and
appoint them by turns for these Beatings; he is also to order them in what
divisions each of them shall beat when the Regiment marches; and they are to
obey all his directions punctually. In some places he gets a third more of pay
than other Drummers, but here at home we acknowledge no such Creature.

The Major of a Regiment is both an Officer of the Field, and of the Staff:
Major.
It is fit he be an understanding person, and experimented, of a quick
apprehension to receive his Orders, and a ready dispatch in delivering them; he
should be vigilant, and of a body able to endure toil. He it is that marshals
the Regiment, and appoints every company its due place according to the
Precedence they have one of another. He orders the Captains, Lieutenants, and
Ensigns to lead Divisions in a march according to their Dignity. In the Field
he receives the word and all other orders from the Major General, and when he
comes back to the Regiment, he is to give no orders out till first he has
imparted them to his Colonel and Lieutenant Colonel, and received their
directions; likewise he is to call one Sergeant of every Company together (at
the setting of the watch is the proper time) and deliver the watchword, and
all his other orders punctually to them, that they may carry them to their
several Officers. He is not only bound to give the Orders, but to see them
obeyed, for he is frequently to visit the Guards, and where he finds his
directions either disobeyed or neglected, he is to bring those to an account
who are accessory to the oversight or contempt.

The Inspection the Major has of the Guards, has got him the title in Latin
of His Duties.
Vigiliarum Praefectus: If he be in Quarters where the Regiment lies alone, far
from the General, he receives his Orders from his Colonel; in his absence from
his Lieutenant Colonel; in a Garrison from the Governor. The French Discipline
admits him not to command Captains, unless he have a Company himself. The
Swedes of a long time allowed him no company, yet allowed him the command over
Captains, but it is now many years ago since they were permitted to have
companies; hence perhaps it is that when they have no companies, they may be
called Serjeant-Majors, as when they have companies, the Germans call them
Captain-Majors, but the English use frequently the words of Sergeant Major, and
Serjeant-Major General, none of them are used either by German, Swede, or Dane.

A Lieutenant Colonel is that in a Regiment that a Lieutenant is in a company,
Lieutenant Colonel.
and therefore when the Colonel is present, the Lieutenant Colonel has no
command; and since in the Colonels absence the other commands the Regiment, I
think he should be endued with all those qualifications that are required to be
in a Colonel, and what these are I shall tell you as others have told me, with
my own sense of them.

A Colonel say some should be a Gentleman of great experience in Military
Colonel.
Affairs, bold and resolute, courteous, affable, liberal, judicious, and
religious: But such descriptions of Military Officers seem to proceed from
those Philosophers who teach men to conform their lives and actions to the
strict and severe rules of Moral virtue; for my part I would not only have a
Colonel to be pious and religious, but his whole Regiment likewise; but because
this may rather be wished than expected, I say, if he be not exemplarily pious,
he may notwithstanding be a Colonel good enough, so he be not a professed
Atheist. I would have a Colonel to be affable and liberal, but though His
Qualifications.
he be both churlish and Parsimonious, he may be a Colonel good enough. I would
have a Colonel to be experienced in most of the points of War; yet though he be
not, and has seen but little, if he be of a ready wit and good judgment, he
may be a Colonel good enough: for Princes and States, when they raise Armies,
think it fit to make choice of Colonels who can levy Regiments, for which
employment without question men of good birth and quality are most proper. But
courage, an aptitude to learn, and proneness to follow advice, are qualities
very essential and requisite in all men of that charge, it is little matter how
avaritious a Colonel be, so he offer not to meddle with any part of the pay of
his Regiment, except his own. It is the less matter though he be ignorant in
some points belonging to his command, so he be willing to be advised by those
of his Officers who understand them: But those who fancy that the Title of
Colonels entails a right upon them, to command what they please, and to pay
their Regiments as they like, and by their wilful ignorance confound matters of
Government, and Discipline, and introduce and frame Customs in their Regiments,
which no others use, should be chased out of all Armies as presumptuous,
arrogant, and impertinent, if not worse.

Having spoken now sufficiently of all the Officers belonging to a Company and
Regiment of Foot, it will be time to put the several Companies in one Body,
thereby to make a Regiment; but I will first tell the Captains that after they
have for some time exercised their Companies, and thereby known the abilities
of their several Soldiers, they must be careful to put them in ranks and files
according as they find they deserve; the properest, tallest and strongest men
they should arm with Pikes, the rest with Muskets. Next to the Corporals the
most deserving should be File-leaders; the next place of dignity is the To
marshal a Company in ranks and files.
rear, the third is the middle or fourth rank, the fourth dignity is the second
rank, as being next the Van, the fifth place of dignity is the fifth rank, as
that which is next the rear; the sixth and last place is the third rank: All
this is meant where all Companies and Batallions of Foot are marshaled six
deep. Next to this the Captain should have regard to the right and left hand
files, and having drawn up his men as he thinks each of them deserves, he is to
command his Clerk to write down the names of all that are in Arms, just as they
stand in files, and thereafter when he draws out his Company, let him
constantly put them in Battle according to that Roll; this being done four or
five days, the Soldiers by custom knowing their places, their Leaders, and
their Sidemen, will be able without the help of their Officers to marshal
themselves. When all the Companies are to be joined in one Body, every Captain
should cast his odd men in the rear, (and it is impossible there can be above
five odd men in one Company) that the Major may make files, and so join them to
the Regiment in such places as he thinks fitting.

There be several ways of drawing up Regiments of Foot, and they may vary
according to the several opinions of men, and yet all of them may be good
enough: But a Major should not marshal the Regiment according to his own fancy,
or yet that of his Colonels, but according to the known practice of the Prince
or State, in whose Service he is; for Uniformity is required in Military
Uniformity in Marshalling Regiments in one Prince his Service.
Customs as much, or rather more than in other things. The pleasure of the
Prince, or of his General in matters which depend on their own judgments, ought
not to be debated or disputed. I will not trouble my Reader with the difference
of opinions in marshalling the several Companies, according to the Precedence
of those to whom they belong, whether these be Officers of the Field, or
private Captains, when they are to be joined in one Body: But shall lay down
three grounds, wherein I suppose all our Modern Commanders agree. These are,

First, That the Regiment should be marshaled in a Square front, the Wedg,
Rhombus, and Ring-Battels, not being now made use of, except for show.

Secondly, That the Pikemen make the Body, and the Musketeers the wings.

Thirdly, That the Colonels Company ought to have constantly the right hand,
whether the Regiment be drawn up in one, two, or three divisions. When
Regiments were two or three thousand strong, it was thought fit to marshal them
in three Batallions or Divisions, and these were called, the Colonels, the
Lieutenant-Colonels, and the Majors Divisions; but being to speak of a Regiment
consisting only of one thousand, and composed of ten Companies, I shall tell
you how I have seen such a one marshaled both in one and in two Divisions, the
manner whereof pleases me better than any other that I have either seen or
read of, leaving notwithstanding every man free to his own choice, for I offer
not to impose.

The Major of the Regiment having either chused the ground himself, or got it
assigned to him by the Major General, if he be to draw up in one Division, A
Regiment marshaled in one Division.
orders the Colonels Company to draw up on the right hand, next to that the
Majors, thirdly the second Captains, fourthly the fourth Captains, fifthly the
sixth Captains, sixthly the seventh Captains, seventhly the fifth Captains,
eighthly the third Captains, ninthly the oldest Captain, and lastly the
Lieutenant-Colonels Company. I know some would have the Majors Company to be
where I have placed the youngest Captains, because they think next to the Van
and the Rear, the middle is the most honorable place: But if they take heed
they will find it is not so with a middle Company as with a middle man in a
file, who upon doubling the front by half files, becomes a Leader. Besides, no
Company can properly be said to be in the middle of a Regiment, unless the
Regiment consist of odd Companies, which seldom or never is practiced; for draw
up a Regiment of ten Companies in one front, the sixth Company (which is
accounted the middle one) or the Company in the middle of the Regiment is not
so, for it has five Companies on its right hand, and but four on its left. Now
my reason for Reasons for the manner of it.
drawing up the Companies in that order whereof I have spoken, is this: The
right hand or the Van is the most honorable place, and next to it the left
hand or rear. Now the honor comes from danger, which is for most part expected
from the Van or the Rear, and hence it will follow that the nearer a Captain
and his Company are the danger, the more honorable place they have; and
therefore the nearer they are to the Van and the Rear, the more honorable
place they have. If then the Regiment be attack^ in the Van (where most danger
is expected) the Majors Company is by much, nearer the danger when it is
marshaled next to the Colonels, than if it were drawn up about the middle of
the Regiment, and consequently is in the more honorable place; by this same
reason the oldest Captain is to be nearest the Lieutenant Colonel, who has the
second place of honor; for if the Rear be attackt, the Lieutenant Colonel is
nearest the danger, and next him the first Captain, by this same rule of
proportion the second Captain is next to the Major, it being fit since the
first Captain has the second place of dignity in the Rear, that the second
Captain have the third place in the Van. And if this rule hold (as I hope it
will) the third Captains Company must be drawn up on the oldest Captains right
hand, that so he may have the third place from the Rear, as the second Captain
had the third place from the Van. And to make short, I place the fourth Captain
in the fourth place from the Van, and the fifth Captain in the fourth place
from the Rear, the sixth Captain in the fifth place from the Van, and the
seventh and last Captain in the fifth place from the Rear. Now because an Enemy
is sooner expected in the Van than in the Rear, the Van is more honorable than
the Rear, and therefore I marshal the last Captain in or near the middle of the
Regiment, where being furthest from danger either in Van or Rear, he obtains
the place of least dignity, for though all places are honorable, yet some are
more honorable than others. I marshal then a Regiment of ten Companies, drawn
up in one Division thus: Order of a Regiment in one Batallion.


Colonel. Major. Second Captain. Fourth Captain. Sixth Captain. Seventh
Captain. Fifth Captain. Third Captain. First Captain. Lieutenant Colonel.
The Companies standing in this order, the Major will have but little trouble
How to put them in one Body.
to Body them, one of two ways: First, he may command all the Pikes to advance
twenty or twenty four paces, and there join them; then let him cause the
Musketeers of the five Companies on the right, to advance to the right hand of
the Pikes, and the Musketeers of the five Companies on the left hand to march
up to the left hand of the Pikes, and so his work is done.

Secondly, if he have no other ground than that he stands on, he is to command
the Pikemen to march thorough the files of the Musketeers by the right and
left hand, till they meet in one Body in the middle, the Musketeers being
likewise ordered to march by both hands to their due distances, so that this
motion is a Chorean Countermarch of files. This may be done with much ease, and
a few words, if the Major please; but some have the vanity to make themselves
and their Soldiers more business than they need by crying this and that, riding
here and there, making work to themselves, and sometimes sport to the Beholders.

If the Major be ordered to marshal the Regiment in two Divisions, he may do To
marshal a Regiment of ten Companies in two Batallions.
it thus: The Colonels Company being to have the right hand of the first
division, and the Lieutenant-Colonels of the second Division, he ought to place
the other Companies according to their Dignities, and these are the Majors
Company in the Rear of the first Division, and the first Captains in the Rear
of the second Division; the second Captain next to the Colonel in the first
Division; the third Captain next to the Lieutenant Colonel in the second
Division; the fourth Captain on the right hand of the Major in the first
Division, and the fifth Captain on the right hand of the oldest Captain in the
second Division; the sixth Captain next to the second Captain in the first
Division; and the seventh and last Captain next to the third Captain in the
second Division. The ten Companies of a Regiment then drawn up in two distinct
Batallions are in this order: Order of ten Companies in two Divisions.


First Division. Second Division. Colonel. Lieutenant Colonel. Second Captain.
Third Captain. Sixth Captain. Seventh Captain. Fourth Captain. Fifth Captain.
Major. First Captain.

My reason for this is, because the Regiment being now divided into two Bodies
or Batallions, the two Reers are next in dignity to the two Vans, and those
that are nearest to the two Reers are next in honor to those who are nearest
to the two Vans; for this reason I place the sixth Captain just in the middle
of the Reasons for that order.
first Division, as furthest from danger of either Van or Rear of that
Division, having two Companies before him, and two behind him, or two on each
hand of him. And I place the last Captains Company in the middle of the second
Division, as the place of least dignity, and that belongs to him, all other
Captains having the Precedence of him. The Pikes of the first and second
Divisions are in the middle of their several Batallions, and the Musketeers of
the five Companies of each Body equally divided on both hands of the several
Bodies of the Pikes, which is done in that same way as when the Regiment was
marshaled in one Division.

I know some are of opinion that the Majors Company should be in the Rear
Objection against that way of marshalling,
of the Lieutenant-Colonels Division, because the third place of honor in the
Regiment belongs to him, and the Colonel having the Van of the first Division,
and the Lieutenant Colonel of the second, the Major should have the Rear of the
second Division, because it is the Rear of the whole Regiment; I should easily
subscribe to this if it were not for two reasons: First, though it be but
Answered.
one Regiment, yet being divided, it should be looked on as two distinct Bodies,
and it is more honorable to have the Rear of the first, than of the last.
Secondly, when a Regiment is divided into two parts, the Major ought to wait
and lodge at the quarter of that Division of the Regiment where the Colonel is,
because from him he receives his Orders, Directions, and the Word, which he is
not obliged to carry to the Lieutenant Colonel (if the quarters of the two
Divisions be divided, as many times they are) but the oldest Captain is obliged
to come and receive them from the Major at the Colonels Quarter, the first
Captain in that case officiating as Major for the Lieutenant-Colonels
Batallion* Now if the Major ought to be where the Colonel is, as I think he
should, then I think the Majors Company should be where himself is.

The Great Gustavus used another way of marshalling his Regiments and Brigades
of Foot, which taken altogether was not square of front, yet all the four parts
or Bodies which composed it, were square. The manner was this, Regiment or
Brigade marshaled a third way,
Suppose one of his Brigades to be eighteen hundred men (as I can assure you he
had many weaker) whereof twelve hundred were Musketeers, and six hundred were
Pikemen; the Pikes advanced twenty paces before the two Bodies of Musketeers,
who immediately joined to fill up the void place the Pikemen had possessed. Then
were the Pikes divided into three equal Bodies, two hundred to each Batallion,
the middle Body whereof advanced before the other two so far that its Rear
might be about ten paces before the Van of the other two. The two Bodies of
Pikes that staid behind, were ordered to open a little to both hands, and then
stand still, all fronting one way to the Enemy; by this means the place which
the two hundred Pikes possessed in the middle, remaining void, there were two
passages like sally-ports, between the Rear of the advanced Body of Pikes, and
the two Batallions that staid behind, out of one whereof on the right hand
issued constantly one or two or more hundreds of Musketeers, who before all
the three Bodies of Pikes gave incessantly fire on the Enemy, and when the word
or sign for a Retreat was given, they retired by the other passage on the left
hand, back to the great Body of Musketeers, where so many of them as came back
unwounded, were presently put in rank and file, the fire continuing without
intermission by Musketeers, who still sallied thorough the passage on the
right hand; and it is to be observed that the firemen fought thus in small
Bodies, each of them not above five files of Musketeers, and these for most
part but three deep. So you may consider that near the third part of the
Musketeers being on service, the other two thirds were securely sheltered
behind the three Batallions of Pikemen, who were to be completely armed for the
defensive. These Pikes had Field pieces with them, which fired as often as they
could, as well as the Musketeers; this continued till the Pikemen came to push
of Pike with the Enemy (if both parties staid so long, as seldom they did) and
then the Musketeers were to do what they were ordered to do, and the order did
depend on emergencies and accidents, which as they could not be then seen, so
no certain rules could be given for them. In this order did I see all the
Swedish Brigades drawn up, for one year after the Kings death; but after that
time, I saw it wear out when Defensive Arms first, and then Pikes came Worn out.
to be neglected, and by some vilipended.

For the March of a Regiment, if it can all march in one breast, it should The
March of a Regiment.
do so; but if not, and if the ground permit it, let the right hand of
Musketeers march in breast, next it, the Body of Pikes, and after it the left
wing of Musketeers. But if none of these can be, then as many should march in
one petty Division, as the way can permit; as suppose twelve, eight, or ten,
and so soon as you come to open ground, you are to march presently in
Squadrons, or as they are now called Squads, or in full Battle, that is, the
Regiment all in one front; for by that means your Soldiers are readiest to
receive an Enemy, they march in a more comely order, and straggle far less than
when they march few in breast, and in a long row. The Major appoints Captains,
Lieutenants, and Ensigns to lead Divisions, and Sergeants to attend the flanks,
every one according to their dignities; but for my own part I never thought it
convenient, much less necessary that every small Division of a Regiment should
have a Bringer up, since he must be (as some will have it) a Commissioned
Officer, as well as the Leader of a Division should be. For first consider,
that in a Regiment of one thousand strong, there are an hundred sixty and six
files, and admit that the way will permit eight files to march in breast, (as
that falls not always out) by that account you shall have one and twenty
Divisions consisting of eight Files apiece; multiply twenty one by eight, the
Product is a hundred and Reasons why every petty Division cannot have a Bringer
up.
sixty eight Files, which consists of a thousand and eight men, eight more than
the number: Reckon again how many Commissioned Officers you have in ten
Companies, besides the three Field-Officers you shall have but twenty nine, now
of these twenty one must be allowed to lead the Divisions, and by that account
you have but nine Officers to bring up, so you want thirteen Commissioned
Officers for that employment, for Sergeants should neither be permitted to lead
or bring up, but in case of necessity, their duty being to attend the flanks.
Besides, all Commissioned Officers are not always present, some frequently
being either sick, wounded, or absent on furloff. It will be enough therefore
if all these petty Divisions be led by Commissioned Officers, (which yet cannot
be, unless you allow some Ensign-bearers to stay from their (...)ours) and by
this means you may spare six foot of ground between two Divisions; for those
who will allow Bringers up, allow eighteen foot between two Divisions, to wit,
six foot between the Rear of the first Division, and him that brings it up:
secondly, six foot between that Bringer up, and him that leads the next
Division, and six foot between that Leader and the Division he leads. This was
the order of the two Princes of Orange, Maurice and Henry. But if there be no
Bringer up, twelve foot will serve well enough between Divisions. Nor am I of
their opinion who will have a Colonel of Foot to begin his march on Horseback;
for since he commands Foot, he is bound at first to march on foot, though
afterward he may ride. And I avouch too, that he who leads Bodies of Foot
should not ride at all, because he may very insensibly make the Rear run after
him. If the Major lead the Regiment, or a part of it in his Colonel A Major
still on Horseback.
and Lieutenant-Colonels absence, he is bound to do it in Towns, in Leaguers,
or at Passes on foot, because then he Officiates as Colonel: but if any of his
two superior Commanders be present, then he should be constantly on Horseback,
for being he is not tied to any one place, but must be sometimes in the Van,
sometimes in the Battle, sometimes in the Rear, now here, now there, to see
that every Officer and Soldier do their duty; he should never be on foot when
the Regiment marches.

And because the Captain-Lieutenant cannot constantly march on foot, A
Captain-Lieutenant.
others should be ordained to assist him by turns, and those others should be
Captains, for by the courtesy of Arms the Captain-Lieutenant is youngest
Captain. But this assistance he is to get, is only in the Field, for so soon as
he comes near to Town, Village, or Quarter, he is to march on the head of the
Regiment behind one of the three Field Officers, and all the Captains ought to
go immediately to their several Divisions.

It has been a custom of a long time, and in many places, to put several
Regiments in one Body or Batallion, which they call a Brigade. There are of A
Brigade.
these both of Horse and Foot, and the Colonel, who commands that Body, is
called a Brigadeer. It is not as yet defined, for any thing I know, how strong
a Brigade should be, three thousand, two thousand, eighteen hundred, or fifteen
hundred. The Estates of the United Provinces had always Brigades of Foot in
their Service, but those were strong, five or six thousand. I have seen six
Regiments in one Brigade, and yet it did not consist of so many as two thousand
men that carried Arms; here you may suppose there were Officers enough for so
few Soldiers. The Colonel who is oldest in that service commands the Brigade.
There is likewise a Major of the Brigade, who receives the Word and other
Orders from the Major General, and gives them to the Majors of the other
Regiments of the Brigade, and they to their Colonels and Lieutenant-Colonels,
and then to the Sergeants of all the several Companies. This Major of the
Brigade is ordinarily he who is Major of the oldest Regiment of that Brigade.

When a Brigade marches, the Regiments of it have the Van-day about by turns,
but so have not the Companies of the several Regiments. It seems something
strange to me that a Regiment of one thousand Foot should be divided into two
several Bodies, the Colonel, and Lieutenant Colonels Divisions, and yet that
Regiment Embodied with another, perhaps with other two, and march all in one
Body. Truly I should think if the first be needful, the second should not be
necessary.

It is a custom with some Princes to give some of their Colonels more Regiments
Colonels of two Regiments.
than one, which I have seen, though I confess I never saw any good reason for
it; for if a Prince or a State will advance a Colonel above or beyond his
fellows, he may rather give him some higher title, and consequently greater
pay; yet it were the more tolerable if both Regiments were of Foot, or both of
Horse, for then they might make up a Brigade, and he who is Colonel of both,
might be Brigadeer of both. But I have known some of them Colonels of Horse and
Foot, and sure they cannot Officiate in both Regiments at one time, and
therefore I confess that in one of them a Lieutenant Colonel is very necessary.
But it must minister some fuel of heart-burning to many brave Gentlemen, who
have served Princes faithfully, to see some men provided with two Charges who
have done no more than themselves, (...) ^^rhaps not so much) when they have no
Charge at all. But to him that has shall be given.

Observe that in the French Service, Majors being commanded to be under
Captains, the stress of the command of the Regiment lies on the
Lieutenant Colonel.

CHAP. XII. Of Troops, and Regiments of Horse, of their Officers, and of
Dragoons.
THOSE who serve in the Wars on Horseback, are by a general word called the
Cavalry, which is now understood in all Languages, though it be derived either
from the French word Chevall, or the Italian and Spanish word Cavallo, both
which signify a Horse. Though the Germans make much use of the word Cavalry,
yet they have one of their own as proper and significative as it is, and that
is Reutery. We have no other word for it in English but what is borrowed from
the French. It has been in ancient times a noble service, and still should be
so; for as I observed before, those who served on Horseback, especially the men
at Arms or Curiassiers, were all Gentlemen, and most of them of a high
extraction; but now a promiscuous levy by the Trumpet has well near abrogated
that commendable custom, and made men of all sorts (so they be of bodies fit
for service) whatever their birth be, welcome to ride in Troops. When the
Romans said, a man was equestris ordinis, they meant he was a Gentleman; and
when they spoke so, it was nothing else but that he was of that rank or class,
out of which Horsemen were chosen to serve in the Cavalry of old challenged
with reason the precedence of the Infantry.
Wars. This made them with much reason demand as their due, the precedence of
the Foot, though still the Infantry be the strength of the Army, but now that
Horsemen are Plebeians as well as Footmen; the hand and the door is no more due
to the one, not to the other; and in many places Commanders of Horse and Foot,
who carry alike Offices, take the precedence according to their antiquity of
bearing charge. But in most Courts and Councils of War And has it yet.
(by the determination of the Prince) the Officers of the Cavalry have seats
given them before those of the Infantry, neither do the last contend for it.

It was near the time of the Emperors, before the Romans had any light armed
Curiassiers.
Horsemen, but almost with all other Nations, and in all times, a Cavalry was
divided into heavy and light armed, and they are called so from their offensive
Arms, the heavy armed are called Curiassiers, Gens d'Armes, and men at Arms
from their defensive armor, but the light armed are now called Harquebusiers
from their offensive weapon; the Harquebuss which before the invention of the
Musket and Pistol, was a weapon (only differing in length) common to both the
Foot and the Horse, and they had both their denomination of Harquebusiers why
so called.
Harquebusiers from it. And though none of them now use the Harquebuss; and
that the Foot-firemen are called Musketeers from the Musket, yet the light
Horse, though they use Pistols, keep still the old name of Harquebusiers.

What Arms both for offense and defense both those kinds of Horsemen had
formerly, and what now they have, is formerly told you in several Discourses.

It has been of late a custom to arm the light Horsemen with Carrabines
Carrabine,
hung about their shoulders in Leather Bandileers, besides their Pistols, so
that upon the matter, whole Troops are so armed with Carrabines, that you may
call them Carrabineers, but it was not so in former times, for only a
prescribed number of them were ordained to attend every Troop of Curiassiers,
and had no Officers of their own, the manner of their service was to ride up
within such a distance as they were ordered, and discharge their Carrabines on
the enemy, and immediately turn to either hand by a Caragoll, and get them
behind the Troop, and this they were obliged to do, as often as they were
commanded to it by him who was Captain of the Company of Curiassiers. Hence it
is that Why so called.
the Lord Carbousine tells us that Carrabine is a Spanish word derived from
Cara, which signifies a face; and Bino which signifies twofold, as one would
say, double faced, because the Carrabineer kept his face to his enemy, till he
had fired his piece, and then turned his face to his friends when he Caragol'd.

Seventy or eighty years ago there were no Regiments of Horse (properly so In
former times there were only Troops, but no Regiments of Horse.
called) only Troops or Companies, and these sometimes were two hundred strong,
sometimes one hundred, and sometimes not so many, and upon occasion of service,
Troops were joined together, and the command of some of them given for a time
by the Prince or State to some person of great quality, whom they thought fit
for that employment. Sometimes three Troops were joined together, sometimes
five or six, yet they had not the name of a Regiment, nor had he who commanded
that Body so composed, the title of Colonel. The Estates of the United
Provinces used this much, but now they levy Regiments. The furious Wars which
began in Christendom in the year of our Lord 1618, (whereof in process of time
we had a deep share at home) reversed many good old customs and constitutions,
and with other changes introduced Regiments of Horse, and not only so, but
brought in such numbers of them that in many Armies there were near as many
Regiments of Horse as of Foot; yea; Numerous Regiments of Horse.
I have seen in more Armies than one, a greater number of Horse-Regiments than
of Foot. Insomuch that some years before the Peace of Munster, Regiments of
Horse were so weak that the Officers of the several Troops being all in the
Van, did near make a full rank equal in number to any of the three ranks behind
them, which were composed of Riders or Troopers. And because in Battle,
Officers by their courage give good example, this helped well to make the
Regiments and Troops fight well, and upon this account I aver that these
Regiments consisted rather of four ranks, than of three, and so were not
properly three deep. But let us look a little further back, yet not beyond the
time that Pistols came in request.

The French Cavalry even in Henry the fourth's time, and the beginning of the
Reign of Lewis the Just, was composed of three kinds, these were Gens d'Armes,
French Cavalry.
Archers, and light Horse. How the Gens d'Armes were mounted and armed has
been told you; and these were used by the ancient Gauls before ever the Roman
name was known among them, and were called Clupeati. These latter Clupeati.
Gens d'Armes, or Curiassiers, were all ordered in several Troops, but not in
Regiments; these Troops were all to be composed of Gentlemen by their birth,
and were not of equal strength, they were of two kinds, for some were in the
Gens d'Armes of two kinds.
Kings pay, some not. Those entertained by the King, were called Des
Ordonnances du Roy, or of the Kings Establishment. Some of them consisted of
one hundred Gentlemen, some of sixty, some of fifty, and some of forty,
according to the quality or merit of the Captain, or the pleasure of the
Prince. The French Troops of Gens d'Armes, which were not in the Kings pay,
were composed of those Gentlemen who were obliged to serve on their own charges
three months within the Kingdom of France, and forty days without it.

The French Archers before the time of Gunpowder carried Bows and Arrows,
Archers.
and from thence had the name of Archers; but at this time of which I speak,
they had for weapons, Pistols, Swords, Maces, or half Lances. Those who were
called Chevaux Legers, or light Horse, had much the like Arms, but Light
Horsemen.
instead of a Pistol, each had a Harquebuss hanging at his Saddle. The main
difference between these two consisted in this, that the Archers composed no
several or distinct body of the Cavalry, but were to attend the Gens d'Armes,
for every man of Arms had the allowance of an Archer to wait on him; so that
how strong soever the Company of the Gens d'Armes was, of that same number The
difference between an Archer, and a light Horseman.
were the Archers that attended it. But the Cavalry Legere, or the light Horse
were not at all obliged to any such attendance, but had a General of their own
who marshaled them, who marched with them, and fought with them, either as he
himself thought good, or as he was ordered to do by the Great Constable, or one
of the Marshals of France. And assuredly the Institution of the Archers to
attend the men at Arms was excellent, for the Curiassiers not being able to
Caragol, are obliged in their charge to break thorough, or be beaten; and in
any of these cases, the Archers were of good use: If they were worsted to
support them, or to pursue the enemy when he was put to flight, which the men
at Arms could not do, because of the weight of their Armor. Now all these
three, Gens d'Armes, Archers, and light Horsemen, How many Horses all three
were obliged to keep.
were obliged to keep each of them more Horses than one; whereas now our
Troopers are obliged to keep no more but one, and have allowance of pay little
enough for that one.

I find, that in the Wars which the Protestants of France made with their
Kings, In the Protestant War, in France 100 years ago*
Charles the Ninth, and his Brother Henry the Third; they managed them at as
small an expense, as possibly they could; yet they obliged every man at Arms,
to keep three Horses, two strong Coursers, and one Gelding; every Archer, and
Light-Horse-man, two, a good Horse, and a good Nag. And I suppose, you will
really think it strange, how they could keep so many, when I tell you what
allowance of pay they had: Every man of Arms had 45 French Livres in the Month,
about Three pound fifteen shillings Sterling; every Archor and Light-Horse-man
had Thirty Livres, about Two pound ten shillings. A Captain of all three had
five Riders pay allowed him, the Lieutenant four, the Cornet three, and the
Quartermaster two: very inconsiderable wages, but assuredly, they had either
other shifts, or things were at easier rates in France then, than they have
been since.

In the times of the Emperors Ferdinand the First, Maximilian the Second,
Rodolph the Second, and Matthias, I find that the German Establishment was, Old
German Companies of Horse, particularly Curiassiers.
that no Ritmaster, or Captain of Horse should have any Rider in his Troop but
Gentlemen, and that every Troop of Curiassiers should consist of Threehundred
Riders, many whereof were bound to maintan three serviceable Horses, and all
the rest, two at least; and every one of these Gentlemen who kept either two or
three Horses, were to keep a lusty fellow well Horsed, in quality of a servant,
armed with a long Gun, wherewith they rode, when commanded, before the Troop,
and fired on the Enemy, and immediately retired behind the Troop, as I told
you, the Carabineers did, these being equal in number to their Masters, made up
Three hundred, and resembled the French Archers. These Dutch Servants had the
Emperors pay, or that of some German Prince, but their Masters received it,
with their own; nor had the Masters power to put away these Servants, or the
Servants to go from the Masters, so long as the War lasted; but if any
difference arose between them, it was voided by the Ritmaster, or Marshal of
the Army. These German Companies of Horse had for Officers a Captain, a
Lieutenant, a Cornet, a Quartermaster, Their Officers.
and six Corporals, whom they called Ritmasters (which is to say, File-leaders)
each whereof had fifty Troops under his command; two Trumpeters* There was
likewise allowed to every Troop, a Priest, a Clerk, a Surgeon, a Dagmaker, a
Saddler, and a Smith. All these Curiassiers were armed for offense with two
Pistols, a Sword, and a Lance; so long as this last was in fashion; so if you
will reckon all that belonged to this German Troop, both Masters, and those who
attended them (who were all obliged to fight) you will find it consisted of six
hundred fighting men, and of nine hundred Horses at least. But since that time
I have seen four Regiments in that same Country, who were not all of them
together so strong.

In later times, Commissions have been given for levying Regiments, free
Squads, and Troops, but all Regiments did not, nor do not consist of alike
Troops and Regiment of those times.
number of Companies, nor all Companies of alike number of Riders, nay, not
under one Prince, you shall see a Lieutenant Colonel have four Troops in his
Squadron (which he calls free) because he acknowledges no Colonel, or other
Commander under the Major General, and each of these Troops to have fifty or
sixty Riders, being obliged to have no more by their Ritmasters Capitulation:
You may see in that same Army a Regiment of six Companies, each of Seventy men;
another of eight Troops, each of fifty horse, so little is an uniformity in
equal numbers of Troops, or of Horsemen in every Troop regarded, or looked
after. I saw one Regiment in the Sweedish service (I may say one, for I saw not
such another in any of their Armies) in which were according to Capitulation,
twelve Troops, each of them consisting of one hundred Riders effectively, but
four of the Regiments of that Army were not so strong, as that Regiment was
alone.

Troops, Squads, and Regiments of Horse in our Modern Wars, are not cast into
Wedges or Rhombs as some of the Ancient ones were, at which manner of figures
Aelian makes his Grecian Companies to be very dexterous: The Square front being
now only in use. The number of Ranks of either Regiments or Troops, whether
they be strong or weak, are alike in all, because the depth of the Battle is
determined by the Prince or State to be alike in all, and in the matter of this
depth there has been great variance among those, who assume to themselves the
title of Tacticks, who teach the rules of War. Many would have the file of
Horsemen to be five deep; others will not hear of How deep Horse should be
marshaled. Difference of opinions.
that, because thereby ranks cannot double; an objection which I have answered
already, in my discourse of Exercise. Others will have six, because that admits
doubling of ranks, but that is rejected, because if six deep be enough for the
Foot, it will be too much for the Horse. There be others who would have every
Troop of Horse to consist of sixty and four Riders, and these being Marshalled
eight deep, and eight in front according to the square root, make a perfect
square of men and Horse, and this speculation seems very pretty, but I Square
Root.
reserve my answer to it till I speak of the square root it self; for the
present let it suffice, that if six deep be too many for a Cavalry, eight deep
will be very far out of purpose. The late Earl of Strafford, as he appointed,
in his Military Instructions, the foot to be eight deep, so he ordered his
Troops of Horse to be four in File. But Universally now, for any thing I know
(unless it be in the Low Countries) the Horse are Marshalled three deep,
without Three deep.
regard to doubling of ranks, whereof I have already spoken; and assuredly,
this of all others, brings most hands to fight.

When you have known how deep the Troop is to be drawn up, you should cause to
be set down in paper, in what order you will Marshal your Horsemen: whom you
ordain to be Leaders, and whom Bringers up, and whom for the right and left
hand files, that all your Riders may be placed according to their dignity, then
it will be an easy matter to draw up your Troop, and for the Major to draw up
the Regiment; for being that all the Horsemen are armed alike, there is no
separation to be made of one part of the Troop from another, as there is of
separating the Pikem^n from the Musketeers in Foot-Companies, the Major giving
every Ritmaster his place of dignity according to his antiquity or Commission;
and those intervals being kept that are appointed, the several Troops, be they
few or many, are very soon cast into the mould of a Regiment.

In my discourse of drilling, I said, that in exercising a Body of Horse,
whether one Troop or more, some allow for order six foot, some, ten, and for
open order some allow twelve foot, and some twenty, others conclude six
Distance.
foot between rank and rank, and file and file sufficient, but in marching
there should be the length of a Horse between rank and rank, but so much is not
at all needful between files: now it seems the Germans allow ten foot for the
length of a Horse in marching and exercising, as well as in their
Castrametation; for when Horse are orderly quartered in the field, ten foot of
ground are allowed for a Horse to stand on between his head and his tail. But
for all this, I say, six foot are not to be allowed in all motions of exercise,
as in Wheeling, which is the poper motion of the Cavalry, you cannot make it,
till your ranks and files be at close order, and in this motion of Wheeling,
observe, that the Wheeling to the left hand, being the Bridle hand, is more
proper, than Wheeling.
to the right: Observe also that after your body has Wheeled you are to reduce
them to their first order, by making the ranks open, which they must do by
advancing, and not by stepping back as the foot do.

The stronger the Troop be, it should have the more Corporals, who begin now to
be qualified with the Title of Brigadeers, for it seems not proportionable for
a Troop of One Hundred and Twenty to have no more Corporals, than a Troop of
sixty, or seventy, yet for most part now all Troops have a like number of
Officers, and these are, the Captain or Ritmaster, The Lieutenant, the Cornet,
the Quartermaster, three Corporals or Brigadeers, two Trumpeters, some have
three, and some four, a Saddler, and a Smith, and some allow a Surgeon, and
a Clerk. Many Troops have no allowance, for the last four, though all four
Officers of a Troop.
are very necessary; In some places, if a Surgeon be allowed for every
Regiment, it is thought very fair, many Ritmasters entertain a Saddler and a
Smith in their Troops, allowing them the pay of Troopers, and what benefit else
they can make by their several Trades. But if all who ride in the Troop be
Gentlemen, they will not permit these two Mechanics to ride with them; yet my
opinion is, since all who ride now in Troops are not Gentlemen, they may
without any disparagement, suffer a Smith and a Saddler to ride in rank with
them, being they are profitable members of that little Commonwealth. It is, I
think an oversight, that a Clerk is not allowed for every Company of Horse; for
a Quarter master has enough to does otherwise, though he be not bound to
officiate for the Clerk, to receive the Pay of the Troop, and give it out, and
keep the accounts of it; unless you will say, that the paying Money to a Troop
falls out so seldom, that the receiving it, will be rather a divertisement than
a trouble to the Quartermaster.

Having spoke to the Duties of a Captain, Lieutenant, and Ensign-bearer of a
Foot Company, I have nothing to add to the Duties of a Ritmaster, Lieutenant,
and Cornet, but between the Quartermasters of Foot and Horse there is this
difference, that the first has no command, but the second has, in
Quartermaster of Horse.
other duties there is none. But I shall tell the Quatermasters of Horse, that
they should have skill in Castrametation, as much as the Foot Quartermasters
have, and rather more; for the last look only to the regular quartering of Men
in the Field, the first to the quartering of both Men and Horses. A Corporal
Corporals, of Brigadeers.
of Horse should have experience, for he either assists the Lieutenant in
placing and setting the Guards, or he does it himself without his Lieutenant,
he sets the Sentinels, and sees them relieved; and orders the Patrovils, which
are Rounds. He is to ride in Rank, and if the Troop march not in breast, but in
three several Squadrons, then there is a Corporal on the right hand of every
Squadron; but in absence of higher Officers, Corporals lead Divisions, so do
they those parties which they are to command, if there be none to command above
them.

When a Troop is divided into three Squadrons, they have not their
denominations from the Corporals or Brigadeers, but the first is called the
Captains Squadron, the second the Lieutenants, the third the Cornets, and if
there be a fourth, it is called the Quartermasters. When a Troop marches, the
March of a Troop.
Captain leads the first division, the Cornet with his Standard the second, the
Quartermaster leads the third, and the Lieutenant brings up; yet some will have
the eldest Corporal to lead the last division, and the Quartermaster to bring
up on the Lieutenants left hand, for which I see very small reason, or rather
none at all. Some French Troops and ours likewise, have besides these Officers
whom I have named, a Sub-Lieutenant, or under Lieutenant, who Sub-Lieutenant.
has no command in the Lieutenants presence, but in his absence he commands
over the Cornet; the French have likewise a Guidon, to whom perhaps may Guidon.
answer he who in other places is appointed to carry the Standard, either in
the Cornets absence, or when he pleases to appoint him to carry it. As to the
Officers of the Regiment-Staff of the Cavalry, they are the same with those of
the Foot, and their Duties are the same.

But now methinks I hear a Trumpeter sound a Call. Of Trumpets and of
Trumpeters I have spoke in my Discourses of the Roman Art of War: That which I
have now to add, is, Trumpeters should be skilful to sound all the Trumpeters.
points of War, and in the Fields they should seldom want their Trumpets about
them for sudden Alarms: And because they are frequently sent to an Enemy, they
ought to be both witty and discreet, and must drink but little, that so they
may be rather apt to circumvent others, than be circumvented; they should be
cunning, and wherever they are sent, they should be careful to observe warily
the Works, Guards, and Sentinels of an Enemy, and give an account of them at
their return to him who sent them. One Trumpeter should constantly lodge where
the Standard quarters. The German Trumpeters assume to themselves a great deal
of liberty, and have in a manner set up Pretended privileges of the German
Trumpeters*
a Republic of their own, independent of that Discipline, by which the Army
(of which they are members) is governed. They pretend to have their own Laws,
whereby they punish crimes very severely, especially such faults, that any of
their number commits against the Articles of War of that Prince whom they
serve; and endeavor to vindicate themselves from any punishment inflicted by
others, than those of their own Commonwealth. If any Trumpeter be abused or
disgraced, whether by his own Ritmaster, or any other Officer, the rest resent
it, as an injury done to the whole fraternity; for which they will very readily
make him march a whole week without a Trumpeter to sound before him. None may
sound a Trumpet before a Troop but he who is master of their Art, and he must
prove himself to be so, by producing a Certificate, signed by a certain number
of Master Trumpeters, with their Seals annexed to it, and this in their
Language, they call a Lerbrief: If any, wanting this, offer to sound before a
Company of Horse, the Masters may come and take him away with disgrace, in
spite of the Ritmaster. Those who have not yet got Lerbriefs, they call Boys,
who must serve the Master Trumpeters in all manner of drudgery, though they
could sound all the points of War never so well. They pretend to have got these
privileges from the Emperor Charles the Fifth, under his Manual Subscription
and Imperial Seal. Ask them where this Patent of theirs lies, some of them
will tell you at Augsburg, others say at Strasburg, and a third will say at
Nuremburg. I have not seen any of them punished by their Officers, and whatever
discipline of their own they have I know not, but I have not heard of any of
their gross misdemeaners. I knew one Colonel Boy, an ancient Gentleman, who for
many years had commanded Horse, in whose Regiment no sound of Trumpet was
heard, for none of them would serve under him, because in his younger years he
had killed a Trumpeter with his own hand. But it is well these pretended
privileges of theirs are confined within the bounds of the German Empire.

There is another Martial Instrument used with the Cavalry, which they call a
Kettle-drum, there be two of them which hang upon the Horse before the
Kettle-drum.
Drummers Saddle, on both which he beats: They are not ordinary, Princes,
Dukes, and Earls, may have them with those Troops which ordinarily are called
their Life-guards, so may Generals and Lieutenant Generals, though they be not
Noblemen. The Germans, Danes and Sweedes, permit none to have them under a
Lord Baron, unless they have taken them from an Enemy, and in that case any
Ritmaster, whatever extraction he be of, may make them beat beside his
Trumpeters. They are used also for State by the Princes of Germany when they go
to meat, and I have seen them ordinarily beat, and Trumpets sound at the Courts
of Sweden and Denmark, when either of the two Kings went to Dinner or Supper.

Dragoons are Musketeers mounted on Horses, appointed to march with the Dragoons
Cavalry, in regard there are not only many occasions, wherein Foot can assist
the Horse, but that seldom there is any occasion of service against an Enemy,
but wherein it is both fit and necessary to join some Foot with the Horse,
Dragoons then go not only before to guard Passes (as some imagine) but to fight
in open Field; for if an Enemy rencounter with a Cavalry in a champaign or open
Heath, the Dragoons are obliged to alight, and mix themselves with the Squads
of Horse, as they shall be commanded; and their continuate Firing, before the
Horse come to the charge, will, no doubt, be very hurtful to the Enemy: If the
encounter be in a close Country, they serve well to line Hedges, and possess
Enclosures, they serve for defending Passes and Bridges, whether it be in the
Advance, or a Retreat of an Army, and for Serve on foot,
beating the Enemy from them: Their service is on foot, and is no other than
that of Musketeers; but because they are mounted on Horseback, and ride with
the Horse, either before in the Van, or behind in the Rear of an Army, they are
reckoned as a part of the Cavalry, and are subordinate to the Yet are part of
the Cavalry.
General, Lieutenant General, or Major General of the Horse, and not to those
of the foot. And being that sometimes they are forced to retire from a powerful
and prevailing Enemy, they ought to be taught to give Fire on Horseback, that
in an open field they may keep an Enemy at a distance till they get the
advantage of a closer Country, a Straight, a Pass, a Bridge, a Hedge, or a
Ditch, and then they are bound to alight, and defend that advantage, that
thereby (though perhaps with the loss of the Dragoons themselves) the Cavalry
may be saved. When they alight, they cast their Bridle Reins over the necks of
their side-mens Horses, and leave them in that same order as they marched. Of
ten Dragoons, nine fight, and the tenth man keeps the ten Horses. For what they
have got the denomination of Dragoons, Whence they have their denomination.
is not so easy to be told, but because in all languages they are called so,
we may suppose they may borrow their name from Dragon, because a Musketeer on
Horse back, with his burning Match riding at a gallop, as many times he does,
may something resemble that Beast, which Naturalists call a Fiery Dragon.

Since then a Dragoon when he alights, and a Musqueteer are all one, I have The
several services of a Musqueteer.
forborne hitherto to speak of the several ways how the ranks of Musketeers
fire, having reserved it to this as a proper place. Take them then, thus:

If the enemy be upon one of your flanks, that hand file fires that is nearest
How he fires in the flank, and falls off*
the danger, and the next standing still to do the like, that which has fired,
marches thorough the rest of the files, till it be beyond the furthest file of
that wing of Musketeers: But* if you be charged on both flanks, then your
right and left hand files fire both, and immediately march into the middle of
the Body, room being made for them; and in such pieces of service as these,
Officers must be attentive, dexterous and ready to see all things done orderly,
otherwise confusion first, and immediately after a total rout will inevitably
follow. If your Body be retiring from an enemy who pursues you in the rear, the
two last How i^ the rear.
ranks stand, whereof one having fired, it divides it self into two, the one
half by the right, the other half by the left hand marches up to the Van,
making ready all the while, this way is much practiced, especially in the
Low Countries, but with submission to their better judgments, I should think it
more easy for these ranks that have fired to march every man of them up to
their Leaders, and then step before them thorough these Intervals of three foot
that is between files, and this may be done without any trouble either to
themselves or their neighbors. If the service with the enemy be in the Van, as
mostly it is, Musketeers after firing fall off two several ways*
ranks may (after they have fired) fall off two several ways: First, the rank
which has fired, divides it self into two, and the half goes to the right
hand, and the other half to the left, and then they fall down to the rear, and
so of Leaders become Bringers-up, till another rank comes behind them. But I
The first not at all good.
would have this manner of falling off banished out of all armies, for in a
great Body it breeds confusion, and though in drilling it may leisurely be done
without any considerable disorder, yet in service with an enemy, where men are
falling, it procures a pitiful Embarras, and though it did not, yet it ought to
The second good.
give way to a more easy way of falling off, which is the second way I
promised to tell you of, and it is that I spoke of, of falling down by the
Intervals of ground, that is between files, and this I would have constantly
done by turning to the left hand after they have fired, because after that
Musketeers recover their Matches, and cast about their Muskets to the
left-side, that they may charge again, which they are a doing, while they fall
off to the rear. But But not at all to fall off is ^est.
there is a third way for Musketeers to do service better than by any of these
two, and that is not to fall off at all, but for every rank to stand still,
after it has given fire, and make ready again standing, the second advancing
immediately before the first, and that having fired likewise, the third
advances before it, and so all the rest do, till all have fired, and then the
first rank begins again. It is not possible that by this way of giving fire,
there can be the least confusion, or any thing like it, if Officers be but half
men; there is another way of firing sometimes practiced, that is by three ranks
together, the first kneeling, the second stooping, and the third standing,
these having fired, the other three ranks march thorough the first three, and
in the same postures fire likewise. But here I shall desire it to be granted to
me that which indeed is undeniable, Three ranks to fire at one time, and then
the other three.
that when the last three ranks have fired, the first three cannot be ready to
fire the second time. Next, firing by three ranks at a time, should not be
practiced, but when either the business seems to be desperate, or that the
Bodies are so near, that the Pikemen are almost come to push of Pike, and then
no other use can be made of the Musket but of the Butt-end of it. I say then
Not so good as all six ranks to fire at once.
that this manner of six ranks to fire at two several times is not at all to be
used; for if it come to extremity, it will be more proper to make them all fire
at once, for thereby you pour as much Lead in your enemies bosom at one time as
you do the other way at two several times, and thereby you do them more
mischief, you quail, daunt, and astonish them three times more, for one long
and continuated crack of Thunder is more terrible and dreadful to mortals than
ten interrupted and several ones, though all and every one of the ten be as
loud as the long one. But that I seem not to pass my word to you for this, be
pleased to take the authority of Gustavus Adolphus King of Sweden, who
practiced it at Practiced at Leipsick,
the Battle of Leipsick, where after he had fought long, and that the Saxon
Army on his left hand was beaten by the Imperialists, he caused the Musketeers
of some of his Brigades to fire all at once by kneeling, stooping, and
standing, which produced effects conform to his desire. If you ask me how six
ranks can fire all at one time, and level their Muskets right? I shall tell
you the foremost three How to do it.
ranks must first be doubled by half files, and then your Body consists but of
three ranks, and the posture of the first is kneeling, of the second stooping,
and of the third standing, and then you may command them all to fire.

If you command your ranks (after they have fired) to fall to the rear any of
the two ways already spoken of, though you take never so good heed, you shall
lose ground, besides that it has the show of a retreat, but by making the
ranks successively go before those which have fired, you advance still, and
gain ground. In this order should Dragoons fight in open field, when they are
mixed How Dragoons should fire, and fall off.
with Horse, in this order also should they fire and advance when they intend
to beat an enemy from a Pass. But when they are to defend a Pass, a Bridge, or a
Strait, they must then after firing fall off to the rear, by marching thorough
the Intervals of their several files, because it may be supposed they have no
ground whereon they can advance.

Martinet the French Marshal de Camp tells us of another manner of firing
different from all these that I have mentioned, as thus: Of six ranks of
Musketeers he would have the first five to kneel, the sixth to stand and fire
first, then the fifth to rise and fire next, and consecutively the rest, till
the first rank have fired, after which he will have the foremost five ranks to
kneel again, till the sixth discharge, if the service last so long. By this way
you can gain no ground, and I think its very fair if you keep the ground you
have, for I conceive you may probably lose it, and which is worse, the ranks
which kneel before that which gives fire, may be in greater fear of their
friends behind them, than of their enemies before them, and good reason for it,
in regard when men are giving death to others, and in expectation of the same
measure from those who stand against them, they are not so composed nor
governed with so steady reason as when they are receiving leisurely lessons in
cold blood, how to pour Lead in their enemies bosoms. But I have spoke of this
in another place, perhaps more than becomes a private person, since I find that
manner of giving fire is practiced in the French Armies by order of his most
Christian Majesty.

In the marshalling of Regiments, Brigades, Companies, and Troops either of
Horse or Foot, Commanders, must be very cautious when they have to do with an
enemy, not to charge the ordinary forms, for if at that time you offer to
introduce any new form wherewith your men are not acquainted, you shall not
fail to put them in some confusion, than which an enemy cannot desire a greater
New figures of Battles commendable.
advantage. If you have a new figure of a Battle in your head, be sure to
accustom your Companies and Regiment very often by exercise to the practice of
it, before you make use of it in earnest. But by this, let me not seem to put a
restraint on any ingenious spirit that is capable to create new figures, I
think they should be exceedingly cherisht by Princes and their Generals, and
such of them as are approved by them should be practiced. The old Romans indeed
kept themselves morosely to their ancient forms, whereby they had been
exceedingly prosperous, and called all new Inventions Schematisms. But we are
not bound to follow them in all their opinions, for I am of Lipsius his
judgment, Valde mihi placent nova, and novitia istae Inventiuncula: These
little new Inventions, To be practiced with much caution.
says he, please me mightily. Lieutenant Colonel Elton in his Complete Body of
the Art of War, has very many pretty figures of several Bodies of Foot, all of
them exceeding delightful, and fit for show, and some of them for use,
provided, Officers and Soldiers be often and thoroughly accustomed to them,
before they be practiced in sight of an enemy. And to this purpose he himself
speaks very well toward the end of his Book, and with his words I shall close
this Chapter. The substantial and solid things of War, are to be precisely
regarded, without which an Army, though of the most valiant men, will be
exposed to the greatest dangers, and will fall into a most certain ruin.

Musketeers on Horseback are called Dragoons in all Languages from the word
Dragon, because when they are mounted on Horses, and riding with burning
Matches (especially in the night time) they resemble fiery Dragons flying in
the air, but now that in some places Dragooners Muskets are converted into
Carabines (a change not to be despised, if the Carabine can send a Bullet as
far as a Musket) I conceive they may rather be called Carabineers than
Dragoons. In France the Lieutenant of Horse marches now on the left hand of
the Captain or Ritmaster, four or five foot nearer the Troop, an Innovation, as
many other customs are, against which I have little to say, or rather just
nothing.

An APPENDIX to the former CHAPTER.
HAving spoken enough of the Officers of both Horse and Foot, and of those who
are neither, and yet both Dragoons, it will not be amiss to speak a word or two
to some Questions that are started concerning them. I shall propose them, and
speak my thoughts of them; for to answer and solve them to the satisfaction of
all, would be an undertaking purely impossible.

The first question shall be this, which of the two Officers of equal quality*
both under one Prince or State, the one of Horse, the other of Foot shall
command in chief, having no Superior at that time above them, supposing those
who are to be commanded consist of both Foot and Horse. The second Question
shall be, whether an Officer of an inferior quality may upon occasion command
one of a higher degree: As whether a Lieutenant may command a Captain? The
question is subdivided into two: As first, whether an Officer of Horse, of an
inferior quality, may command an Officer of Foot of a higher degree? And next,
whether an Officer of a King, Prince, State, or Generals Guards, ought or may
have the command above an Officer of a Superior quality, in any other Regiment
of the Army? Suppose a Lieutenant of the Guards of Foot to command over any
Captain of another Regiment of Foot, and the like of the Horse, there may fall
out a thousand emergences and occasions for such encounters, and therefore they
would be obviated and provided for by necessary and punctual orders. As
suppose, which is very ordinary, there be but one general person with a part of
an Army, and in an Encounter he is killed, the Colonels under him striving for
the Command in chief, make themselves a prey to the enemy, which fell out but a
very few years ago to the Danes, when they unfortunately fought against the
Swedes in the Isle of Rugen. Next, suppose a strong party of Foot and Horse
commanded by a Colonel, who has under him but one Lieutenant Colonel, and one
Major, several Ritmasters, and Foot-Captains, the three Field-officers are
killed, the question is, Whether the chief command belongs to the eldest
Ritmaster, or the eldest Captain, or to him of these two, who can show the
eldest Commission in that same service. If the first of these Questions be well
and judiciously handled and discussed, there will need but a few words to be
spoken to the rest.

The first Question being, which of the two Officers of Horse and Foot of equal
quality shall have the command? there be some who take a broad axe to it, and
by an equal division would satisfy both parties, and say, that in the Fields
the Officer of Horse, and in Towns, Castles, Garrisons, and fortified places,
the Officer of Foot should have the prime command; this Arbitration would seem
to give pretty good satisfaction to peaceable men, but the ambition of
Commanders of Horse challenges the Superiority in all places; nor do I think
the Officers of Foot should be so modest as to give it them in any place
without the express command of the Prince, or his General. Assuredly this
Superiority cannot in reason be challenged by either Foot or Horse, unless they
conceive their employment is either more necessary, more to be trusted to, or
more honorable than the other. We shall then get some light to decide the
controversy, when we have examined whether the Cavalry or Infantry of an Army
be most necessary, or most trusted to, and most honorable, or all three. And
first as to the necessity, reason, and if I have any right reason, common sense
will evince that Horses are not absolutely necessary in the managing a War, but
as they say, ad been esse, only needful they are for the better managing the
War, or to say better, they are useful and convenient, but the Foot are purely
and absolutely necessary, as without which no War ever was, nor no War ever can
be managed. Consider that the Impugnation and defense of Towns, Forts and
Castles is one of the most important and most necessary points of War, or of
the whole Military Art, yet these have been, may be, and for most part are
maintained and defended, and assaulted and taken by the Foot only, without the
help of Horsemen, and I think they are not Paradoxical, who say that Horsemen
are so far from being necessary, that they are not convenient within besieged
places, and without at Sieges as little, unless an enemy with Succors be
expected. And in the field a well ordered and courageous well armed Batallion
of Foot, are not so soon trod down by a Brigade of Horse as some men fancy,
and when their charge is stoutly stood out, I know not what the Horse can do,
but ride, I will not say, run away. If we look upon the practice of Nations
both ancient and modern, we shall find all I have said supported, and more too.
And though our young Gallants will be governed by no former customs, yet I
believe Truth it self has bid us follow the good old way. And therefore let us
take a short view how little necessary many Nations have thought Horsemen to be
in their Wars.

The first Battle we read of in holy Writ was when the King of Sodom and his
Confederates were beaten, and the Prisoners and Goods rescued by Abraham, we
find none of these nine Kings had any Horsemen; nor do I think any will fancy
that Abraham mounted his three hundred and eighteen Servants on horseback when
he pursued Chederlaomer, Amraphel, and the other two Kings. If we had not the
warrant of holy Writ for it, we should not be obliged to believe that the Kings
of Judah and Israel would have mustered so many hundred thousands of men in
such short and narrow spots of ground as that whereof they were masters; and
since we read not of any Horses, we may conclude, all their Armies consisted of
Foot. Nay more, the Kings of Israel were commanded not to multiply Horses; and
Solomon is taxed for prevaricating with this command, as well as for his
multiplying Wives and Concubines. Now if the Lord of Hosts had thought it
necessary that Horsemen should have been in the Host of his Chosen people, he
would not have forbid their Kings to multiply horses, but rather have commanded
them to provide store of them for managing their Wars, which they might easily
enough have done out of Egypt, where abundance of them were to be bought. It
seems then to me that neither the Israelites nor their neighbors, the
Ammonites, Moabites, nor the Nations whom Gods people were ordered to
extirpate, thought Horsemen necessary at all.

And if we peruse other Histories, we shall find that many ancient people of
the world had many bloody Engagements without the help of Horses. And not to go
so far back, it is not yet above a hundred and sixty years since the Switzers
with their Foot-Batallions without the help of one Horseman, durst fight
against Armies composed of numerous Foot, Horse, and Artillery, witness their
Victory at Novara over the French Army, wherein they destroyed all the French
Infantry, took all their Cannon, and chased away all their Cavalry. And Francis
the First knew well what work they gave him at Martignan when he was in person
at the head of two brave Armies of Foot and Horse, one French, the other
Venetians, as you have it related in the seventh Chapter of the Modern Art of
War. The Americans following the light and law of Nature, made fierce Wars
among themselves before Columbus discovered them, without Horse; and when they
saw some of these Animals mounted by Spaniards, they had such notions of them,
as fabulous Antiquity had of the Centaurs, whom they imagined to be half men,
half beast. The civilized Grecians made use of horses, but not as absolutely
necessary, for many of their Battles were fought without them. And the Romans
who conquered most of the then known World, made use but of few of them, and
many times they made their Horsemen quit their horses, and fight on foot, so
little accounted they them to be absolutely necessary; but of this more
hereafter. Only observe, that as the Grecians had but the sixth part or the
eighth of their Armies horse, so the Romans for most part had but the
fourteenth part of their Army mounted on horseback. And let no man say that
this was done for want of horses, for so it continued to be when they were
Masters of all Italy, Spain, France, much of Africa, and a good part of Greece.
How little James the Fifth of Scotland conceived Horsemen to be necessary in
his Armies, you may see in an Act of his Parliament, Anno 1640, two years
before his death, wherein he ordains that if any come to the place of
Randezvouz on Horseback, he shall send back his horse with a Footboy, except
Earls, Lords, and Barons, and the reason he gives, is because these Horses
destroy poor peoples Corn and Meadows, and are not necessary in his Hosts,
where all men must fight on foot.

In my Discourses of the Grecian and Roman Art of War; I spoke not of these
questions mentioned here: for as the Lacedaemonians being asked why their
Lawgiver Licurgus made no Law against Thieves? answered, because no such crime
as Theft was heard of among them; so I say, neither Grecian nor Roman knew any
thing of those questions mentioned in these Papers. And since by what is said,
Wars have been, and may be managed (though not so well) without Horse, but not
at all without Foot, I conclude the last absolutely necessary, but not the
first; what reason then that a Foot-Officer that is absolutely necessary,
should be commanded by an Officer of Horse, without whom the War in case of
necessity may be managed?

Next, we are to consider whether the Horse or Foot is most trusted, and which
of the two Services is most honorable, and these I shall speak of not
severally, but conjunctly, for I suppose it will not be denied that the greater
the trust be, the greater is the honor; for if the King entrust a Citizen or a
Merchant, who is neither Lord, Knight, nor Gentleman, to be a Privy Councellor,
certainly that Citizen by that great trust is not only honorable, but right
honorable, and that title belongs to him as well as to a Lord. We are here to
consider that an Army composed of Horse and Foot, represents a man, the
Infantry his body, the Cavalry his sides, assuredly the intrinsic parts of a
man that are contained within his breast and belly, are more honorable than
the extrinsecal ones, which be his sides, legs, and arms; and hence it is that
they get the name of noble and vital parts, and if this comparison hold, as I
hope it will, then it is as extravagant a desire of an Officer of Horse to be
admitted to command over an Officer of Foot as for the rib of a man's side to
seek power over the heart, liver, or lungs of the same man. Or if you please,
an Army is like to a bird or fowl, the Infantry is the body of the bird, and
the Cavalry the two wings; the sides of a man may be pitifully wounded, and the
wings of a bird broken, and yet the bodies of both man and bird preserved; and
even so, as long as the Infantry keeps the Field, Victory is there, though both
the sides or wings of the Horse be broken and fled. And so it fell out at the
Battle of Oxenfield in Germany, in the year 1638.

With the Infantry the Artillery both ancient and modern, was, and is
constantly entrusted with the Infantry, the Magazines of Arms, Provisions,
Victuals, Ammunition and Money is entrusted; with the Infantry are entrusted
the Castles, Forts, Ports, Havens and Strengths of the Land, and the Prince his
Treasure, and these make the vitals, not only of an Army, but of a State. In
fortified Camps not only all these, but even the Cavalry it self are entrusted
to the Infantry, who are to maintain and defend the Ramparts, Bastions, and
whole Circumvallation of the Camp. With the Infantry the Prince who manageth
the War, or his General, or both constantly entrust themselves, and either the
one or other is the head of the Army: Now, as I said before, where the greatest
trust is, there is the greatest honor; and consequently the Infantry are more
honorable than the Cavalry. These things were well enough known to the
Grecians and Macedonians; he that commanded the whole Phalanx, that is the
whole Army, stayed with the heavy armed Foot, so did all the Artillery and
Ammunition of the Army. And certainly they had Detachments, as well as we have;
and the Suntagmatarch of a Foot- Phalanx had under his command two hundred and
fifty six men, with Colors and suitable Officers; how would the merry Greeks
have laughed, if this Suntagmatarch, whom our Captains sixty years ago in many
places, (when Companies were three hundred strong) did represent, had been
required to submit himself to the command of an Elarchos, who was Captain of
sixty four Horse, and represented our Ritmasters now adays; for sometimes the
Grecian Troop of Horse was one hundred.

In the Roman Art of War, a Legion was commanded by Tribunes by turns, or as we
call it from the French, by toures; he whose six month it was to command, had
ordinarily four thousand two hundred, sometimes five thousand, and sometimes
six thousand Foot under his command; the Horse ordained to attend this Legion
were but adjectitious, and were seldom above three hundred, sometimes not so
many. The denomination of any Officer is a majori part, from the greater part,
and therefore the Tribune was a Colonel of Foot, and yet commanded these three
hundred Horse as absolutely as he did any Centuriate in the Legion. Hence it is
that with reason I aver that in the Roman Discipline the Horse were constantly
commanded by Officers of Foot; and peruse all the Roman Histories you shall not
find that ever any Officer of Horse pretended to the command of any of the
Foot. With the Roman Infantry were entrusted their Balists, Catupults, their
Battering Rams, their Ambulatory Towns, their Bridges, and all the Materials
whereof these were composed. Now these were the Artillery of the Ancients: with
the Roman Infantry were entrusted the Treasurer and Treasure of the Army, all
Provisions for Man and Horse, their Altars and places of Devotion; and though
the Troops of Horse had their petty Standards and Vexilla, yet the Eagle which
was mounted on a long Pole, and was the great Ensign of the Legion, was
constantly entrusted to the keeping of the first Centurion, who was a
Foot-officer. With the Foot the Consul marched, lodged, and fought. All these
being entrusted to the Roman Foot, and not to the Horse, shows that these
Conquerours of the World esteemed the Foot-service more honorable than that of
Horse; for still I say, the more trust the more honor. It is true, the Roman
Horsemen were all elected of Gentlemen, (for so I interpret the Equestris Ordo)
and therefore I doubt not but they had a Precedence at door and Table before
the Legionary Soldiers, who were all levied out of the Commons; but that gave
them no Superiority or command over the Foot, which is the thing now pretended
to. Nor will the Roman Discipline, which ordered the Horse to ride the Rounds
about the Guards of Foot, as you have it in the twenty second Chapter of the
Roman Art of War, entitle these Horsemen to any Superiority or command over
these Guards of Foot; no more than a Gentleman who is sent to go a Round with
Musketeers to attend him, will evince that he has the command of these Guards
or any Sentinel of them, both the Ancient and Modern Rounds being only obliged
to give an account to those who sent them, in what posture they found the
Guards and Sentinels; yea, these four Roman Horsemen who were to ride the
Rounds, were commanded to lie at the door of the Hut or Tent of a Centurion of
Foot, which I think denoted their subjection to him.

Thus I think it is clear, that with these ancient Romans, to whose arms and
discipline of War most of the world paid homage, the Foot-service was more
honorable than that on Horseback. To confirm this, I hope it will be granted
me, that where the greatest danger is, there is to be expected the greatest
honor. Now very often the Roman Consuls where they saw the Enemy prevail in
Battle, they called the Cavalry or a part of it thither, but mistake it not, it
was not to fight on horseback, but to make them alight from their Horses, and
fight on foot with the Legionaries, which encouraged the Foot when they saw the
Horse could not ride from them. And therefore since the danger was greater to
fight on foot than on horseback, the Romans thought fighting on foot more
honorable than fighting on horseback, and consequently the Foot-service more
honorable than that of Horsemen. Julius Caesar the greatest Captain that ever
was, practiced this in the greatest Battle he ever fought, which was against
the Helvetians, now called Switzers. To show good example he alighted first
from his horse, and then caused all his Cavalry to alight, and as himself tells
us, caused all the horses to be driven away a great way from that place of
Battle. And so did several of the Roman Consuls before him. And I think you
need not doubt but the horsemen being on foot were marshaled by the Tribune as
the Foot were, and so the Decurions who were Captains of horse, received their
orders from the Centurions, each whereof commanded sixty Footmen, whereas the
Decurion had but the command of thirty. So here we see Officers of Horse
commanded by Officers of Foot, but never the contrary. I find Ab^er, Joa^,
Amasa, fight still on foot, and so did their Master David King of Israel, so
did* Saul before him, and most of the Kings of Judah and Israel after him,
except some who fought on Chariots to their small advantage, but none fought on
horseback; I believe Absalom fought on foot, though after his rebellious Army
was routed, he mounted on a Mule to carry him away with more haste than good
speed. Many Kings in the Modern Wars since Gunpowder made a noise, have fought
on foot; Edward the fourth of England fought nine Battles on foot, our Kings of
Scotland did so frequently. And if King James the fourth was killed at Flowdon,
he was slain fighting on foot, and all these were Princes who traced the path
of honor, and studied both to show their own valor, and to overcome their
enemies, which they conceived they did more properly on foot than on horseback.

Since the best governed Kingdoms and States both ancient and modern have given
the honor to the Foot and not the Horse, by intrusting them with their chief
strength, their Treasure, their Artillery, Provisions, Ammunitions, Towns,
Castles, and fortified places, I cannot enough admire what new light the
Commanders of Horse of our time have got, that can move them to demand a
superiority over the Officers of Foot, of equal quality with themselves. If
they say because they can be sooner at an enemy than the Foot can, it will be
answered that they can also ride sooner from an enemy than the Foot can go. I
shall easily grant that three or fourscore years ago, the Curiassiers of
Germany, and Gens d'Armes of France being all Gentlemen might very well have
Precedence at door or board of the Foot-Soldiers, but could not thereby pretend
to any Superiority or command over them. But now the case is altered, for in
Germany, Denmark, Sweden, the Low Countries, and here with us in Scotland and
England, for most part the horsemen are levied out of the Plebeians as well as
the Foot. And I believe the Gens d'Armes of France are much fallen from their
Primitive Institution, most of their Cavalry being composed of the Vulgar,
except the Ban and Arreerban, which consists of Gentlemen that have Estates in
lands, who by the tenure of their Lands and Inheritance are bound to serve the
King on horseback, so many days within, and so many days without the Kingdom.

But before I go further I conceive my self obliged to anticipate an objection,
which both may, and will be made by the great Champions of the Cavalry, and it
is this, that many, at least some States and Kingdoms have been, and some at
this day are, whose strength consisted, and consists in Horse, and not in Foot.
But though I grant them all they seek, which yet I will not do, they gain
nothing unless they make it appear that a War can and may be managed with horse
alone, and not with any Foot, which they will never be able to do. First, they
say that in the days of Yore, the greatest strength of France consisted in
Horse; that Kingdom indeed gloried much in a noble and courageous Cavalry, but
examine their stories, you will find that the most glorious of their Kings,
Charles the Great, his Father Pepin, and his Father Charles Martel, their
famous achievements in France, Saxony, Germany, Spain and Italy were done with
Foot as well as with horse; many of their Kings fought on foot, and Orlando
Nephew to Charles the Great, when he had fought well on foot died, of thirst
and wounds. Those of their Kings who made their Cavalry their greatest strength
in the field, bought it dear when they were so often worsted by the Spaniards,
Flemings, but most of all by the English, whose greatest strength consisted in
Infantry. This made the French Kings beg and hire Foot from Scotland, Germany,
and mostly from the Switzers. These last being discontented with Lewis the
Twelfth, made all France tremble, when with a numerous Army (in which not one
Horseman was to be seen) they were like to fall like an Inundation on that
Kingdom, and were come the length of Dijon in Burgundy, and had reached Paris
without stroke of Sword, if the Duke de Tremouille had not amused them with a
Treaty, in which he was forced to grant them all they desired, and for
performance gave them what Hostages they required. Francis the First perceiving
the error of some of his Predecessors, in trusting too much to Horses, ordered
seven Legions of Foot, all French to be levied, enrolled, and paid each
consisting of seven thousand men, to stand perpetually in time of Peace and
Wars, and these he called, and I think very deservedly, the sinews and nerves
of France.

Next they will object, that the Mamaluks kept their Empire in Egypt and Syria
above two hundred years with Horse, and without Foot. This is a horrible
mistake, for their Towns and Forts were taken by Foot, and defended by Foot
without Horse. They also lost their Empire by putting too much trust in their
Horse, for the Great Turk Selim with his Foot and Cannon beat and killed
Campson Gaurus in the Field, and Tomomby at Cairo, and so put an end to that
Tyrannical Monarchy.

Thirdly, They will instance the Persian, who defends his Kingdom without Foot,
only with Cavalry; but this is a mistake, for their Towns are defended with
Foot, and Ismael in the Calderan Plains paid dear for trusting so much to his
Horse, when he was chased away by Selines Foot and Artillery. Since that time
the Kings of Persia have endeavored, but without success, to get European
Officers to Train their Foot, and order their Artillery; for my part I can as
soon dream that the Persian Squadrons of Horse put themselves in Enchanted
Castles, as that they defended their Towns against Sieges and Assaults of the
Turks with Horse and no Foot. And I can as soon fancy that the Sophi rode with
forty thousand Persians all on Horseback over the Walls of Babylon, as that he
took it back from the Turk without an Infantry.

The Hungarians will come next in play, but they never managed any of their
Wars without Foot, though they paid as dearly for trusting too much to their
Caval^y as ever any did, their Army consisting most of Horse being routed by
Solimans Foot and Cannon, and their King killed, and most of their Kingdom made
a Province, the remainder of it falling into the House of Austria's lap, has
been these hundred and twenty years well defended by German Foot.

It will be in vain to bring Pole on the stage, for peruse the Histories of
that Nation, you will find none of their Wars to have been made either
offensively, or defensively without Foot; to imagine that the Polonians
conquered the half of Prussia from the Knights of the Teutonick Order, and took
in so many well walled Towns without Foot against that warlike fraternity, is a
mere speculation. Nor have they bought the great trust they repose in a
numerous and valiant Cavalry at a cheap rate. In the year 1621 Pole was saved
almost by a miracle, for assuredly Prince Vladislaus would not have defended
his Fathers Kingdom, though he had eighty thousand Horse, and some thousands of
Foot with him, against Sultan Osman, who invaded it with three hundred thousand
Turks, the great Body and strength whereof consisted in the Janissaries, who
mutinying against the Grand Signior, forced him back to Constantinople. But
what a risk did Pole run lately in the years 1655, and 1656, and 1657, where
Charles Gustavus overcame that Kingdom with an Army of twenty thousand men,
most of them Foot; and observe what a well trained and ordered Infantry can do,
Anno 1656, when the rebellious Polonians had returned to their duty, and that
their King John Cas^mir in the head of one hundred thousand Horse, and a
considerable number of Foot and Cannon, assisted and flankt with some Trenches
and Redoubts, was routed and beat out of the Field by the King of Sweden, and
the Elector of Brandenburgh; both whose forces in Horse and Foot did not exceed
thirty two thousand. If all this be true that I have said, as I believe it is,
then I may conclude, that the Foot-service is more necessary, more honorable,
and of greater trust than the Horse one. Since I believe I have made it appear
that a War in all its parts, points and dimensions may be managed with Foot,
without any Horse, (though I confess not so well) but that it can be so without
Foot, is a pure Speculation; why should then Officers of Horse be so
overweening as to pretend to a Superiority over Commanders of Foot of equal
quality with themselves, since they themselves may with less hurt and less
inconvenience be spared out of an Army, than those of the Infantry? Nor do I
see with what right an Officer of Horse can pretend to the command of an
Officer of Dragoons of the like quality, for that Dragoons are reckoned to
belong to the Cavalry, though their service be on foot, will only entitle the
General or Lieutenant General, or Major General of the Horse to command over
them, but not a Ritmaster to give Orders to a Captain of Dragoons, unless he
can show an elder Patent. Yet when I served in Germany, this Emperors Father
ordered a Colonel-General over all his Dragoons, but whether he was Independent
from the Commander in chief of the Horse, I cannot so well tell. And if in the
field the Commanders of Horse ought not to assume this Superiority, much less
ought they to do it in Garrisons, Towns, Castles, or yet in Barricaded
Villages, for these do resemble fortified places. On the other hand,
notwithstanding the opinion of some, who understand well enough, I think it
would be of very hard digestion for an Officer of Horse, though within a Fort
or walled Town to receive Orders from a Foot-officer of a lower quality than
himself. Suppose a Colonel of Horse to be under the command of a
Lieutenant Colonel of Foot, or a Major of Horse under a Captain of Foot. For
though there be no Subordination between them, yet when an Officer of a higher
quality is commanded by one of an inferior degree, it brings superior charges
in disrespect and disesteem, which would carefully be avoided. Koningsmark who
became a famous General in the German War, when he was Colonel of Horse, came
to lie with some of his Troops in Osnabrug, where Lieutenant Colonel Lumsdaine
commanded in absence of his Brother Sir James, Koningsmark pretended to that
Command, protesting that if Sir James who was a Colonel, had been there, he
would willingly have submitted to his Command, but that either himself, or any
other Colonel should receive Orders from a Lieutenant Colonel, was a thing he
neither could nor would understand: A temperament was found out by those who
mediated between them, and the expedient was, that the Lieutenant Colonel
should keep the Keys, and exercise all other functions of a Governor, except
the giving the Word, which the Colonel of Horse should give week about; this
saved the Lieutenant-Colonels interest, and the Colonels reputation. The Great
Gustavus Adolphus King of Sweden ordered that where two or more Colonels of
Horse or Foot were in the Field or Quarter together, without any General
Officer to command above them, the Colonel who had the eldest Commission,
should command in chief, whether he served to Horse or to Foot, and so it was
to be understood of all other Officers under a Colonel. And whereas it might
fall out that many several Colonels might have received their Patents all in
one day, or that otherwise their antiquity might be debateable, in that case it
was ordered that they should cast lots, which is an excellent way, for the
wisest of men has le^t it on record in the best of Books, That the lot causes
contention to cease, and parts between the mighty. Now why should any
Soldier, or why should any General, nay, why should any Prince be ashamed to
follow the rule or example of so famous a King, or so renowned a Captain as
Great Gustavus was known to have been.

Having spoken so much to the first question, I suppose I need speak but little
to the second, which, you may remember, I subdivided into two parts, the first
was, Whether an Officer of Horse may command an Officer of Foot; though of a
superior quality, as suppose a Lieutenant of Horse command a Captain of Foot,
a Quartermaster of a Troop of Horse to command a Lieutenant of Foot, a Captain
of Horse to command a Major of Foot, and that only by virtue of their serving
on horseback: But if it be true, what I have asserted, and endeavored to
prove* that no Officers, (what ever their service be) Horse or Foot, of equal
quality can with reason pretend to the command of one another; then it will
assuredly follow, that an Inferour can far less pretend to any such authority
over a Superior. But there seems to be a greater difficulty in the second
question, which is, Whether an Officer of a King, Prince, or Generals Guards,
either of Horse or Foot, ought to command over not only his equals in another
Regiment or Troop, but even over those, who in quality are above him: As
whether a Lieutenant of these Guards may not, or should not command over any
Captain of another Regiment, or a Captain of those Guards over any Major of the
Army. And truly, as the question is stated, and so ordinarily it is stated, I
must answer negatively: And yet shall go as great a length, with these Officers
of Guards, as I conceive true Military Discipline, and method of War will
permit me, and perhaps further. I say then, that a Generals guard either of
Horse or Foot, much more that of a King, or absolute Prince, in a march should
constantly have the Vaunt of all other Regiments, Companies, or Troops of the
Army, both for their honor and that they may be in time at the Head quarter to
officiate, and do duty: I say next, that all Officers belonging to these guards
have the priority and precedence, not only of Door and Table, but even in all
Courts and Councils of War, before any other Officers in the Army of their own
rank and quality; but not of others of a higher charge; nay more, though it be
a received maxim both in the Civil and Military Law, that Par in parem non
habet potestatem, One equal has no power over his equal; yet I hold when
Officers of guards are by some emergency or other, or by command, to march, or
quarter with Officers of other Regiments of equal quality; the Officer of the
guards should have the command over the other. Suppose these be either
Captains, Lieutenauts, Majors, Lieutenant Colonels, or Colonels, further than
this I cannot go, till I get more light, than the high demands of some has yet
afforded me. Nor can I fancy any reason for this pretense of superiority, but
the will and pleasure of the Prince, his General or his Privy Council, and
indeed that must neither be contradicted nor controlled; yet I conceive, the
inconveniences of such an unusual command, may be represented to the Prince,
his General and his Council; and I suppose they will be loath to give, or to
leave any occasions of heart burnings, animosities, debates, or discontents.
How strange and odd will it be to see a young and raw Captain of the guards,
who by the favor of powerful friends has come to that charge, to command over
a grave and experienced Major? it is the way to make Discipline of War
contemptible to some, and ridiculous to others. I remember that in Germany one
of the Swedish Lieutenant Generals ^ad the chief command of a little Army, and
over all the Garrisons of that Country, which were not few; a strong party of
that Army of Horse and Foot was drawn out to attack a little Town strongly
barricado'd, by the enemies; five hundred commanded Foot were to fall on first,
under the conduct of a Lieutenant Colonel: He who was Lieutenant Colonel of the
Lieutenant Generals Regiment, which had the name of Guards, pretended to the
command, and debated it strongly; there was an elder Lieutenant Colonel than
he, of another Regiment, who stiffly refused to yield to the Lieutenant Colonel
of the Guards, pretending to the command, because he had been a Lieutenant
Colonel in the Swedish service long before the other; the Lieutenant General is
consulted, who presently ordered them to cast the Dice for it, his own
Lieutenant Colonel by lot gained the honor, but lost his life by the bargain:
You see how this Lieutenant General was loath to give occasion of discontent, by
preferring an Officer of the Guards to another of that same quality, but of an
elder standing; and yet, if I had been worthy to have been Arbitrator, I had
awarded the command to the Lieutenant Colonel of the Guards: Thus far have I
hazarded to publish my opinion of this controverted point; and as every thing
that men write, must be subject to the variable judgments of several Readers,
so I profess I shall be willing to alter my opinion when the reasons of others
shall even but probably convince me to have been in an error. I am sure to
maintain either the one or the other, will transgress neither Act or Statute of
either Church or State. Ordinances of War, even of the greatest of men, are not
irrevocable as the Decrees of the Medes and Persians were said to be. But
notwithstanding any reason can be given for the maintenance of what I have said
in avoiding this question, this great King of France gives a Superiority of
some Officers over others of that same degree, and not only to those of his own
Guards (which are very many) and those of the Queen, the Dolphine, and Monsieur
his Brother, which I look upon as tolerable; but he gives the command to French
Officers over strangers of a higher quality, in so much that in one Chapter of
his Ordinances, he orders Lieutenant-Colonels who are strangers, to be
commanded (if I remember right) by a French Ensign. If private men might
examine the Directions of mighty Monarchs, I should think this were enough to
encourage all strangers to offer their service to the Capital Enemies of his
most Christian Majesty.

CHAP. XIII. Of Feltmarshals, Lieutenant-Feltmarshals, Lieutenant-Generals,
Generals of the Cavalry, and Infantry, Major-Generals, and Adjutant-Generals.
OUR Modern forces being levied, mustered, armed, well exercised, disciplined,
paid and provianted, and molded in Troops, Companies and Regiments, call now
for General Officers, that these Independent Bodies whereof I have spoken may
be cast in the shape of an Army. These shall not be wanting, for it is but too
ordinary to have more General Officers in an Army than there are Colonels in
it, and yet a great deal of more Colonels than are necessary, Many General
persons in an Army.
if you consider the weakness of their Regiments. And truly I think it is an
insupportable abuse and vanity, that no sooner is a Lieutenant or Major General
sent with a part of the Army on some exploit, which may require some
considerable time, or that upon some other occasion, either for a speedy march,
the accommodation of the Army, or the ease of the Country, every one who
commands apart one wing or Tertia of that Army, in a very short time makes up a
complete General staff. Of the General of the Artillery, Commissaries,
Muster-masters, and Proviant-masters General, and of the Auditor and
Provost-marshal General, I have spoke in their proper places, and so I shall
hereafter of the Quartermaster, Scout-master, and Waggon-master General, and
now I am to give you a brief description of these General Officers mentioned in
the Title of this Chapter.

The word Felt, or Field-marshal imports nothing else but that person who
Felt-marshal^
marshals the Field, and is called in French, Marshal de Camp, and so the
Primitive institution of the Office was, and so it continued, till within these
fifty years; for the present in Germany, Sweden and Denmark, those who command
Armies Royal consisting of Cavalry, Infantry, and Artillery, are qualified by
the Titles of Felt-marshals, and have an equivalent authority to the ancient
Marshals of France far above that of Marshals de Camp; and those Felt-marshals
have under them Lieutenant-Generals of the whole Army, Generals and
Major-Generals of Horse and Foot, and these last are now the Marshals of the
Field, for they draw up the several Regiments and Brigades of both in order of
Battle. So upon the matter a Felt-marshal is now General or Commander in chief
of the Army, so were Barrier, Torstensone, and Wrangel, successively one after
another, in the long German War, under Christina Queen of Sweden. These Felt
marshals now have Generals and Trains of Artillery under them. A Felt-marshals
absolute command of an Army, as I said before, is of no old date, for in my
time Ilo was Felt-marshal to Wallenstein, Gustavus Horn to the King of Sweden,
Kniphausin to the Duke of Lunenburg; and as in process of time he has
insensibly attained to a higher and more absolute power than before, so the
Title of Lieutenant Felt-marshal signifies now more than it could be
interpreted Lieutenant-Felt-marshal.
to do at its first institution, and the title it self is not old. When the
late King of Sweden invaded Pole, he gratified some of his ancient General
Officers with this Title, and it was then and is now, where it is used, looked
upon as more honorable than that of Lieutenant General, for what reason I
cannot divine; yet it is certainly so, for a Lieutenant Felt-marshal commands
Generals of Horse or Foot, Count Koningsmark had commanded several Armies in
chief in the long German War both prudently and successfully under the title of
Lieutenant General, but thought himself honored seven years after the Peace of
Munster, with this title of Lieutenant Felt-marshal. That must be most
honorable that a Prince fancies to be so, and there is good reason for it,
because he is the fountain of honor.

A Lieutenant General, (if you take the word strictly) has no command
Lieutenant General of an Army.
when his General is present; I think it is a most proper Title for those who
command Armies in chief under a Monarch or free State, because they are their
Lieutenants in Militaribus, or if a Prince have appointed a Captain General to
command all his forces, then that Captain General commissionates
Lieutenant-Generals to command petty Armies under him; but when he joins his
forces, the Command of the Lieutenant General seems to cease, because he is but
the Deputy of him that sent him, and a Representative is no more a
Representative, when he whom he represented is present. The Roman Consuls had
their Lieutenant Generals, who were called Legates, who commanded Armies apart,
Roman Legates.
when the Consuls thought fit, but had no command when the Consul was present.
Nor does Caesar give those Legates even in the Consuls absence, an absolute
power; for speaking of one of his own Legates in the French War, I believe it
was Labienus, he commends him for not hazarding a Battle with the Gauls, though
he seemed to have the advantage, because, says he, a Legate has not that
power which he has, who is Imperator or Commander in chief. One of the Dukes
of Aumale commanded an Army in France against the Protestants with the Title of
Lieutenant General, but so soon as he joined forces with Henry Duke of Anjou,
who was Captain General for his Brother Charles the Ninth, the Duke resigned
both his Title and Office. But notwithstanding all this, Lieutenant-Generals
continue both in their Title and Office in their Generals presence; and I have
known Felt-marshals have Lieutenant-Generals under them, who have commanded
both the Horse and Foot of their Armies, even when the Felt-marshals were
present; as the Earl of Bramford who was Lieutenant General to Felt-marshal
Barrier, and King, who was Lieutenant General to Feltmarshal Leslie. I think
the great Dukes of Muscovia have a very commendable custom to choose any of
their Colonels, who they fancy are qualified for it to be Generals or
Lieutenant-Generals of a competent number of forces fit for the expedition they
are to be employed in, and so soon as that piece of service is A good custom.
done, the Colonel lays down his Commission, and returns to his former Charge,
without the least thought or imagination, that he is disparaged thereby, the
frequent practice of this custom banishing such thoughts out of all men's heads.
Neither would such a practice be fancyed to be a degrading of men from former
honors in other places of the world, if they were but a little habituated to
it. The French gives now the Title of Lieutenant-Generals very frequently, I
suppose they are independent one of another, and are the Kings
Lieutenant-Generals, which is very proper, and obey none but such as he
commands to give Orders to them.

A General of the Cavalry commands it under him who is Commander in General of
the Cavalry.
chief of the Army, whatever title he bear, whether General, Felt-marshal,
Lieutenant Felt-marshal, or Lieutenant General. He is to see the Troops and
Regiments of Horse kept at that strength that they are appointed to be of; and
if by Battle, long marches, great fatigue, or other accidents of War, the
numbers of men be diminisht, Horses lost, or made unserviceable, it is his duty
when they come to Quarter, to see the Troops made strong, the Horses put in
good case, and the Riders well clothed and armed. In Musters he is obliged to
see that no Colonel or Ritmaster wrong the Muster-masters, by His Duties.
making a show of borrowed men, Horses or Arms, whereby the Prince may be
cheated in his Purse, or disappointed in his service. He is to take care that
the Cavalry be paid, and provided with Proviant and Fodderage, and good
Quarter. He should also be a person who understands something of the
Footservice, in regard that when the greatest part of the Horse is sent in any
Expedition, ordinarily some Foot are sent with them, and then it is the General
of the Cavalries office to command both. But it is a pity that all General
persons should not make it their study and their work to understand both the
Foot and Horse-service, for I have seen considerable parties of Foot more
harassed and spoiled in a-short time under the command of an Officer of Horse,
than if they had been routed by an enemy; so little discretion some have to
know the difference between a man and a Horse. It seems in the Low Country
service the General of the Horse commanded next the General, and in his absence
over the Army, even when they had Felt-marshals; but that custom is not now in
other places where Felt-marshals, and Lieutenant-Felt-marshals command the
Generals of the Horse; and it would seem that the Estates of the United
Provinces have now voided the difference otherwise, since they qualified the
two Commanders in chief of their Armies with the Titles of Felt-marshals,
Prince Maurice, and Wurz.

A Lieutenant General of the Horse being in his Generals absence to do the
Lieutenant General of the Cavalry.
same duties, he should have the same qualifications. If the Cavalry be
marshaled in one Body, the General is to stand on the right hand of it, and the
Lieutenant General on the left. But if the Horse be drawn up in two wings, the
General commands the right, and the Lieutenant General commands the left wing.

A Major General of the Cavalry is to receive the word, and all other Orders
Major General of the Horse.
from the Commander in chief of the Army; he is to impart them to the General,
and the Lieutenant General of the Cavalry, and after he has received their
commands, he is to give all to the Regiment Quarter Masters of Horse, which
they carry to the several Regiments. All complaints and differences between
Officers and Horsemen, or among themselves, are first brought to him, which he
should endeavor to compose in an amicable way, but if he cannot, Major General
of Horse,
he is to proceed according to the Articles and Constitutions of War. He has
the inspection of all the Guards of Horse, and orders them, and keeps lists of
Convoys and Parties, that the several Officers and Troopers may have their
turns, in which a Major General should show himself very impartial; for very
few or none there be, who will not think themselves wronged in their
reputation, His Duties,
if others be preferred to them, where either danger may probably be looked for,
or profit expected, unless it can be made clear to them that it is not their
turn to go on that party, or with that Convoy. It is the Major General who
marshals the Cavalry in Battle, having first advised about the manner with the
General of the Horse, or in his absence with the Lieutenant General. If he be
an understanding, active, stirring and vigilant person, a General and
Lieutenant General may be laid aside, as in many Armies over Christendom they
are, though not in all. This Officer the English qualify with the Title of
Commissary General of the Horse.

The Duties of a Lieutenant General, and Major General of the Foot are the
General Officers of the Foot.
same which I have told you belongs to those of the Horse, mutatis mutandis.
Generals of the Foot are but rare, Banier was under Gustavus Adolphus, and Lind
under Charles Gustavus, both Kings of Sweden, and some of the Emperors Armies
had them likewise. Some Lieutenant-Generals of the Infantry I have likewise
known, but these are not in all Armies. But a Major General of the Foot is
thought a necessary Commander in all Armies, though they be never so weak; when
any of them is wanting, or out of the way, the oldest Colonel officiates for
him. The English call him Sergeant Major General of the Foot, and in some
places he is ordered to be constantly President of the Council of War.

The name of Adjutant-General denotes his charge and office, for he is a helper
Adjutant-General,
to those General Officers of whom I have spoken in this Chapter. The orders
and directions he gives are not to be looked upon as his own, but the Generals,
and therefore his person must be known to both Officers and Soldiers of the
whole Army. If he have a Regiment, he may of himself in some urgent occasions
give such directions, as he thinks warrantable, and for which he knows His
Duties*
he can be accountable, otherwise, whether he be a Colonel, or not, he must be
sparing to give any other Orders than those he has received. He must be very
ready, active, and stirring, of a quick judgment to receive, and of a ready
utterance to deliver his commands. In an Army Royal when it is encamped, or
lies in Quarters, or yet when it is marching, two Adjutant*Generals, one for
the Horse, and one for the Foot, if they be men of active bodies and minds,
will be sufficient, but in a Battle they are too few. To supply which defect,
and not to increase the number of Adjutants, the Commander in chief ought to
have half a dozen of understanding Gentlemen well mounted, and these as the
General rides along the Army either to marshal or encourage it, should ride
with him, that the whole Army may know them as such, who are to be employed to
carry the General's directions, which may be very many, according as the many
emergencies and changes of things may make him alter his commands; and the
fittest persons for that employment are such Reformado's as have been Majors of
Horse and Foot formerly. I have seen this place of Adjutant-General made very
contemptible by some Generals, who have filled it up His Charge made despicable.
with men, whose mean understanding, little experience, dullness of spirit, and
weak intellectuals rendered them despicable and ridiculous to those to whom
they pretended to bring their Orders. He is, or should be, a great helper to
the Major General, whether of Horse or Foot. But where there are two or three
Major Generals of the Infantry, and perhaps as many or more of the Cavalry, I
think there needs no Adjutant at all, for I know no reason why every Major
General should have an Adjutant General, nor will men be sound to engage in a
charge that is made so common, unless it be such insignificant persons as these
I have spoke of. In France this Adjutant General is called Aid^ de Camp, and in
Aid de Camp, and Aid Major.
some Foot Regiments the Major had his Adjutant, who was called Aid Major; and
this for most part is one of the Lieutenants, who has no allowance for it. In
the old English Discipline of War this Adjutant was called a Corporal of the
Corporal of the Field.
Field; and there were four of them in every Army, wherein they were well
known; they were mounted on good and swift horses; their charge and employment
was the very same in all things with that of our Modern Adjutants.

If I have rightly described an Adjutant General, I must confess I differ from
Monsieur de Gaya, who has lately written a short System of the Art of War; in
his Nineteenth Page he would have us believe that the charge of an Adjutant
General, or Aid de Camp, as he calls him, is fit for a young man of quality,
and in which (says he) it is easy for him to learn and make himself perfect.
Indeed I acknowledge we are bound still to be learning what is good, yet I
cannot allow an Adjutant to be an Apprentice, and though it becomes him to be
taught by his Betters, yet he should be so perfect in the Military Art, that he
is bound to teach others; nor can I allow him to be very young, since he
imbraceth a charge which befits none but an experienced Soldier. But Monsieur
de Gaya adds, he should be wise, vigilant, and vigorous. I confess a young man
may be wise, but I believe wisdom here is taken for experience, whereof young
men of quality may be very often destitute. But Monsieur de Gaya forgot to bestow
the qualification of Courageous upon his Aid de Camp, which if he want (being
he is to carry and distribute his Orders in the time of hottest danger) I will
not give a rush for all his wisdom, vigilance and vigor. He says also, that
his Aid de Camp should be always, ( tous jours) besides the General Officers
to carry their Orders where they are necessary. But if he be always with them,
how can he be from them when he carries their Orders where they are necessary?
certainly he must be but sometimes ( Quelquefois) with them, and sometimes from
them.

Besides all these General persons mentioned, some would have a Quartermaster
General for the Horse, besides the Quartermaster General of the Army, because
this last stays constantly at the head Quarter with the General of the Army,
and the other should be constantly with the Horse. But I think places and
offices Places should not be multiplied.
should not be multiplied in Armies, and therefore the Quartermaster of the
oldest Regiment of Horse may officiate in the Cavalry in the absence of the
Quartermaster General, of whose office I shall speak in my Discourse of
Castrametation.

Though many of these General Officers of whom I have spoken, may seem to be
more burdensome than useful, to either Prince, State, or Army, yet this present
Emperor Leopold was glad to make use of them all in his late War against the
Turk, to satisfy that noble desire of honor which many Princes, and other
persons of high and eminent quality had to serve him against the common Enemy
of the Christian name.

I have told you of all the Duties these General persons are bound to pay in
Qualifications of all these General Officers.
their several charges, but I have not spoke of those parts, virtues and
qualities, wherewith some who write or speak of that Subject, would have them
endued, they will be too tedious to rehearse, neither can I well do it without
Tautologies. But I shall tell you that the qualifications required by some
Authors for a Captain General, being divided between him and all the General
persons under him, may in my opinion serve them all sufficiently, and what
these are, you may read in the next ensuing Chapter.

CHAP. XIV. Of a Captain General, or Generalissimo.
IF our first Parents had not rebelled against their Creator, their posterity
had enjoyed an everlasting peace, and so such a person as we now speak of, had
been very unnecessary. But I assure my self never man (except Adam when he was
in the state of perfection) was endued with these gifts, wherewith some
Notional Authors will have a Captain General to be qualified. He must, say A
Notional description of a Captain General.
they, be pious toward God, just toward man, and loyal to his Master. He must
be very affable, very wise, of a sudden and quick apprehension, of a solid
judgment, and happy memory. He must be very severe in his command, and yet very
merciful. He must be liberal, and free from all manner of Avarice, painful,
magnanimous, and courageous, and in one word, endued with all the Moral
Virtues. He ought to be an old Practitioner in the Military Art, and well
experimented in all its parts and duties. Perhaps you may think this enough,
but Polybius in his Ninth Book requires more, for he will have his General to
be both an Astrologer, and a Geometer. If you will tell me where, or in what
region of the habitable world, all these qualifications shall be found in one
person? Eris mihi magnus Apollo.

That he who is entrusted with the supreme Command of Royal Armies, one or
more, and with the whole Militia of a State, should be an accomplished person,
The charge of a Generalissimo is of the highest nature.
and if it be possible, such a one, as we have described, will not be readily
denied, since it is a Command of the highest nature, the greatest honor, and
deepest consequence that can be conferred on any single person of what quality
^r degree soever, for he is entrusted not only with the lives of those that are
in Arms under his Command, but with the defense of the whole Country, Towns,
Forts, and Castles, with the honor, welfare, and standing of the Prince and
State, and with the lives and properties of all their Subjects. The loss of his
Army, or Armies by his negligence, inadvertency, rashness or cowardice, may
occasion the loss of all these, or make them run a very great hazard by his
indiscretion, much more by his treachery; he may in one moment of time lose the
lives and liberties of many thousands, make numbers of women widows, children
fatherless, and fathers childless, he may lose the honor and beauty of a whole
Province, yea of a whole Kingdom, all which he was bound by his office and
charge to preserve.

The consideration of these things moved most of the ancient Kings and
Emperors, A Prince to manage his Wars in person.
and those of latter times likewise to manage their Wars, and lead their Armies
in person. Those who laid the foundation of the first four Monarchies did so,
as in the Ass^rian, Nimrod, Belus, Ninus and Semiramis, and when their
posterity did it not, their Empire was in the wain, and ended with
Sardanapalus, who hid himself from the sight of men among his women. Cyrus led
his Armies himself, so did some of his Successors, but when others of them
staid at home, and sent their Lieutenants abroad, the Persian Monarchy decayed,
and became a prey to the Great Alexander, who managed his Wars in person, and
so did those great Captains of his, who cut out Kingdoms to themselves out of
their Masters Conquests; but their Successors lost them by sitting idle at
home, and employing their Generals abroad. Many Roman Emperors after Augustus,
went to their Wars in person, whereby they preserved their Imperial Dignity;
but when others employed their Lieutenants (though many of these were excellent
men, and often victorious) the Empire was torn in pieces. The Kings of Leon,
Navarr, Castile, Portugal, and Arragon, after the destruction of the Gothish
Monarchy in Spain, went to the field in person, and recovered Many Instances to
prove it.
those Kingdoms out of the hands of the Saracens. When the Kings of France of
the Merovingian and Carolomannian race kept within their Palaces, and suffered
the Majors thereof to govern their Armies, they lost their Kingdoms and Crowns.
Our Kings of Scotland and England used mostly to manage their Wars themselves;
the Emperor Charles the Fifth led his greatest Armies himself, and for most
part was always victorious, for his loss at Algiers occasioned by the visible
hand of Heaven; and his forced Retreats from Inspruck, and the Siege of Metz,
were but small blemishes in the beautiful and fair Map of his victorious reign.
But since his time his Successors the Kings of Spain have sat at home and
entrusted their Armies to their Generals, and we see that their wide and far
stretched Monarchy has been since that Emperors time in a constant decadency.
All the Kings and Emperors of the Ottoman race went in person to the Wars,
till Selimus the second changed that custom, and since that time none of them
have done actions by their Bashas comparable to those of their Ancestors. In
our own days the Emperor Ferdinand the Second entrusted the managing his War
against Gustavus Adolphus to his Generals, Wallenstein, Tily, and Pappenheim,
all brave and great Captains, yet that Martial King being in person on the head
of his Armies, prevailed over them all.

We may perceive the great odds of managing a War by a Prince in his own
person, and by his Captain General by taking a view of the actions of two
Brothers, both of them excellent Princes, these were the Emperor Charles the
Actions of two Brothers compared.
Fifth (of whom I but just now spoke) and Ferdinand the First, King of the
Romans, Hungaria and Bohemia. The first, (as I have already said) led his most
considerable Armies himself; the second staid constantly at home, and sent his
Captain Generals to manage his Wars of greatest importance; mark the issue,
Ferdinand lost three Royal Armies, each of them composed of a well appointed
Cavalry, Infantry, and Train of Artillery: one of them at Es^c^hi^ under
Cazzianer, another at Buda, under Rocandolf, and the third at Pesth, under
Joachi^^ Marquess of Brandenburg; all three were woefully and shamefully lost
without fighting. And if any think that the misfortune of all the three, or any
one of them could not have been prevented by the Princes own presence, I shall
answer that undoubtedly it had, and my reason is this, because that which lost
them all, was the irresolution of the Generals, who durst neither fight, nor
retire in time, as being shie and wary to hazard that which was not their ow^^
whereas Ferdinand (if he had been present) would quickly have resolved either
on the one or the other, and consequently would have either retired in time and
saved all his three Armies, or have fought, and by that means been victorious,
or would have been beaten with more glory to himself, and mischief to his
insolent enemy. And this is more particularly clear in that Army commanded by
Rocandolf, who after multitudes of Infidels were already arrived for the relief
of the besieged Queen and City of Buda, and that Soliman himself by speedy
marches was hastening thither, could not be moved or persuaded by any entreaties
or remonstrances of the principal Commanders of his army to raise the Siege,
vowing and protesting that he neither could nor would do it, without an express
warrant from his Master King Ferdinand; but before that could come, he and his
misfortunate Army were both irrecoverably ruined. The sad History of all these
three Armies, you may read at length in Paolo Giovio.

Be pleased to take another instance of a later date: In the year 1657, Charles
Gustavus King of Sweden invaded the Duchy of Holstein with a very
inconsiderable army, his Horsemen and his Soldiers were almost naked, and all
beaten Actions of two Kings compared.
with a long march from Pole; nor was it so strong as eleven thousand of all.
Frederick the third King of Denmark intrusts a well appointed army of sixteen
thousand Horse and Foot to a Feltmarshal, and stays at Cop^nhagen himself, by
the persuasions of his Privy Council. The Swede being in person on the head of
his harassed army prevailed every where, ruined the Danish army without one
blow, and besieged the relics of it in Frederichsode, a strong Town, stormed
it, and took it with the slaughter of the Danish Feltmarshal, and most of his
men, and got in it above one hundred Brass-guns, and much Ammunition. After
this a vehement Frost being commanded from Heaven to favor him with a Bridge,
he stepped over the Ice from Isle to Isle on the Belt, where he forced the Dane
to accept of such conditions as he imposed, which were both dishonorable and
disadvantageous. Sure if the King of Denmark had been personally present with
his forces, he had at least once fought for it.

To make War in person seems to be one of the essential Duties of a King or
Sovereign Prince; this was one of those reasons which the people of God gave
for their desire to have a King to rule over them, To do justice among our
selves, Kings of Israel and Judah made War i^ person.
and to lead out our armies to battle against our enemies, and they add, after
the manner of other Nations. So then it is clear that Kings at that time went
to the field in person. So did Saul the first King of Israel, and so did David,
and most of all his Successors Kings of Judah and Israel. And if it be objected
that David made Joab his Captain General, I give two answers, first Joab's
authority ceased when David was present, which he was almost constantly with
his forces, The objection of Joab answered.
till he was established King of Israel. For Joab's employment where he
commanded in chief, (if I have observed right) was first against the Rebel
Absalom, and this was a Civil War, and then against the Ammonites, and that was
a foreign War, both these had their rise from sudden Emergencies. In the last
the Kings presence, till the latter part of it, was not necessary, and in the
first not at all convenient. But secondly, I answer that David did often repent
him of the large Commission he had given to Joab, who thereby made himself so
strong that the King durst not hazard to punish him for his misdemeanors, which
he often insinuated in those words, You are too strong for me, you Sons of
Z^rviah. That o^ Benajah answered.
As to Solomon's making Benajah Captain General, it signified but little, since
there was no War in his time, and the Captain of the Host was almost constantly
beside him. If any War had fallen out, probably Solomon would have conducted
his forces himself. But his reign was peaceable, as being the Type of the
Prince of Peace; yet he might have repented it if he had conferred that high
trust on Jeroboam, who if he had been Captain General, probably would not have
fled to Egypt for fear of King Solomon; for his actions against Rehoboam
declared afterward, that the heart of a Rebel was within his breast, whatever
his exterior deportment was in the time of that peaceable King.

But to what I have said, That Sovereign Princes should conduct their armies
Objections against what has been said. First,
in person, it will be objected, That an Infant King cannot manage a War: To
which I answer, that then the Prince nearest in blood should do it, as well as
he should govern in Civil affairs. And if it be said, he may usurp; I answer,
Better he do so than a fellow subject, who may play the like prank, if he be
invested with the like power. But it is known that many Infant Kings have been
carried Answered.
about with their armies to encourage them, so great an influence has the
presence of Sovereign power, (though in a Child) over the spirits of Military
persons. Observe what Henry the sixth of England's valiant Uncles did for him,
and how faithful they were to him during his Minority. Observe also that Roxan^
her being with Child to the Great Alexander, made his ambitious Captains (after
his death) smother their foaring thoughts till time should discover to them
whether their Sovereign was in her belly or not, that accordingly they might
know how to take up their measures.

In the second place it will be asked what shall an old decrepit, or
Valetudinary The Second,
King do, who is not able to go to the field? Truly I shall not desire him to
do as that King of Morocco did, who in the Battle he fought with Sebastian King
of Portugal* caused himself to be carried in a Litter, whereby he gained the
Victory, though with the loss of his own life in the field. But I say such a
King Answered.
may entrust as many of his subjects as are able and capable to lead armies,
but he should put the managing the great bulk of the War principally in the
hands of the heir of the Crown to command over all* and if he be not of age fit
for it, then that great trust should be given to the next Prince of the blood,
who is capable of it. When the Imperial and Spanish forces Invaded France in
the year 1635, the French King made his Brother Gaston Generalissimo, who
chased the enemy out of the Kingdom. After the Emperor Ferdinand the Second
had suffered many losses, at last he made his own Son the Hungarian King,
Generalissimo over all his armies, who at his very first Encounter with the
Swedes, routed two of their armies at Nordling in the year 1634, and in the
space of two months made them lose more ground than they had gained in two
whole years before.

Thirdly, it will be said a Sovereign Queen cannot lead armies, and therefore
The Third*
cannot manage the War in person. I shall not answer, that many Princesses have
done it gloriously and successfully both in ancient and modern times, and
therefore all should imitate them. But I shall say, that she can employ no
better nor fitter Captain General than him who is nearest in blood to her self,
for he is most proper to represent the Sovereign power who is next to it. I
confess Queen Elizabeth of England did not so, and yet was fortunate in all her
Wars, Answered.
she had very gallant and loyal Subjects, neither was it in her power to make
that choice I spoke of, because he who was next to her in blood, was a
Sovereign Prince of another Kingdom. And if it be objected that Christina Queen
of Sweden managed her German War fortunately under the Conduct of several brave
Captains, who were not of the blood: I shall answer it is true, yet for all
that, I aver that all of them did not so much in sixteen years time after the
death of Gustavus, as he did alone in the space of two years. And Christina at
length found it necessary to give the great trust of all her armies in Germany
to her nearest Cousin the Count Palatine, and send him over with the Title of
Generalissimo, which she never bestowed on any of her Subjects.

Fourthly, it will be said, that a free State must choose and trust a Captain
The Fourth,
General with their forces, for a State cannot go to the Field in person, as
little can it send one of their blood, for he may be a near kinsman to two or
three of the State, and have no relation to the rest. To which I answer, that I
look upon it as an intrinsecal defect in all free States, whether
Aristocratical, or Popular, Answered.
that a pure necessity is put upon them to entrust their armies to such a
General, as they in their prudence make choice of, and of whom frequently All
Free States jealous of their Generals.
they live in a perpetual jealousy, fearing his usurpation almost as much as a
professed enemies invasion; and for that reason they do often limit his
Commission with so many restrictions, and give him such Committees and
Counselors about him, that he is forced many times to let slip fair occasions,
wherein he might have done the enemy great mischief, and his Masters eminent
service. And in the election of their General, it is no small question in a
State, Whether it be best to choose a native or a stranger? The Athenians
employed their own Athenians.
Citizens, the Spartans their Kings, who were created for no other purpose but
Spartans.
to lead their armies; for in time of peace they had no more authority than any
of the other thirty Senators. The Romans made use of their yearly Consuls.
Romans.
The Venetians mostly make choice of strangers, and have for most part ^een
happy in falling upon prudent and faithful Captains. The Commonwealth of
Venetians.
the Switzers consists in their Union among themselves against all enemies,
especially Switzers.
the House of Austria, from whose subjection they emancipated themselves. All
the thirteen particular or Provincial Estates being independent one of another,
and being without a Head, they are subject to Ruptures, and Civil Wars, as they
were more especially in the time of Zuinglius, for matters of Religion. But
their jars last not long, fear of a common enemy teaching them to compose their
animosities, for nothing makes a Society more faithful than fear of one who
hates all of them. When they join unanimously at their general meetings, and
prosecute the results of their Counsels, they are formidable; and when they
make a General of their forces, whether it be for their own service, or that of
foreign Princes (for very mercenary they are) it is but for one expedition, or
for one piece of service, which being ended, his Command* is at an end
likewise, and so they need not be jealous of him, or of any that succeeds him.
The Estates of the United Provinces of the Netherlands managed the long ^^ited
Provinces.
War they had with the King of Spain under the Conduct of four Princes of
Orange successively one after another, neither needed they ever fear the
Usurpation of any of them; for though their power was almost unlimited, yet it
could not tempt those Princes, who were so eminent for virtue, to whose
goodness, magnanimity, justice and fortunate conduct, these Estates under God,
owe their freedom, yet were they jealous of the late Prince; but it seems they
are now desirous to witness their gratitude to that Illustrious family by
making this present Prince their Captain General.

How remediless this inward disease is in all free States, that they must
entrust Free States usurped by their Captain Generals. Lacedemon.
their Militia to one or two persons, the ruin of some Commonwealths makes it
manifest: Lacedemon several times was like to lose her liberty by some of her
Kings, who were nothing but her Captain Generals, and at last they lost it
under the Tyrant Nabis. The fear of Usurpation made Athens commit an
inexcusable folly, or rather a madness in their Ostracism, whereby the people
banished the best qualified of their Citizens. Rome for all her wariness in
intrusting her Rome.
armies to Annual Consuls, missed but little to lose her freedom in the
Dictatorship of Bloody Sylla, and scarce had she recovered it after his death,
when she was robbed of it for ever by Julius Caesar. Castruccio Castra^ani
usurped the Republic of Luca, and so have some other petty free States of
Italy been used. Luca.
How that Hodg podg of Oligarchie, Tyranny, and Anarchy, the long black
Oligarchie of England.
Parliament of England, (which pretended it self to be a free State) was used
by their Captain General Cromwell is a story well enough known, and he knowing
that he might be used in that same fashion, would never part with the Command
of the army, no, not after he had usurped the Sovereignty.

And indeed if Sovereign Princes will look back to by past ages, they will find
And Monarchies also.
it dangerous to entrust their whole Militia to one Subject, unless he be a
Prince of the Blood. You may find in Holy Writ, Abner Captain of the Host of
Israel, Kingdom of Israel.
bring the Kingdom over to David, and though the same David seems to attest
that Abner died not like a fool, yet I believe he died like a Traitor, and that
was as bad, and an insolent Traitor too, for he told his Master to his face, he
would betray him. And truly if David's Political ends had not hindered him, I
think he had done as just and as generous an act to have put Abner to death as
he did, when he caused Baanah and Rechab to be slain, for bringing him the head
of their Master Ishbosheth. Nor was Ishbosheth the last King of Israel who was
so served by his Captain General. Zimri conspired against Elah, and killed him
with his whole family. Omri Captain of the Host, bandies against Zimri, and
forced him to burn himself in the Kings Palace. And Tibni went fair to have
done as much to Omri. J^hu Captain of the Host marches against his Master King
Joram, and slew him with his own hands, and beheaded seventy of his Brethren.
Pekah a Captain conspired against King Pekaliah, killed him, and made himself
King.

Profane Story will furnish more examples of this kind than are necessary to
be rehearsed. The Emperor Mauritius was forced to see his Wife The Empire.
and Childrens heads struck off, and then receive the same measure himself by
his General Phocas, who usurped the Empire. How Pepin and Hugh Capet, both
France. (...)
Majors of the Palace, and Generals of the forces, used two Kings of France, by
disburdening their heads of their two Crowns, and clapping them upon their own,
are stories well enough known to any who has read the French History. The
Caliphs of Egypt and Babylon had their Estates and Dignities, and some of them
their lives taken from them by their Soldans, who were their Captain Generals.
In our own time Ferdinand the Second Emperor of Germany Wallenstein.
was like to pay dear for making Wallenstein Generalissimo of all his armies,
for by that power that haughty Captain General went fair to have rooted out
that branch of the House of Austria in Germany, which has chained the Roman
Eagle in that family for some ages, and to have made himself King of Bohemia to
boot.

On the other hand a subject would be very wary and cautious to undergo a
Subjects would be wary to undertake this great charge,
charge so burdensome and dangerous, as that of the Supreme command of all
armies belonging to either Prince or free State; for though he has not been
wanting to his Duty, yet if in the managing of his charge he have miscarried by
chance or misfortune, he may make account to pay dearly for it, unless he have
to do with both a just and a merciful Master. And if he be so fortunate to do
those exploits which extend the Dominions, and add to the honor and benefit As
very dangerous.
of the Prince and State whom he serves, he has done but his Duty, and can
crave no reward but ex beneplacito, nor needs he expect any, except from a
Gracious Prince; nay it is well if he come off without some dishonor or
disgrace put upon him, if not worse, some Princes not loving to look on men who
have done them extraordinary services, because they may pretend to these
extraordinary rewards, which they intend not to bestow upon them. In bad Some
free States unjust to their Generals.
Requitals free Republics have shown themselves most unjust to many of their
best deserving Captains, as Sparta to Agis and Cleomenes, Athens to
Themistocles, Miltiades, Cimon, Phocion and Pericles. Rome to Coriolanus,
Camillu^* and both the Scipio's. Nor have some Princes forborne to stain their
honors by being injurious to Captains, who have done them the most signal
services. How basely dealt Tiberius with Germanicus? How cruelly did Nero use
Corbulo? And with what inhumanity did Justinian use the famous Bellisarius, who
was the supporter Some Monarchs also.
of his Empire? How ungratefully did Ferdinand of Arragon requite Gonsalvo di
Corduba the great Captain, to whose Valor, Conduct, and Indefatigable labors
he owed the Kingdom of Naples? So true is that observation of Philip of
Comines, the greatest services are often requited with the greatest
ingratitude. Boccalini in one of his Raguagli, has a shrewd hint at this, He
tells us, Boccalini.
that on a time, the news at Parnassus were, that Doria was appointed with his
Fleet to fall upon Hariaden Barbarossa, at a place, where he could hardly
either fight or get away; having made Shipwreck of some of his Fleet, Doria
sent privately to Barbarossa, advertised him of his danger, and advised him to
get him out of his way. One of Dorias's Captains who was his Kinsman, not
knowing of this, came to him, and desired him not to lose so fair an
opportunity, to ruin the Arch-Pyrate: Doria perceiving his simplicity, drew
him aside, and told him, he was not well seen in the Affairs of the World; for,
said he, my fortune is so strictly joined with that of Hariaden, that if he be
totally routed, I perish, because I shall be altogether useless: for I would
have you know, said he, and learn it of me, since you are but a young Captain,
that Princes use Military men, as they do broad Hats, and thick hoods, which in
wet weather, they wear to save them from the Rain, but cast them away, so soon
as the Sun shines.

But if great Captains, who have done Princes or States great service, be
rewarded, Presumption of Captains,
or at least, be not ill used, they should be aware of another rock; and that
is presumption, upon which they run, when they think the glory of those Actions
they have done, intitles them to a liberty to do what they will: For they
should remember, that good services are but Duties, which they owe, and which
are not to be rewarded but according to the pleasure of the Prince; but Crimes
are punishable by the Laws of the Land where they live, and upon Ruins many of
them.
this shelf many brave Captains have split themselves, and suffered Shipwreck:
So did Pausanias, the Famous Spartan King, and Alcibiades the Valiant Athenian;
and so did the Roman Manlius, who saved the Capitol from the Gauls; so did
Biron Duke, Pair, and Marshal of France, under Henry the Great; Sir William
Stanley under Henry the Seventh, of England, and the Earl of Essex, under Queen
Elizabeth. The like did the great Captain Wallenstein Duke of Friedland, whom I
mentioned a little before, who stained all his fair actions and eminent
services, with the black and infamous Crime of Treason, Instances.
against one of those Emperors whom he had served so well, and who had given
him so great a trust. This was likewise Joabs inexcusable fault, who presuming
on the greatness of his Office, rather than that of his services, was many
times too saucy with his Prince: And though Abner deserved a worse death, than
that he got, yet he deserved it not from Joab, David's servant; and, no doubt,
it was intolerable presumption in Joab to revenge his Brothers Death on a man,
with whom his Master had but just now entered into League: And though perhaps
the same Joab had enough of reason of State on his side, for killing Absalom,
yet it was his duty, to have used him as the King bad him; for Princes love to
be served in their own way, and obedience should be the Glory of Subjects. This
presumption of his moved David to leave him a bloody legacy on his Death bed,
which Solomon did not scruple by any pretense of devotion, to cause to be
executed even at the Horns of the Altar, where he had taken Sanctuary. Nor can
Generals excuse their Revolts, Treasons, or Rebellions, by any Affronts or
Injuries, they can pretend to have received from their Princes. And of this
Narses was guilty, though wronged by the Emperor Justine, so was the Duke of
Bourbon, Great Constable of France; the First, for bringing the Lombards into
Italy, the second, A Prince cannot affront his Subjects.
for deserting his Masters service, and going over to Charles the Fifth; for a
Sovereign Prince cannot give his Subject a just cause to cast off his duty; And
Tacitus tells us, that we should suffer the wrongs of Princes, as we do Rain,
Tempests, Hail, Thunder, Lightning, and other injuries of the Air.

And yet for all that has been said, or can be said on this subject, this high
and important charge of Captain General of all the Forces, and Armies of a
whole Kingdom, has been offered in all Ages, by Sovereign Princes to Subjects
(for of necessity, sometimes free States must do it) and we find but few of
those Subjects, who have refused it, for desire of Honor (the Idol of
ambitious Souls) makes them insensible and blind, that they can neither Men's
ambition.
feel the present weight, or foresee the future danger of so high and so heavy
an employment; but if Princes and Monarchs, will have such Captain Generals, as
are not of their own blood, they had better trust their own Subjects with the
charge, than strangers: for the first owe them Fealty, Loyalty, and Allegiance;
the second, only Military service, from which obligation they shake themselves
free, when ever they think it time. As Francis Sforza, Father of him who
Usurped Millan, deserted Joanne Queen of Naples, and went over to her Enemy of
Arragon. I humbly think, that a Prince who has many Armies, should be either
by himself, or one of his Blood present with one of them, and entrust the rest
to persons of known abilities, who should have no higher titles, than that of
Lieutenant Generals, and are to be independent one of another, and this will
make them emulous, endeavoring which of them shall do their Master best
service; but when Reason of War requires a conjunction of Forces, then as I
have often said, the Prince, or one of his Blood should have the supreme
command; for to a Prince, all the Lieutenant Generals will give ready and
submissive obedience, without repining, grudging or murmuring, which men
ordinarily do not to Fellow Subjects. Charles the Ninth of France, made but a
sorry progress in his Wars against his Protestant Subjects, till he made his
Brother Henry Duke of Anjou, his Captain General, who though he was The French
Kings Brother Generalissimo.
but very young, yet all the Kings Generals giving him an entire obedience, in
a short time he brought those of the Religion, to a very low and petitioning
condition. The Emperor Ferdinand the Third, in the year 1637. gathered together
most of his Armies to the number of Eighty Thousand men, gave the conduct of
them all to one Count Gallas, with the title of Generalissimo, and commanded
him to chase the Swedish Feltmarshals Banier, and Leslie out of Germany. Gallas
put them indeed to a fearful retreat, which they made to the Baltic Sea, but
his Authority was not so great, as to procure an absolute obedience of all the
Generals under him, to his commands, which ocasioned the ruin of most of those
numerous Forces, within less than nine Months: But three or four years after,
the same Emperor made his Brother Archduke Leopold, Captain Leopold the
Emperors Brother Generalissimo.
General of his Armies, and sent him against the same Banier, whom he forced to
retire in some disorder, in which he lost well near the whole Left Wing of his
Cavalry. The Arch Duke notwithstanding some losses which he suffered, did not
only preserve, his Brother the Emperors interest, and Forces, but gained
several advantages against the Sweed, till he was called to be Governors of
the Spanish Netherlands. Then again went the Emperors The late Emperor in
person with his armies.
affairs wrong, till he went in person to his principal Army, where his
presence made his Generals do their Duties so well, that the Sweed was once
more at a loss; so much does a Princes presence contribute to the carrying on
of Military designs.

To lay a side that Chimerical description I gave you in the beginning of this
Chapter of a General, give me leave to say, that one ought to be chosen for
that high charge, who knows something of all inferior charges below his own.
The Sweed breed some of their Nobility, in Armies, making many of them begin
with an Ensign bearer or Cornets place, and so rise by degrees, till they
attain to the command of a part or Wing of an Army; the^ Qualities requisite
for a General.
continue but a short while in one Station, yet so long, as they may understand
what belongs to every charge under a General. In the next place, our General
should be stout, not rash, resolute to lay hold on occasion, as knowing, she is
bald behind; he should be very secret, and ready to hearken to advice and have
judgment to discern, whether it be good or bad. Very young this General ought
not to be, for he must not be a mere novitiat, (I speak still of Subjects;)
very old he must not be, for age dries up the radical moisture, cools the
blood, and weakens the body, and thereby makes a man unfit for these Actions,
which require both present resolution, and present expedition: In short, if you
have a General endued with some knowledge in Military Affairs, with some
prudence, with some liberality, and an unblemished reputation; he may pass for
sufficient enough, though he have not all these qualities in the Superlative
degree: for perfection is not to be looked for in the depraved condition of
mankind. As to Stratagems, if he be witty, he needs not lose his time to read
Frontinus; for as Xenophon tells us, a General should Stratagems.
know how to invent Stratagems of his own, as well as to know those who have
been before him, as that Musician is the better Artist, who can make new Tunes,
than he who can only sing or play old ones. And in all those qualifications I
have now spoke of, all General persons are invited to take a share.

But there are some who in the choice of a General require another
qualification, and that is that he be fortunate; but how shall you know whether
he will be fortunate in his future undertakings? if you say, because he was
happy in his lower employments, you will take your measures very ill; for many
are fit to conduct parties or parcels of armies, and to follow such directions
as are given them, who are very incapable to manage the charge of a whole army;
and it is very well known that a Commander in the Wars may be fortunate enough
under Fortune unconstant.
one Master, and very unfortunate under another. Besides, fortune is unconstant
in all things, and in nothing more than in matters of War. I knew when Count
Koningsmark was Major, Lieutenant Colonel, and Colonel, no enterprise succeeded
well with him, nor had he fortune favorable in any party he conducted. But
when he came to have a petty army under his own peculiar Command, all went well
with him, and as he was advanced to higher employments, fortune attended him
more and more, so that he was esteemed to be one of the most successful
Generals Queen Christina of Sweden had; but observe the change, when he came to
serve the late King of Sweden in his War against Pole, this Koningsmark is
pitifully taken at Sea by the Dantzickers, and kept Prisoner till the Peace was
made. It has indeed been observed of some, that they have lost all the Battles
that ever they fought, as if some inexorable destiny had constantly Some never
fortunate.
attended their persons, how brave and accomplished soever they were. They say
never Battle was won for Henry the Sixth of England, when he was Henry the
sixth of England.
personally present, but several were when he was absent. There was one of our
Earls of Douglas, who had the nickname of Tinefield, or Loose-battel, a
courageous person, and well experienced in the managing of the Wars of those
One of the Earls of Douglas.
times, and though he wanted no qualification of a good Captain, yet lost he
all the Battles that ever he fought; and this ill fortune attended him when he
joined with Piercy in his Rebellion against Henry the Fourth King of England,
for that Battle was lost, wherein he thought he had killed three or four Kings,
and he himself was taken Prisoner. The same rigid fate attended him over to
France, where fighting at Vernouville against the Duke of Bedford, he lost both
the Battle and his Life.

There is another extravagant opinion, that it is good for a General to be once
beaten, that he may thereafter shun those errors which occasioned his
overthrow; An odd opinion.
but the Escapes, neglects, and Mistakes in the time of Action, are so many,
that if a General did not endeavor to prevent them, till by every one of them
he lost a Battle, Conflict, or Rencounter, he should never win a Field in his
life. A great deal better it is, says Monluc, for a Captain to be wise by the
loss of other men, than by his own, and by the neglect of others, (who thereby
have shipwrackt themselves) to steer his course so that he split not upon that
same rock.

Many there be who fancy the safety of an army to be wrapped up in the safety of
him who commands it, and therefore will not have him to hazard his person, but
a distinction must be allowed here, for if the Prince or Monarch be in person
at the Medley, when he exposes himself to danger, he hazardeth more than his
army, for he hazards the State and Commonwealth; yet many Princes have done it,
Cyrus, the Great Alexander, Caesar, Henry the Fifth of England, and Henry the
Fourth of France, Charles Gustavus the late King of Sweden, all of them
successfully, and his Majesty now reigning magnanimously a^ Worc^ster. But
indeed it should not be done by them, but in extreme necessity. But* when we
speak of any other Generals, except Sovereign Princes, whatever ^ame they bear,
I say, he who will not have them to hazard their persons, robs the^ Generals
should hazard their persons
of one of the most essential qualities of their Office, and that is Courage.
If a great Captain be never so prudent, never so knowing in the Military Art,
never so vigilant, never so industrious, if he be not stout, all the rest is
worth nothing. Nor do I mean for all that, that he should he rash, there is a
difference between staring and stark mad. He should not hazard his person but
where his presence is necessary, as when he sees or understands that in time of
Battle the enemy is prevailing against such a part of his army, thither he
should run, for his presence may restore the fight, as has been seen a
thousand times, and it is In several occasions.
certain, that in time of action, hardiness is more necessary than prudence.
Neither is it enough for him, in time of Battle to hazard himself, but he must
do it also in viewing those Forts and Towns which he is to besiege, or the
ground where he is either to fight or encamp, yet he ought to be so well
guarded, that he may not be surpised by any sudden eruption, or the ambush of
an enemy, as the Roman Consuls Marcellus, and Claudius were by one of
Hannibals. Nor must a Generals courage stop here, for where he finds his
advantages, fears the weakening of his own, or the strengthening of his enemies
forces, he should not only hazard, but should dare the enemy to Battle, and
fight it boldly; for occasion is so disdainful and nice, that if you do not
court her when she offers Front capillata est, pos^ha^ occasi^ calva.
her self, you will hardly ever find her in so good an humor again. Let it not
be said that a General may be courageous, and yet not hazard himself. He must
show his courage sometimes, yea many times. It is good for him to be cautious,
but he must be adventurous too, and if he be not this, he may happily preserve
what he has gained, but cannot probably make any considerable new Conquests;
and it is upon such a subject that Monluc says, Un Chef qui craint, ne fera
rien de bon, a Chieftain who fears will never do good.

But I think I hear some say, that a General should hazard his person least of
all in Battle, because if he fall, the rout of the army immediately follows. I
Generals should hazard themselves ^^ Battle.
grant it has sometimes fallen out so, but that must not make a general rule;
for as the safety of an army consists not in the safety of the General, so the
loss of an army follows not necessarily the loss of a General. Many brave
Generals and Captains (when their armies are irrecoverably routed in the field)
are forced to fly, and so preserve themselves to better fortunes; so on the
other hand many armies have been saved, and have gained the day, after their
Generals have either fled out of the field, or been killed in it. At a Battle
fought with the Imperialists Loss of a General does not lose an army.
in the year 1638, Paltsgrave Birkifeld fled with most of his General persons,
yet his army gained the Victory; and in our own days the Generals of three
armies, joined at that time all in one, fled before the Battle was half fought,
yet the mishap was that the General who fought against them, and bravely kept
the field, lost the honor of the day. Titus Livius tells us, that the two
Decii, Father and Son, both Consuls in two several Battles which the Romans
fought with their neighbors in Italy, when they saw their own men began to
fly, consecrated and devoted themselves and their prevailing enemies to Mother
Tellus, and all the Infernal spirits, with all the Hellish rites of that
Heathen action described at length by Livy, that thereby the Roman army might
recover the honor Instances for it of ancient times.
of the Field well near lost, and so they being bravely mounted rode among the
thickest of their enemies, where valiantly fighting, both of them were killed,
which made Victory presently turn over to the Romans. But we must not believe
with Livius, that the Consuls bequeathing themselves so heartily to the Devil
was so acceptable a sacrifice to heaven, or so supererogatory as to move the
Gods to reward it with success to their party; no, it was that excess of valor
which they showed in the action, that encouraged the flying Romans to turn
head, and follow their Generals in that desperate Charge, and I doubt not but
the deaths of their Consuls exasperated them, and put an edge on their revenge,
and that procured them the Victory. The same Author informs us that a Roman
Consul, one Petilius Laetus fighting bravely against the Ligurians was killed,
to revenge whose death the Romans fought so well, that they chased their
enemies out of the Field. Polybius in his second Book speaks of a very
remarkable Battle which two Roman Consuls fought with two Gallick Kings, the
two Consuls having marched with two several armies two several ways by a
strange Chance met in such a manner, that one of them began the skirmish with
the Van of the Gauls army, when the other began to attack their rear, but at
the first shock one of the Consuls was killed, to revenge whose death his army
charged and fought thorough the Gauls, routed them totally, killed on the place
forty thousand, and took ten thousand, with one of their Kings. The Theban
Epaminond^^ got his mortal wounds at Mantinea, whereof he died that night, yet
was his army victorious.

But to come nearer home and our own days, Maurice Duke of Saxe in the Emperor
Charles the Fifths time, was killed in that Battle he fought with Albert
Marquess of Brandenburg, yet his army got the victory. A little before
Instances for it of later times.
that time the Duke of Bourbon was the first man that was killed at the assault
of Rome, which did so enrage the army, whereof he was General, that it never
gave over storming the Walls till they entered them, and then sacked the City.
The Prince of Orange who succeeded that Bourbon in the command of that same
Imperial army, was killed in a hot encounter with the Florentine General
Ferrucci, yet his army was Victorious. The great King of Sweden, Gustavus
Adolphus, was killed even as the Battle of Lutzen began, yet did his army fight
bravely the whole day, and forced the Imperialists to go out of the field at
night. I knew Feltmarshal Kniphausin a good Commander, while he was marshalling
the few forces he had at Hasalon in the Bishopric of Munster against one
L^aersam Lieutenant General to the Elector of Colen, shot dead, upon which one
Cratzenstein, who commanded next the Feltmarshal, gave the enemy so gallant a
charge, that Lutersams little army was defeated, and himself taken. And to
conclude, a General may lose more to his Prince, by too much care to preserve
his own person, than by freely hazarding it. Now as our General is bound to
give proofs of his courage, so in time of action he ought to be of an excellent
temper, for if at that time he be transported with vanity, presumption,
credulity; or other perturbations of soul, he may either hazard too much, or
not hazard at all; for these or any of these passions may move him to give
those Orders and Commands which may easily make him lose the day, and with it
the service of his Master, and his own Reputation for ever.

CHAP. XV. Of Intelligence, Spies, and a General Scoutmaster.
A Man can scarcely speak of a careful General, but you will hear him say, that
he had always good intelligence, but I can tell him that no General ever lived
that had always good intelligence, nor is it at all possible. But certainly To
look for Intelligence, the duty of all Commanders.
it is the duty of all Commanders, especially those who lead armies, to
endeavor to get Intelligence of their enemies designs, counsels, projects,
motions, and marches, their numbers, their strength, their Artillery, the
quality of the Soldiers, whether young and raw, or old and experienced, but
more especially of the qualifications, virtues and vices of him who commands in
chief. And if a siege of a Town or a Castle be to be formed, to know the
situation of the place, its manner of Fortification, Bulwarks, Parapets,
Ditches, and outer works, what men are within it, what provisions, what
Munitions of War, and what Artillery, and what Officers, particularly what a
person the Governor is, how the Posts are divided, and what numbers of men are
assigned for keeping every one of them, and many more particulars, that
accordingly the General may know how to ^ake his measures, whether he shall
presently storm it, or Block it, till he starve the Ga^^ison out of it, or if
he shall make his approaches and batteries against it.

Almost every Soldier can tell you, that in all armies Intelligence is the life
of action, but how to get good Intelligence to which a General or any Commander
may trust, is an Art yet to be found out, and I say more, it will never be
found, so long as that remains true (and it will remain true till the Heavens
To get true Intelligence, very difficult*
be rolled up like a scroll) which Truth it self has said, and it is this,
That all men are liars, and so long as men are so, what Intelligence shall men
believe. We are not to expect it from Angels, and the Devil is a liar from the
beginning. Instanced.
To confirm this by one instance which is unquestionable, What Intelligence
durst the leader of Gods people trust, when ten of these twelve Intelligencers,
which by Gods appointment were sent to spy the Land of Promise, did by their
fearful and false relations make the people murmur. This truth of the
uncertainty of all Intelligence in Military affairs, which I assert, will best
appear if we examine all the kinds of Intelligence that can be had, and these I
suppose can be no more but two* public and private Intelligence. Every one of
these will admit of a subdivision, for both of them are of several sorts.

Public Intelligence is got first by those parties whether stronger or weaker,
Public Intelligence by stronger parties,
whether of Horse or Foot, that are sent either from an army, a part of it, or
from a Garrison, to learn those things, or some of them that I have mentioned
in the beginning of this Chapter. If the party be to go far, it is to be the
stronger, and to divide, some part of it is to stay behind at some pass or
strait, to secure the retreat of those who advance further. Now suppose this
strong party meets no opposition, but returns safely, the Intelligence they
bring is either Very often false.
from the Country people, which signifies but little, and for most part just
nothing, or else the party has taken some Prisoners. These can tell you how
strong they conceive your enemy is, where he was yesterday, or where he was
this morning, but cannot tell you where he will be this night or to morrow, nor
can they tell you any of his designs or intentions; and if any of the two,
either Country people or Soldiers undertake to reveal the secrets of the
Enemies General to you, you are unhappy if you trust them, for ordinarily they
speak either ignorantly or falsely; and it is certain, that either a Fool or a
Knave may ruin you if you believe either of them. The two Roman Consuls
Veturius, and Two Instances of it.
Posthumous lost a brave army at Cau^ium, where they were shut up in the
straits of Mountains till they were contented to be disarmed, and pass
ignominiously under the Gallows to redeem their lives from the Samnites; this
mishap befell them for trusting the Intelligence of the Country people, or
Soldiers clothed like Country people, who assured them that the army of the
Samnites was not within one hundred Italian miles of them. You may read it at
large in Livies Ninth Book. Curio, Caesar's Legate in Africa, a good Soldier,
believed the Intelligence that some Prisoners whom he had taken from the enemy,
gave him, which was, that Juba King of Mauritania was gone home from Vtica, and
had taken most of his army with him, but had left behind him his Lieutenant
General Sabuca, with some few forces, upon which the Credulous Curio marches
out of his well fortified Camp, sought out the King who waited for him, fought
and was beaten, hardly being able to make a retreat to his Leaguer, where he
lost his life. Caesar has it in the Ninth Book De Bello Civili.

When you send a smaller party for Intelligence, it must not be far, it is done
Public Intelligence by smaller parties, not altogether to be trusted:
when an enemy is near; these are to discover, or as it is commonly called, to
recognosce, it is ordinarily of an odd or uneven number, as seven, nine,
eleven, thirteen, fifteen, or more. If it consists of fifteen, three may go
before, four follow to sustain them, and then eight to receive the other seven.
Suppose they come safe back, they bring you word that at such a distance they
saw no enemy at all, or they saw such a number in such a place, or they saw
their whole army marching; you have reason upon this to draw up in Battle, if
you be not strongly encamped, yet the marching army may prove Trees, or Cows at
best; I have sometime seen the like of this fall out. But this weaker party
perhaps brings you a Prisoner or two, if so, it has done much; but what you
are to trust to of a Prisoners Intelligence, I have already told you. And here,
as the Proverb goes, a Tartar may be taken, your party may be beaten, and some
of them if not all made Prisoners; you will say you care not, none of them can
tell your intentions; I believe you, but if that be true, then those you take
from your enemy, can tell as little of his. But you will say upon a march
sufficient Nor that of Officers*
Officers shall be sent with these parties which are called forlorn Hopes, (and
so they may be called if an enemy be near) and these will bring in true
Intelligence; yet for all their sufficiency they may bring you such news as may
prejudice you if you give absolute trust to them, for the best of men may be
mistaken, and may mistake things. Take two notable examples of this, Caesar
Instanced in Caesar*
marching against the Helvetians, commanded Labienus with two Legions with all
possible speed to go before, and possess a hill not far from the Enemies Camp,
this at a Cursory march he did; C^sar marches with the rest of his army, but
sent one Considius a Tribune of great experience, and approved valor before,
to bring him certain word in what posture the Switzers were: Considius And
Considius one of his Tribunes;
mistakes the two Legions which were with Labienus, to be Helvetians, and when
Caesar with his army was within one Italian mile and a half of that place,
Considius came posting to him, and assured him the enemy was Master of the hill
Labienus should have possessed, and avouched he knew them by their Arms and
Colors to be Helvetians, and which was worse, he told him he could not learn
what was become of the two Legions. This Intelligence made the great Caesar
immediately alter his resolution, which was to have fallen on the Helvetians
that very day, for he was in great want of Provisions: Well, he drew off, and
encamped on the next hill, and when the day was well spent, he came to know
that Labienus and his two Legions had possessed that hill as they were appointed,
that Considius had out of fear imagined the Romans to be Switzers, and that the
enemy was marched away far enough. Caesar steps aside to look for bread to his
hungry army; the foolish Helvetians thinking he had fled for fear, followed him
to their loss, otherwise they had escaped him for that time, perhaps for good
and all. Thus Caesar by misintelligence was like to have lost a fair
opportunity to fight his enemy; and whom should he trust, if he might not trust
a Veteran Captain, and as himself calls him, Rei Militaris peritissimum, most
expert in Military affairs?

The second instance is, when Francis the first made his Retreat from Landrecy
And in Charles the fifth,
and Guise, he encamped one night in view of the Emperor Charles the Fifth,
who followed him, making show as if he intended to fight Charles the next day;
about break of day one Zalasar a brave and experienced Captain, was And Zalasar
one of his Captains.
sent to discover, who at his return assured the Emperor that the French King
was lying still in the same posture he was in the night before, and that a
Regiment of Switzers had the outer guards, and several pieces of Artillery with
them: fair daylight made his error known, the French army was got clear away,
those that Zalasar took for Switzers were the Emperors own guards of Germans,
and his Pieces of Ordnance were old Trunks of Trees. This made the poor
Gentleman ridiculous to that whole army, in which he formerly had so much
respect, and did worse than that, for his misintelligence lost him his Masters
favor, who by it lost the opportunity of taking his advantage of the rear of
the French army.

If you ask me what shall be done in this case, I answer, the usual custom must
be followed, Intelligence must be both sought and bought; for parties, forlorn
Yet Intelligence must still be looked after.
Troops, smaller bodies of Horse, and sometimes of Foot, must be sent out for
Intelligence: neither can any army, or part of an army march with any security,
unless some be sent before to discover. The want of these made the Roman army
under Flaminius become a prey to Hannibal at the Lake Thrasimenes, where the
Consul lost his life. I am not so vain as to give any new rules for
Intelligence; all I pretend to in this place is to demonstrate that no
Intelligence can be so exactly good, but it may prove wrong, nor can any be
sent for Intelligence be they never so witty and expert, but they may mistake.
Neither is No trust to an enemies Intelligence.
there any Intelligence more to be doubted or misbelieved than that which comes
from an enemy; Sabinus one of Caesar's Legates trusted what Ambiorix a petty
King of the Gauls in public hostility with him, reported; this cost the lives
of a Legion and five Cohorts of Romans, besides that of the Legate himself.
Cicero another Legate not giving trust to the same Ambiorix, saved himself and
his Legion till Caesar came and relieved him out of eminent danger.

There be other ways of public Intelligence by shots of Cannon or Muskets,
Other ways of public Intelligence.
from Hills, Mountains, Towers, or Trees, as also by Beacons with smoke by day,
and fire by night. I confess in some cases there can be no better way found
out, yet these may readily prove uncertain, as many times they have done; for
your Sentinels and Guards may make these shots and signs upon misapprehensions,
and so disturb you with false alarms, or an enemy may have surpised your
Guards and Sentinels, and by giving you no sign, or false signs, ruin you.
Intelligence may also be given publicly from the Steeples and Towers of
besieged places, and from Mountains without, by either Cannon or fire, by
signs, and Counter-signs, yet all of them may be misunderstood, miscarried, or
betrayed. But more of this in my Discourse of Besieged Cities, Towns, and
Castles.

Private Intelligence is got by word, or by writing either from those who
Private Intelligence by word, or by writ,
dwell and converse with your enemy, or those you send among your enemies
disguised as their friends. To corrupt a Secretary of a Prince or a General, is
a good way for Intelligence; and to do this, he who commands an army must spare
no Gold, and therefore a Parsimonious General will have but bad private
Intelligence, or rather none at all. Governors of Forts, and Officers to whom
Posts are entrusted, either in Garrison or Field, must be tried how they may be
corrupted. This is an excellent way for Intelligence, and makes the destruction
of an enemy easy, and it ought to be attempted, essayed, and prosecuted with
all earnestness, prudence, and secrecy. One will do wisely to seem to give full
credit to the Proposals, Intelligence and promises of these Traitors, but he
must not always do it, for in this the rule will hold exactly, Disce diffidere,
learn to distrust. How many Generals and other great persons have been cheated
by such seeming Traitors, History and daily practice bear witness. In the
Proves often false.
time of the Civil Wars of France in Charles the Ninth's reign, a Protestant
Officer within Orleance agreed with much secrecy to deliver one of the Ports to
the enemy who besieged the Town, and accordingly some hundreds were admitted
within the City, who were all Massacred, and a number of great Guns and
Muskets were fired on those who were following, after the Portculleys were let
down, and the Drawbridg was plucked up. Sir Philip Sidney was little better used
with his Intelligence out of Alost. Such an entertainment was prepared for five
or six thousand Spaniards, to whom Breda should have been delivered in the
nightime, when the Prince of Parma governed, if I remember right, but when
they came near the Town, they grew jealous, and so returned with little loss.

In the next place Generals ought to have a wary eye over their Secretaries; I
believe few of them trust them with all their secrets, nor is it fit they
should. And what trust can you give him, who is willing to betray his Master to
whom A Traitors Intelligence to be distrusted.
he has sworn fidelity? should you not be afraid that he will rather betray
you to whom he has sworn none? Yet this way of Intelligence has in all ages
been tried, and has very often proved successful, and therefore it must be
still practiced, and something must be hazarded, for all cannot be made
cocksure. Wallenstein as was afterward well known, really intended to have
betrayed the Emperor his Master, and all his armies; but the Duke of Weymar
and other Swedish Generals durst not trust him, till they got assurances, and
before he could give these he was dispatched to another world. Wherefore I say,
something must be adventured, but let it be done with all imaginable care and
circumspection, that if your Intelligence fail you, the loss may not be
considerable.

Written Intelligence is very dangerous, both for the person that carries it,
Written Intelligence dangerous.
for him who sends it, and for him who receives it. If the bearer of it be
taken he will no doubt be put to exquisite tortures till he tell from whom he
brought it, and be hanged when he has told it; this brings the sender or
writer in danger of his life, and the intercepting this written Intelligence
divulgeth some of his secrets to whom it is sent, and so puts him to new
resolutions, for though the advices he sent be written in Ciphers, yet the art
of finding keys for Ciphers So are Ciphers.
is now common; and though a Cipher be not unlockt, yet he to whom it is
directed, will rationally conclude it was unlockt, and therefore will find it
needful to fall upon new resolves. Other manners of writing with illegible Ink,
are Yet both to be used.
soon found out with fire and water. But notwithstanding all this there is a
necessity of writing many times, and it must take its hazard.

Private Intelligence by word of mouth is certainly the surest way, (if any way
of Intelligence can be sure) provided the persons employed be witty, sober,
vigilant, and faithful. The first three qualifications may be known by
conversation, Spies.
but the last only by frequent trial, and yet he may be faithful to you in many
things, who may cheat you to purpose at the last blow. These be the
Intelligencers, whether men or women, who are properly called Spies, upon whose
Intelligence no prudent General, Governor, or good Officer will build
resolutions, till it be confirmed by several hands, and even then it will be
needful Not always to be trusted.
to walk with circumspection. We find in the life of Caesar, writ both by
himself and others, that he made it his great work to get Intelligence of his
enemies posture, doings, and designs, and that the wonderful celerity he used
in all his expeditions, was the product of his Intelligence, yet did he never
trust any that ever he got from either friend or enemy, till it was confirmed
to him from others; yet I have told you that his Intelligence did fail, it is
true not so often as his Legates were abused by theirs, because he trusted not so
easily. When Spies are sent, he who sends them must let them know none of his
own designs, Their miserable condition.
for these they may readily reveal. These Spies are in a woeful condition, for
so soon as they are suspected, they are immediately searched, and if any Papers
be found about them, either in their Clothes, the soles of their shoos, their
hair, hats, sheaths of daggers or swords, they are put to torture, and then all
they know for most part is revealed, and though no Papers be found with them,
yet are they tortured to tell what perhaps they know not. The Roman way to How
the Romans found out Spies.
find out Spies was by a Trumpet or a Crier to command all to their Huts and
Tents, and those who were then found wandering abroad, were apprehended, and
examined for Spies.

But I do not remember to have heard or read of a greater mischief, that want
of Intelligence did to any than to the two famous Carthaginian Brothers,
Hannibal and Asdrubal: for after the last's arrival in Italy, Hannibal faceth
one Roman army, resolving to hinder it to join with another, which he knew was
sent to hinder his Brother to join with him; Asdrubal faceth the other Roman
army Two great Captains both Brothers, ruined for want of Intelligence.
under Consul Livius, and provokes him to Battle, but in vain. All the four
armies are encamped and fortified, each diligently observing the motions of his
adversary. Yet Claudius Nero the Consul who opposed Hannibal, marches in the
night with six thousand commanded Romans out of his Camp, joins with Livius,
who was at least a hundred miles distant from him, without the knowledge of
either of the two Brothers. Neither had Asdrubal any knowledge of the
Conjunction but his own conjecture by the numbers of the Horses that he saw go
out to watering, and the two Classicums, the Badges of two Consuls; he reti^'d
that night, but was overtaken next day, beaten and killed. Nor did Hannibal
know any thing of the whole matter, till Nero was returned in safety to the
Roman Camp, and that he caused Asdrubals head to be thrown before one of the
Gates of Hannibals; at the sight whereof the Gallant Carthaginian wept, and
said, he now saw too well the fortune of Carthage; meaning no doubt, that the
Heavens were not to be any more propitious to that powerful City, when such two
famous Warriors as himself and his valiant Brother were ruined for want of
Intelligence. For,

Quos vult perdere, hos dementat Jupiter. Jove dements whom he intends to
destroy. But to return to our Spies, to put them to death without mercy, or to
The punishment of Spies very severe.
use them worse, has been so ancient, and still is so universal a practice,
that to speak any thing against the injustice of it, might justly make a man
ridiculously singular. In ancient times for most part they were tortured to
death, and little better are they used in the Modern War. But do not you think
the Romans used Spies more mercifully at the Siege of Capua, who only cut off
their hands and noses, and so let them depart in peace.

Caesar who was merciful enough, and made great use of Spies himself, caused
the hands of two messengers to be cut off, who were taken carrying Letters from
Corduba to young Pompey; and in the same War he apprehended four Spies in his
Camp, one was a Soldier, and three were Slaves, the Soldier he beheaded, but
the Slaves he Crucified. So you see Soldiers must be subject to the punishment
of Spies if they suffer themselves to be employed in their office. But since
Spies are made use of by all Commanders in the Wars, by all Generals, nay by
all Princes, why is there a more severe animadversion against them, than
against Robbers, Murderers, yea Parricides? They are not only allowed, made use
of, and commended, but bountifully rewarded by those who employ them; why then
is not there some capitulation for them, or at least some greater mitigation of
their punishment, than to deliver them over to the cruelty of a Butcherly
Hangman, Spies may be lawfully used.
to whip, torture, hang, spit and quarter them? Certainly their Office is
lawful, otherwise lawful Princes would not make use of them; why are they then
so horribly punished for going about their duty? Yes, assuredly their Office is
lawful, since Moses by Gods own appointment sent a dozen of them to spy the
Land of Canaan, one whereof was Caleb, who went in and possessed his share of it,
and another of the Twelve was Joshuah, who thereafter was Captain General of
the Israelitish Army. Two Spies were likewise sent to Jericho, who owed the
safety of their lives to the Harlot Rachab, and when they lodged at such a
woman's house, had they not been sent by Gods own people, might not a man have
said, that Knaves and Whores were well met together?

But to conclude, if Spies escaped without very severe punishment, Camps,
Armies, and all Fortified places would be pestered with that base, though
necessary Canaille.

The English have a General Officer whom they qualify with the Title of
Scoutmaster General, I have known none of them abroad, but I hear in some
Scout-master General.
places of Italy they have something very like him, and that is, Il Capitano di
Spiani, the Captain of the Spies. I cannot believe that this Scoutmaster, or
this Captain has any thing to do with that Intelligence, which I called
public, and is got by parties whether of Horse or Foot; for the commanding
these out, and the keeping the Lists of their Turns or Toures belongs properly
to the Major Generals, and several Majors of Regiments both of the Cavalry and
Infantry, none whereof I conceive will suffer the Scoutmaster to usurp their
Office. They must then only have the regulation of the private Intelligence,
wherein no doubt they may ease the General of the Army very much. But being
that Spies are properly under their command, if this Scoutmaster General, or
this Capitano di Spiani be taken Prisoner by the enemy, whether he may be
ransomed and used as an Officer, or hanged as a Spy, is a question, which
because I cannot determine, I shall leave it as a Problem. The French have
lately constituted a Captain of Guides, who perhaps is the Captain of Spies I
speak of.

CHAP. XVI. Embatteling by the Square-root, examined and rejected.
THE great Apostle of the Gentiles tells us, That the fashion of this world
perishes; And truly I admire not at all, that Embatteling Bodies of Foot and
Horse by the Square-root is worn out of fashion, but I admire much that Several
kinds of Batallions marshaled by the Squareroot.
ever it was in fashion. I shall not offer to prepossess my Reader with a bad
opinion of it till I inform him of the thing it self. Authors mention
Batallions square of men, and Batallions square of ground, Batallions of a
large front, and doubled Batallions. To these by the permission of those
Speculative Martialists, I shall add another, and that is a Batallion square
both of men and ground, whereof I do not remember that I have heard any of them
either speak or write.

It will be requisite for that Commander who intends to draw up his Company,
Regiment or Brigade by the Square-root, to have Tables of several numbers by
him, whereof the Sieur de Preissuc, Bockl^r, and Whithorne (who translated
Machiavelli his Art of War into English) have been at the trouble to leave What
is meant by the Square-root.
some behind them, but to little purpose; for any ordinary Arithmetician can
make a square number, which is nothing else but a number multiplied in it self.
As 3 multiplied by ^ produces 9, 9 multiplied by 9 produces 81, 81 multiplied
by 81 produces 6561* in it self multiply 6561, the product will be 43046721,
and so in infinitum. But observe first, that all numbers are not square, and of
these that are square you may extract the root without a fraction, as a 100 is
a square number, because the root of it is 10 without a fraction; for 10
multiplied by 10 produces a 100. But when you extract the root of a number
that is not square, you must take the nearest, as 10 and 11 are not square
numbers, and therefore you must take the root of 9, and that is 3, now 3
multiplied by 3 produces but nine, and so in 10 you have the fraction of one,
and in 11 of two. Observe, secondly, that every number above 10 has for its
square a number above a 100, as 11 multiplied by 11 produces 121. Observe
thirdly, that the root of a Three necessary observations.
square figure is the side of it, and in a quadrate square all the sides are of
a like length; so that if you would know the superficial contents of a square
figure aequilateral, you multiply the number of one side by it self, as by
example if the number of one side of that figure be a 100 men, the Product will
be 10000: But if it be an oblong square, that is, which has two sides longer
than the other two, you are to multiply the length of one of the longest by the
length of one of the shortest; as by example, there is an oblong square,
whereof each of two sides contain a 100 Foot, and each of the other two sides
but 50, multiply then the longest by the shortest, that is a 100 by 50, the
Product will be five thousand.

This being premised, if you would have a square Batallion of men, you are
first to see what the number of your men is, and next extract the root of that
number, and according to it, form your Body of equal number of men in rank
Batallions square of men, how made.
and file. As the number of your men to be marshalled is 256, which was the
number of the Grecian Syntagma or Company, extract the root of 256, you will
find it to be 16, for 16 multiplied by it self, produces 256, and therefore
your rank and your file must each consist of 16 men, this is a Batallion square
of men. Or suppose your number to be 6560, you will find it is not a square
number, and therefore you must take the root of the next square number to 6560,
and that you will find to be 6561, the root whereof you will find to be 81, for
81 multiplied by it self produces 6561, and therefore to marshal 6560, you
must make your rank consist of 81 men, and your file of as many. But truly you
will not find this so easy to be done in the field, as on a piece of Paper,
and when you have done it, perhaps you will say it was not worth the half of
your pains.

To make a Batallion square of ground is to allow no more ground to your front
or your rank, than you do to your file or flank, and for this they will give
you a rule which will be hard enough to follow on any sudden occasion, and it
is this, allow seven foot in length, and three in breadth for every Soldier;
multiply Battallions square of ground.
the number of men you are to marshal by three, and divide the Product by
seven, then extract the square root of the Quotient, that will be the number of
men for your file, by the number of men in your file, you are to divide the
whole number of men in your Batallion, and the Quotient of that will be the
number of men for your rank. This is a little harsh, yet I cannot make it
clearer, perhaps an example will clear it. Suppose your men to be 1600, the
ordinary number of weak Brigades, multiply 1600 by three, the Product is 4800.
Divide 4800 by seven, the Quotient will be 685, with a fraction of five. When
you extract the root of 685, (because it is not a square number) you must take
the nearest, and that will be 26, for that multiplied in it self produces 676,
and this wants but nine of 685. Then by the rule your file consists of 26, and
by it you are to divide your 1600 men, and you will find the Quotient to be 61,
with a remainder or fraction of 14; so by this rule your rank consists of 61
men, and consequently your 1600 men come to be 61 in rank, and 26 in file, for
61 multiplied by 26 produces 1586, which with the fraction of 14 makes just
1600. Now three foot being allowed to every man in rank (according to the
ordinary computation) 61 men in rank possess 183 foot of ground, and seven
foot being allowed for every man in file, the ground the 26 possess, is 182
foot, which wants but one of the 183, and that proceeds from the fraction of
14. And hereby you have your Batallion of 1600 men to possess equal ground,
though the rank consist of 61, and the file but of 26. And this you will think
is very pretty to see or look on, whether it be worth your labor or not, you
can best tell after you have ordered it, which I suppose you will not do
without some trouble. Besides, in this computation (as I have often said) there
is an inexcusable error committed by most men in reckoning Distances and
Intervals, for they still reckon as many of them, as there be men in rank and
file, as here, they make 61 Intervals in front, because there are 61 men in
front, whereas really there are but 60 Intervals, and in the file they make 26
Intervals, because there are 26 men in file, whereas really there can be no
more but 25 Intervals. And these two mistakes will quickly make a vast
alteration in your Batallions squareness of ground.

A Doubled Batallion is so called, when the rank consists of twice as many A
Doubled Batallion.
men as the file does. The way to marshal it is this: The men you have to
order, their number being known, double on paper, for you will, I suppose, find
that more easy, than to double their number really in the field. Then extract
the square-root of that double number, and that must be the number of men for
your rank, and the half of that must be the number of men for your file. As by
example, you are to marshal 3200 men (the number of ancient Regiments) in a
Doubled Batallion, double them, and say you have 6400; extract the square root
of 6400, you will find it to be 80, for 80 multiplied by 80, produces 6400,
and so you must marshal your 3200 men 80 in rank, and 40 being the half of 80,
your file must consist of 40 men, for multiply 80 by 40, the Product is 3200.
Take an example of a number that is not square, and let your men be 2500;
double these, and so they are 5000, look for the squarefoot of 5000, you will
not find it exactly, because it is not a square number, and therefore you are
to take the nearest, and that will be 71, for 71 multiplied in it self
produces 5041, and that is 41 more than the double number of your men: let
therefore your rank be of 71 men, the half whereof should be the number of your
file, this you cannot do exactly, because 71 is an odd number, you must
therefore take 35, and that is the half of 70, and so make your file to consist
of 35 men, and you will be near right, for 71 being multiplied by 35, produces
2485, which wants but 15 of your number of 2500. We read that the Spaniards
used these Batallions in the times of old, but now they do not.

A Batallion of a large front is that in which there are many more men in the
rank, than in file. These Batallions may be formed easily, and they are those
Batallions of a large front.
which are now universally used, but the square root men will needs give us a
rule for it; which is of a harder digestion than the practice of the thing it
self. Yet I shall tell you what it is; you shall divide your whole men by that
number of which you intend your front shall consist, and the Quotient of that
Division shall be the number of your file; as by example, you are to marshal a
1000 men, and you intend they shall be 50 in rank, divide the 1000 by 50, the
Quotient is 20, and so your 1000 men shall be 50 in rank, and 20 in file. But
if you intend to have a 100 in front, you divide a 1000 by a 100, and the
Quotient will be 10, and so your Batallion has a 100 in front, and 10 in file,
for a 100 multiplied by 10 produces a 1000. We may safely conclude 10000 men
may be marshaled in this form of Batallion, with the half of this Arithmetic,
and is daily practiced. For at this time all Bodies of Foot drawn up either ten
or six deep, and Bodies of Horse three deep, are Batallions of large fronts,
and are marshaled very well by those who neither know, or ever did hear of a
square-root.

But let me add to these Theoretical marshallings of a Batallion square both of
men and ground, let the number of your men be what it will. And thus, Make
first as many men in file as in rank, and then you have a Battallion square of
men. In the next place allow no more distance between your ranks than you do
between your files, and then your Batallion is square of ground likewise. As
for example, you are to draw up 2500 men, extract the root of that number, A
Batallion square of men and square of ground likewise.
you will find it to be 50, for 50 multiplied in it self produces 2500, and
therefore your rank must consist of 50 men, and your file of 50 men, and
consequently you have a Batallion square of men; then allow as you must do, for
every Combatant one foot to stand on, by that means every rank possesses 50
foot, and every file 50 foot. Allow 49 Intervals in the rank, for more there
are not, and for every Interval three foot, amounts to 147 foot, and allow no
more but three foot for every Interval in the file, you have likewise 147 foot
for the Intervals of files; now add 147 to 50, which the fighting men stand on,
the aggregate will be 197, and so many foot of ground does every rank possess,
and so much does every file possess; and consequently your Batallion of 2500 is
square of ground as well as of men. Would you know how much ground this
Batallion so marshaled possesses in all, multiply 197 by 197, and you will
find the Product to be 38809 foot, which will be near eight Italian miles. But
I hear Objection,
you cry out that six foot are always allowed for an Interval between ranks.
But I answer you negatively, not always, for so many Foot are but allowed in
Answered.
a march, because the length of a Pike requires that distance, when it is
shouldered, but standing in Battle ready to give or receive the Charge with
Pikes either ordered or advanced, three foot are sufficient for the Pikemen as
well as for the Musketeers; and when they Charge, one foot and a half of
distance between ranks of Pikemen is enough. If you will then make use of this
Batallion of mine, let it be with Pikes advanced, but if you be pleased to
follow my advice, you shall never make use of it at all.

But all these forms of Battles framed by the square-root, (except the
Batallion of a large front, which is more easily framed without it than by it)
are of Most of all these useless.
much trouble and little use, they are these which bring fewest hands to fight,
and renders them apt to be surrounded, and so are all Batallions that have deep
files. Next by that manner of Embatteling you must constantly alter the forms
and figures of your Battle, according as the numbers of your men increase or
decrease, and in them there is a daily change. Captain Cruso who Englished Du
Preissacs Military Resolves, in a Marginal Note calls Embatteling by the
square-root an impertinent curiosity; and to what purpose, says he, the
square-root, since now all Europe marshals their foot ten deep, except the
Swede? for he wrote near forty years ago. And to that same sense at this time,
I say, to what purpose the square root, since now all Europe marshals their
foot six deep, and their Horse three deep, except the Hollander? But I shall
bring you a greater authority against deep files, and square-root Battles;
Xenophon tells us when Cyrus fought with Croesus for the Kingdom of Lidia,
Croesus his army was marshaled both Horse and Foot thirty deep, except his
Mercenary Egyptians, who were ten thousand, who would not, says he, abandon
their Country custom in Egyptians square Batallion of 10000 men.
making square Battles, and therefore their 10000 men were drawn up a 100 in
rank, and a 100 in file, and a 100 times a 100 makes 10000. And so their
Batallion was square of men, and might have been also of ground if they allowed
no greater Intervals of ranks than of files, which hardly they could do, being
they were all offensively armed with Pikes both long and strong. But our Author
says that Cyrus was glad of this, wishing Croesus's whole army had been
marshaled a thousand deep, for then he had sooner destroyed it, as I have told
you in the second Chapter of my Discourses of the Grecian Art of War. Yet
Xenophon tells us that these Egyptians fought best of any of Croesus his army,
yea so long till they had fair quarter given them. And withal he informs us
that Cyrus his own army (his Foot I suppose he means) were marshaled 24 deep,
and that was eight more than the depth of the Macedonian Phalanx.

CHAP. XVII. Of the Modern way of Embatteling and Marshalling Armies.
AS all Armies are marshaled according to the pleasure of those who command
them, so their pleasure often is, and ever should be over ruled by the
circumstances of time, the posture of the enemy they have to do with, the
Weather, the Sun, the Wind, and the ground on which they are to fight, if the
General find by his foreparties, or Vancouriers, that his enemy is before him,
drawn up in Battle, ready to receive him, he will do himself an injury to march
forward, for it is not to be fancied, that his adversary will be so courteous
as to permit him to marshal his army, but will take his advantage and fall upon
him, before he can draw up his Van, especially if his march have been thorough
any close or strait Country; and in such a condition as that, a Generals A
General should have a ready wit.
own ready wit and resolution must serve him for Counselors, for there will be
no time given him to call a Council of War. But we speak now of Embatteling
Armies, when Generals have half the choice of the ground.

The manner was in many places, and still is in some, to marshal Armies in
three distinct Bodies, one behind another, the first was called the Vanguard,
the second the Battle, the third the Reer-guard. But several times every one
Armies marshalled in three distinct Bodies.
of those consisted of three Bodies likewise, these were two wings of Horse,
and one Body of Foot; and when they marched, these three great Bodies were
called the Van, Battle and Rear. Their proper Title was to be called so when
they marched, for many times when they drew up in order of Battles, it was in
one Breast, and then the Horse were divided in two wings, and the Foot made the
Battle. This was done when the ground was very spacious, and to prevent
surrounding, otherwise Armies seldom fight but in two Battles, if not in three.
But as I said, time, ground, the power of an enemy, minister occasions to a
Commander of an Army to alter the ordinary custom, and frame a new method of
his own to serve him for that opportunity. I shall give you one instance, and
that of a mighty army, marshaled, as few before it have been, and I believe
none since. It was that which Charles the fifth, and his Brother King Ferdinand
had at Vienna, when they looked for Sultan Soliman, the ground was very
spacious, and though their numbers were very great, yet those of the Turk were
How the mighty Army of the Emperor Char^es the Fifth was marshaled at Vienna.
very much beyond them, and they feared to be out-wing'd by his numerous Horse.
The order of their Battle was to be this if they had fought: They had sixty
thousand armed with Pikes, Halberts, Partisans, and other long Staves, these
were divided in three great Batallions, each of twenty thousand; on the right
hand stood one of them, on the left hand the second, and the third in the
middle. There were about six or seven thousand Harquebusiers on foot, to attend
each of these great Batallions of Pikes, who were to have several little
Intervals thorough which these Harquebusiers were to salley and fire
incessantly before the grand Batallions, till they should be necessitated to
retire through these same Intervals to the Rear, and then the Pikes were
immediately to close and fill up those void places. These three great
Batallions separated one from another, made two great Intervals, in each of
which stood fifteen thousand Horse. Here then you see upon the matter, one of
the bravest Armies of Christians that ever was marshaled in one front without
reserve (only some thousands of men were ordered to guard the Baggage and
Munitions) scarce read of before or since. Here you see the Pikemen make the
Wings, whereas both before and since they made the Body: Here you see the
Firemen marshaled behind, and ordained to fally from their station, and do
their service in the Van, and then to retire to their place according to the
custom of the ancient Gr^cian and Roman Velites, and not marshaled on the wings
of the Pikes.* And here you see the Horse, who before that time and since made
the wings of an army, make now the Body of it, strongly flanked with Pikes;
this being the inversion of former Ordinances of War, was then thought
necessary to prevent the surrounding, and the impetuosity of the Turks numerous
Cavalry.

Armies for most part now are marshaled in two distinct Bodies, the Vanguard,
and the Arreer-guard, which are commonly called Battle and Reserve. But it is
not only difficult, but purely impossible for any the most experienced General,
to set down any one certain rule or order, whereby he may constantly Battle and
Reserve.
keep one manner of marshalling, or one form of Battle, as it is called forma
aciei, though he could be assured that his Regiments or Brigades of both Horse
and Foot, should constantly continue of one strength, since the place,
situation, Houses, Villages, Castles, Hills, Valleys, rising heights, hollow
grounds, Waters, Woods, Bushes, Trees, and Marshes, do occasion such
alterations as make the form or mould of an Army cast in one place, change so
much, as you shall not know the face of it on another piece of ground, perhaps
not above one or two hours march from the former. And in this, as I said
before, the General is to act his part, and take such advantages as he may, and
readily possess himself of such places, which being in the enemies power might
do him prejudice. One of his great cares in Embatteling would be to secure both
his Flanks of an Army to be well secured in ^attel.
flanks, which are called the right and left hand of his Army with some River,
Brook, Ditch, Dike, or Retrenchment, if these cannot be so readily got, then he
may do it with the Wagons or Baggage of his Army; for in time of-Battel it is
almost impossible for a Batallion or Body either of Horse or Foot to stand when
it is charged both in front and flank, and this is ordinarily done by
overwinging, so that the strongest in number has the advantage, which the
weaker should endeavor to counterballance by art, policy, and stratagem.

This makes me wonder how Charles the Fifth, a great Warrior, in his
Instructions to his Son Philip the Second, asserts that thirty thousand Foot,
and Numbers a great advantage if they be well ordered.
four thousand Horse is a sufficient Army against any enemy how strong soever,
provided it be still kept at that strength, and fresh men put in their places,
who are either put in Garrisons, or are killed or dead; because, says he,
hardly shall you find any ground capable to contain more without encumbrances.
But himself found ground to marshal one hundred and ten thousand men at Vienna,
almost all in ^ront; and if he find ground to marshal these thirty four
thousand men, certainly it will be necessary to have a Reserve of twenty
thousand. And assuredly greater numbers have the advantage of smaller, if they
be well ordered to second one another, whether the ground be spacious or
narrow, Reserves being rightly placed.

Many are of opinion, and it is grounded on reason enough, that Horse and Foot
fight best together, but they differ in the way, for some would have one Horse
and Foot together.
Regiment of Horse, with two Regiments of Foot, or if the Cavalry be so strong,
a Regiment of Horse for every Regiment of Foot, and marshaled alternately; as
first, a Regiment of Horse, and then one of Foot, and so with the rest. Others
like not this so well, but like better to fortify their Squadrons with
Plottons of Musketeers, who give their Vollies incessantly, before the
Plottons of Musketeers with Horse.
Horse come to their Charge, and this assuredly does exceedingly disorder and
damnifie Bodies of Horse before they can come to make use of their Pistol or
Lance, ^or the Lance is not yet out of fashion with the Polonians, Hungarians,
Trarsylvanians, and Walachians, besides those of more Easterly Nations. Of this
manner of mixing Foot with Horse, Gustavus Adolphus made good use in his Wars
with Pole, and in Germany too, especially at the Battle of Leipsick. But that
great Prince was not the first that invented it, it was used in the world many
ages before him among the ancient Gr^cians, Romans, and Germans too as I have
already shown you. Coligni the famous Admiral of France had ordinarily
Harquebusiers of Foot mixed with his Horsemen; and truly as I think, Musketeers
have done, and can do good service against Horse before they come to the
Charge, so I conceive in the Charge, Pikemen well armed for the defensive,
would notably assist Horsemen if they were interlin'd with them. But it seems
Generals think not so, because they do not use it.

But in the marshalling Armies there is great difference of opinions concerning
the Intervals between the greater Bodies, whether these be Regiments or
Brigades. Some allow but 24 foot of ground between them, and they say if they
be greater, the enemy may easily get into these void places, and so fall upon
Narrow Intervals between great Bodies,
the flanks of the several Bodies and ruin them, a consideration that carries
much reason with it. But truly this order is good if the Army be drawn up in
one front, without any Reserve. But if it have a Reserve these narrow Intervals
in the Battle render it useless, nay they may help to ruin it. My reason is
this, a Reserve is appointed to advance against an enemy, at one of these three
occasions, which are when the Battle is weary, when it is in danger, and when
it is beaten. Now in none of these three can the Reserve be steedable if there
be not ground for it to advance, to draw up, and to fight, but who can imagine
that a Brigade of three hundred men in front, in the reserve, can advance, draw
up, and fight on a spot of ground twenty four foot broad, or yet on a plot of
ground three Obstructs help from the Reserve.
hundred foot broad, for there they should only have ground to stand on, but no
room to handle their arms, especially their Muskets. But it will be yet worse
if the Brigades of the Battle be flying, and these of the Reserve advanceing,
for there shall be in that case such a medley, and an Embarras, that they shall
ruin one another without the help of an enemy.

I suppose for these or the like reasons, others allow as much Interval between
two Brigades marshaled in the Battle as can contain a Brigade drawn up behind
it Large Intervals of better use.
in the Reserve, all the Brigades being supposed to be of a like strength and
number. And thereby whether the Battle ^eel, faint, or fly, the Reserve may
come up to the shock with an enemy, without any empeachment given to it by the
flying Brigades of the Battle, and thereby a fair opportunity given to those
who fled or retired, to rally on the ground whereon the Reserve stood, which
was the order the ancient Romans kept in their three Batallions of Hastati,
Principes, and Triarii, as I have at length shown you in my Discourses of their
Art of War. And it seems in the days of Charles the Fifth about a hundred and
twenty years ago, the Intervals between Batallions were so narrow, that the
Charles the Fifth his Complain^.
Reserves could give them little or no assistance, whereof he complains in his
Instructions to his Son; for he says they were all drawn up in direct lines,
(these are his words) that if you beat, (says he) the foremost Bodies, they
fall back upon the rest, who are directly behind them, and so bring them in
disorder and consusion: which hurtful error of marshalling, that Emperor says
he intended to rectify, and to that purpose refers the King his Son to his
written Notes upon that Subject. Now what better way is there to rectify this
evil, than not to draw up any Batallion of the Reserve directly behind a
Batallion of the Battle, but in a direct line behind the Interval that is
between two Batalions of the Battle; and this is the Romans way, who drew up
the three Bodies of their several Legions one behind another, Chequerwise.

And here the Objection mentioned before, that an enemy may easily enter at
these wide Intervals and charge the flanks of the Brigades in Battle, must be
answered, Intervals defended by Ordnance.
that these Intervals are defended with greater and smaller pieces of Ordnance,
suppose every one of them with four greater and lesser Pieces, or with three,
according as the Train is great or small; and if that does not the deed, or
that any of the Brigades of the Battle begin to shrink or reel, then that
Brigade of the Reserve that is behind the Interval in danger should be ordered
speedily to advance and possess it: It would seem that the not marshalling the
Battle and Reserve in this order at the Battle of Woodstock, fought in the
Error a^ Woodstock Battle.
year 1636, was either the Swedish error, or mistake; for Banier who commanded
the right wing of the Swedish forces, being overlaid with numbers, had been
undoubtedly beaten if the Battle and left wing had not prevailed; so soon as he
saw the danger, he sent Post after Post to Lieutenant General Vizthumb, who
commanded the Reserve, commanding him to advance instantly to his succor, but
he made no great haste: the Swede having obtained the Victory, Vizthumb next
morning is questioned for his slow advance, he justified himself by making it
appear, that if he had advanced immediately, those who were running away in
Troops would have routed him, at least have so disordered him, that he could
have done no service, and therefore he stood firm in his first ground, till all
the runnaways were past him, and then marched up in good order. Most of this
was known to be true, but if Battle and Reserve had been marshaled in the
manner I spoke last of, there had been no danger of that whereof Vizthumb was
afraid, for there had been room enough for him to have advanced, and for those
who fled, to have run away. But it seems it was ordered otherwise.

But we shall marshal an Army both ways, first with the lesser, and next with
the greater Intervals; and we shall suppose our Army to consist of sixteen
thousand Army of 16200 Horse and Foot, divided into seven Brigades of Foot, and
six of Horse,
Horse and Foot, and a few more. We shall draw them up in a fair Campaign or
Heath, which has very few or no encumbrances of Houses, Trees, heights, or
hollow places, and the right hand of it shall be fenced with some unfordable
water, and the left with the Wagons of the Army. The Army it self shall
consist of seven Brigades of Foot, and six of Horse. Each Brigade of Foot shall
consist of 1800 men, in all 12600. The six Brigades of Horse shall consist of
3600, which being divided into six parts, gives 600 Horsemen besides Officers,
to every Brigade; in all 16200. In the first way of marshalling, I shall allow
as I should do, one foot of ground for every Foot* soldier to stand on, and
three foot distance between files; but because some think this too much, have
patience, and at my second marshalling of the army, I shall allow them less,
though no less belongs to them. To every Horseman I allow four foot of ground
for himself, and the distance between him and his sidemen. Some will think it
too much, but Bockler allows him six, this is too much; at next marshaling I
shall allow him less than four.

On the right wing of the Van guard or Battle, shall stand two Brigades of
Horse, and on the left wing as many, and between the wings the Body shall be
Marshaled in Battle and Reserve with lesser Intervals.
composed of four Brigades of Foot. On the right wing of the Reer-guard or
Reserve shall stand one Brigade of Horse, and on the left wing another Brigade
of Horse, and between the two wings the Body shall be composed of three
Brigades of Foot. The length of the Battle you may compute thus, every Brigade
of Horse being six hundred, and drawn up three deep, consists of two hundred
Leaders, for each of these, four foot are allowed, that is eight hundred.
Multiply eight hundred by four, (which is the number of the Brigades of the
Battle) the product is 3200. Three Streets or Distances each of eight
foot-broad must be allowed in every Brigade, inde twelve Streets in four
Brigades, these make 96 foot, then you have two Intervals on the right hand,
one between the two Brigades of Horse, and another between the Horse and the
right hand of the Foot, and as many you have on the left hand of the Battle, in
all four great The Longitude of the Battle computed.
Intervals, each of them of 24 foot, for more some will not allow, inde 96
foot; add 3200 to 96, and both to 96, you will find the aggregate to be 3392.
And so much ground does the four Brigades of Horse possess with their
Intervals. Each Brigade of Foot consisting of 1800 men, being six deep, has
300 Leaders, these possess 1200 foot, 1200 being multiplied by four (which is
the number of the Foot-brigades of the Battle) produces 4800. There must be a
distance of six foot between the right hand of the Pikemen, and the right wing
of the Musketeers, and another on the left hand, these two Distances take 12
foot, and therefore four Brigades require 48 foot. Now four Brigades have three
Intervals, each of 24 foot, inde 72. Add then 72 for greater Intervals to 48
allowed for lesser Distances, the aggregate is 120; add 120 to 4800, the
aggregate is 4920: so much ground does four Brigades of Foot possess with their
Intervals. Be pleased to add 4920 to the 3392 Foot, which the four Brigades of
Horse possessed, you will find the aggregate to be 8312 foot, which being divided
by five to make paces, the Quotient is 1662, and two foot; so much ground do
our four Brigades of foot and four Brigades of Horse take up in front, the
Intervals between Brigades being allowed to be no greater than 24 foot.
According to this allowance the Reader may easily calculate the longitude of
the three Brigades of Foot, and two Brigades of Horse, which make the
Reer-guard or Reserve, if he conceive it worthy of his pains.

To marshal our Army of 16200 men another way, in order to Intervals, I shall
in the first place allow no more ground to either Foot-soldier or Horseman
Marshaled in Battle, and Reserve with greater Intervals.
for himself, and distance from his sidemen, but three foot in all. But for the
great Interval between two Brigades, I shall allow as much ground as a Brigade
may stand on, that the Brigade in the Reserve may possess it when ordered to
advance. You will remember we agreed that four Brigades of Foot, and four of
Horse should make the Battle, and three Brigades of Foot, and two of Horse
should make the Reserve; which I marshal thus, On the right hand of the Battle
two Brigades of Horse, but between them an Interval of as much ground as one of
the Brigades possesses. On the left hand of the second Brigade of Horse, an
Interval of 24 foot, on the left hand whereof four Brigades of Foot marshaled
in one front; these four must have three Intervals, each of them capable to
contain a Brigade of Foot, on the left hand of them an Interval of 24 foot, and
then two Brigades of Horse with such a distance between them as that the two
Brigades on the right wing had. The Reserve I marshal thus, One Brigade of
Horse drawn up at a convenient distance directly behind the Interval between
the two Brigades of Horse on the right wing of the Battle. Then on its left
hand, three Brigades of Foot drawn up directly behind the three Intervals
appointed to be between the four Brigades in the Battle, and on their left
hand, the second Brigade of Horse drawn up behind the Interval appointed to be
between the two Brigades of Horse, which makes the left wing of the Battle.

The Longitude of the Battle marshaled as I have said, you may compute thus,
Longitude of the Battle computed.
The two Brigades of Horse on the right wing, each consisting of 600 Horse, and
consequently of 200 Leaders, both of them 400 Leaders, each whereof has three
foot of ground allowed him, require 1200 foot, and the Interval 600, the
distance between them and the Foot 24, as much you are to allow to the left
wing of the Horse, add these together, you will find the aggregate to be 3648.
Each Brigade of Foot consisting of 1800 men six deep, has 300 Leaders, and so
the four Brigades have 1200 Leaders, each of these has three foot allowed him,
inde 3600 foot, so every Brigade has 900 foot of ground, as much must every
Interval have, now there be three Intervals, and three times 900 amounts to
2700. There must be in every Brigade two Intervals, each of six foot between
the Pikes and Musketeers, so 12 foot in every one, and in all the four 48. Add
48 to 2700, and both of them to 3600, the aggregate is 6348. So much ground is
required for the Foot of the Battle. Add 6348 to 3648, which was allowed to the
Horse, the aggregate will be 9996, which will want four foot of two Italian
miles. I shall neither trouble my Reader nor my self to compute the Longitude
of the Reserve. What I have said of two ways of Marshaling this Army of 16200
Horse and Foot, is meant only in order to Intervals, for it is most certain, an
Army may be drawn up in as many several figures and forms as there may be
Generals to succeed one another in the command of it.

Between the Battle and Reserve there should be as great distance of ground as
a Brigade of Foot possesses in its Longitude; but if the Army be marshalled in
three bodies, then the distance between Battle and Reer-guard must be double,
that distance that is between Vanguard and Battle, that there be room for both
to rally, this was observed by two late Princes of Orange, Maurice and Henry,
in drawing up their Armies, following therein the practice of the Romans, in
their Intervals between their Hastati, Principes, and Triarii.

CHAP. XVIII. Of the Women, and Baggage belonging to an Army, of the General
Waggon-master, and of his Duties.
OUR levied men being armed, paid, exercised, disciplined, divided into Troops,
Companies, Regiments and Brigades, with Officers belonging to them, and
sufficiently proyided with General Officers, and a Train of Artillery, and at
length marshaled in order of Battle, are now ready to march, but I am afraid,
the Baggage will disturb them, unless it be put in some order.

The great number of Coaches, Wagons, Carts, and Horses loaded with baggage,
the needless numbers of Women and Boys who follow Armies, renders a march,
slow, uneasy and troublesome. And therefore the Latins gave Baggage justly
called Impedimenta.
baggage the right name of Impedimenta, hindrances. But because without some
baggage an Army cannot subsist, it would be his ear who commands in chief to
order the matter so that the baggage may be as inconsiderable and small as may
be, and that it march in such order that every Waggon-man, Carter and
Baggage-man may know his own place, that so they may neither disturb one
another, nor yet hinder the march of the Army. The place where the Baggage
should march is appointed according to the knowledge the General has of his
enemy, if he be in the Rear, the Baggage should be sent before the Army; if he
be in the Van, it should be in the Rear. But in these places there should be
Baggage should have Convoys of Horse and Foot.
with it a Convoy of Horse and Foot, strong or weak, according as occasion
seems to require. And of Convoys for Baggage I shall say these few things in
general: In them these Horsemen who are not very well mounted, may well enough
be employed, but no men are to be set there, whether of Foot or Horse, that are
sick, lame, or wounded, for that were to betray both them and the Baggage to an
enemy. When Convoys are put to fight for defense of their Charge, as many times
they are, (for the desire of booty spurs men to desperate attempts) they should
(if conveniently they can) cast themselves within the Wagons and Carts drawn
up round for that purpose, from whence Musketeers may do notable service, and
out of which retrenchment the Horse may as they see occasion, make handsome
Sallies. If they cannot get this done, they should be sure to put as much of
the Baggage, or all of it, if they may, between them and their own Army, and
themselves between the Baggage and the enemy, whether he fall out to be in the
Van, or in the Rear. Sometimes if the danger appear to be both before and
behind, the Baggage marches in the middle of the Infantry, and though some be
of the opinion, that the Baggage should still follow the Artillery, yet that
does not, nor cannot hold in all cases and emergencies, the marching of both
Armies and Baggage many times depending on contingents, of which no determinate
rule can be given.

The way to regulate Baggage is to appoint under a severe penalty that no
Company, Troop or Regiment shall have more Wagons, Carts, or Baggage* horses
than such a set number already ordered by the Prince, or his General, The
number of Wagons, Carts and Baggage-Horses should be determined.
which should be as few as may be, with full power to the Waggon-master General
to make all that is over that number, prize, with an absolute command to all
Colonels to assist him in case of opposition. In the former Discourses we have
seen that the Grecians and Romans to free themselves as much as was possible,
of this great Embarras of Baggage, loaded their Soldiers like Mules and Asses;
this perhaps did suit those times, better than it would do ours. But most of
our Modern allowances for Carriages of an Armies Baggage has been in the other
extreme. I shall instance four.

The Swedish Kings and their Generals allow ten Wagons to every Troop of
Horse, and two to every Company of Foot, and a Sutlers Wagon to every one of
them, sometimes two to a Troop of Horse, besides the Wagons allowed to Swedish
allowance of Wagons.
the field and Staff-officers of Regiments. Let us then suppose that the
Cavalry of an Army consists of five thousand Horse, and these divided into a
hundred Troops, and fifty Horse in a Troop were thought fair in the German War.
These hundred Troops had for themselves a thousand Wagons, and a hundred for
their Sutlers. Model these hundred Troops in twelve Regiments, and allow for
every Regiment staff eight Wagons, you are to have ninety six Wagons more,
add these ninety six to the other eleven hundred, the Wagons of your Cavalry
(besides Coaches) amount to eleven hundred ninety six. Let there be an Infantry
of nine thousand men joined to this Cavalry, let it be divided into fifteen
Regiments, and each Regiment into eight Companies, there will be a hundred and
twenty Companies, for every Company two Wagons are allowed, and one for the
Sutler, these are three for a Company, inde for a hundred and twenty Companies
three hundred and sixty Wagons; for the Staff of every Regiment allow eight
Wagons, inde for fifteen Regiments a hundred and twenty Wagons, add a hundred
and twenty to three hundred and sixty, you have four hundred and eighty Wagons
for the Infantry, besides Coaches. Add 480 to 1196, the Wagons of the Cavalry,
the total of Wagons for both amounts to 1676, you may safely allow to the
general persons of this Army at least a 120 Coaches and Wagons, and then you
have 1796; besides all these numbers of Wagons* belonging to the Train of
Artillery, and the Proviant, I have seen in a German Army that exceeded not
6000 Horse and Foot, not so few as 900 Wagons.

My second instance shall be of the Dane, and some German Princes, whose Dane
and Germans.
allowance is somewhat less than the Swedes.

The third of the Emperor, who allows more Wagons to both Horse and Emperors.
Foot than the Swede does, and that is needless.

My fourth Instance shall be of the French allowance, not of our times, but
French allowance of Wagons and Horses fifty years ago,
Fifty years ago, for four of the Gensd'arms Baggage a Wagon was appointed;
inde 25 Wagons for 100 men at Arms. The light armed were allowed no Wagons,
but were appointed to carry their stuff on Horseback; and how many Horses were
allowed them for that use, I find it not specified; but we may make a
conjecture, when we see how many were allowed to the Foot: In the time of Henry
the Great, who died about sixty years ago, one Horse was allowed to carry the
Baggage of four Soldiers: hence we may conclude, that a horse was allowed for
the Baggage of two Light-horsemen, or of Archers; so for Infantry of 10000 men,
besides Officers, 2500 Baggage horses were allowed. Besides, a Gudget or Boy
was allowed to serve two Soldiers, inde for 10000 Soldiers, 5000 Gudgets, the
very Vermin of an Army. These horses and Boys, did, no doubt, very
unnecessarily destroy both Proviant and Fodderage. And yet Louis de Montgomery
in his Milice Francoise, Much retrenched.
approves of this allowance. But the French, now, of all other people puts the
greatest restraint on their Baggage: And indeed, it Montgomery had lived till
my time, I could have let him see one hundred French Soldiers, whose Baggage
(except the Clothes on their backs) might all have been carried in a A Soldier
may carry his own luggage.
Handkerchief. And though I join freely with him in his opinion, that the
Soldiers should not carry such burdens as the Romans did of old, yet I would
have neither Horse nor Boy allowed to them; It is too much, that the bad Custom
of later times, has eased most of them of the burden of defensive arms, and
therefore every one of them both may, and should carry his own Knapsack and
four or five days provision of meat; with a Hatchet at his girdle, which last I
see too much neglected, on this side of the Sea: in so much as where an
Infantry comes to encamp, if it be for one night, or two, or more, the
Soldiers must make use of their Swords, for cutting down branches of Trees,
and to cleave Wood, either for making their Huts, or for fire; indeed I know
not for what most of their Swords serve, being for most part so extremely base,
yet assuredly Hatchets were more proper for those uses, I have spoke of, than
their Ammunition blades, which Allowance of Boys to serve Soldiers out of use,
can hardly cut any thing. But such an allowance of Boys and Horses, were in
fashion in France, long before Louis de Montgomery's time: for I find some in
Records of the Civil Wars, the Protestants did retrench these allowances, when
their Soldiers were Garrisoned; for then it is said, four of them had but one
Gudget allowed them to wait on them, and a whole company of them, were but
allowed six horses for their Baggage, and indeed I think both these were too
many for them in the field, in Garrison they needed none of them. Though you
allow every Soldier two pound of Bread and Cheese every day, and God knows, he
gets not so much many times in four days: suppose he has a couple of Shirts, a
pair of Stockins, and a pair of Shoos in his Knapsack, As not necessary.
(and how many Soldiers have all these?) and a Hatchet; I say, all these will
not weigh so much as a Headpiece, and a Corslet, and therefore he may well
enough be obliged to carry them.

Every Regiment, whether of horse or foot, should have a Wagon or a
Baggage-master, and where the establishment of the Prince does allow him no
pay, the Colonel should order a sufficient Sergeant or Corporal to exercise
that Office by turns, these are to see that every Officers Baggage, from the
highest to the lowest, march according to the Dignity and Precedence of him to
whom it belongs, whether it be carried on Wagons, Carts, or Horses. But these
Regiment Baggage-masters are not to suffer the Baggage of the Regiments to
march, till they have received their Directions from the Waggon-master General,
Waggon-master General,
when, and in what manner it shall be done. This Waggon-master General's charge
is exceeding toylsome, when an Army marches. Every night after the Army comes
to Quarter, and every morning before it march, he must attend the Major
Generals of the Cavalry, and Infantry, and receive his Orders from them, if the
whole Army march together; but if the Cavalry march apart, then the Major
General of the foot gives the Waggon-master His Toil.
his instructions, particularly a list, in what order the Army is to march, for
ordinarily, Regiments and Brigades change by turns, and their Baggage must
march* in that same order, that themselves do: the Waggon-master having got his
list, he accordingly orders the Regiment Baggage-masters (who are obliged to
wait on him every morning) to cause their luggage march, wherein they may not
fail; for (unless some extraordinary occasion alters it,) the Prince, or in his
absence, the Commander in Chief his Coach, or Coaches, with his Wagons go
first, then the whole Train of Artillery behind it, the The order how the
Baggage of an Army mar^heth.
Coaches and Wagons of all the general Officers according to their dignity*
after them, the Wagons of that Br^gad, that has the Van for that day, and so
all the rest in order, according as the Regiments or Brigades march. If any
Wagons or Baggage-horses press to be before these, behind whom the
Waggon-master General has ordered them to march, he may safely make prize of
them, owe them who will. When the Wagons come to a Heath, or a Champaign
field, the Waggon-master should order the Wagons to draw up two, four, or five
in rank, and to drive in that order, so long as the ground permits them to do
so, and this saves time, and makes dispatch, and when they come to strait
ground, they are to fall off, by the right hand, in that order wherein they
were before. The same course he is to take with Baggage horses. This
Baggage-master General is allowed to have two Lieutenants; so that if the Army
march three several ways, (a^ Waggon-master has Deputies.
sometimes it does) himself and his two Deputies serve to marshal the Baggage
of all the three. If the Army is divided into two, or the Cavalry march alone,
one of his Lieutenants goes along with the Horse, the other stays with himself,
and he is constantly to be there where the General of the Army and Train of
Artillery either marches, or quartereth.

Many times Wagons are commanded to be burnt and destroyed; sometimes* all the
Women and most of the Baggage are left behind at some Garrison and fortified
place, or with the Body of the Infantry and Artillery when expedition calls
away all the Horse, Dragoons, and as many Foot as are able to march lustily. In
some of these occasions, Officers go fair to lose their Wagons, and some of
their movables. Women following an Army divided into three Classes. First.


Women who follow an Army may be ordered (if they can be ordered) in three
ranks, or rather in Classes, one below another. The first shall be of those who
are Ladies, and are the Wives of the General and other principal Commanders of
the Army, who for most part are carried in Coaches; but those* Coaches must
drive according to the quality of them to whom the Ladies belong, and as the
Baggage of their Husbands is appointed to march by the Waggon-master General.
The second Class is of those who ride on Horseback, Second.
and these must ride in no other place than where the Baggage of the Regiment
to whom they belong, marches, but they are very often extravagant, gadding here
and there, and therefore in some places they are put in Companies, and have one
or more to command and over-see them, and these are called in Germany,
Hureweibles, Rulers or Marshals of the Whores. I have seen them ride, keep
Troop, rank and file very well, after that Captain of theirs who led them, and
a Banner with them, which one of the Women carried. The third Third.
Class is of those who walk on foot, and are the wives of inferior Officers
and Soldiers; these must walk besides the Baggage of the several Regiments to
whom they belong, and over them the several Regiment* Marshals have inspection.
As woman was created to be a helper to man, so women are great helpers Women
helpful to their Husbands in Armie^,
in Armies to their husbands, especially those of the lower condition, neither
should they be rashly banished out of Armies, sent away they may be sometimes
for weighty considerations; they provide, buy and dress their husbands meat
when their husbands are on duty, or newly come from it, they bring in fuel for
fire, and wash their linnens, and in such manner of employments a Soldiers
wife may be helpful to others, and gain money to her husband and her self;
especially they are useful in Camps and Leaguers, being permitted (which should
not be refused them) to go some miles from the Camp to buy Victuals and other
Useful in Camps.
Necessaries. At the long Siege of Breda made by Spinola, it was observed that
the married Soldiers fared better, looked more vigorously, and were able to do
more duty than the Batchellors; and all the spite was done the poor women, was
to be called their husbands mules, by those who would have been glad to have
had such mules themselves. Among all these kinds of Women in well ordered
Armies, there are none but those who are married. If there be any else, upon
examination made by the Minister, Priest, or Consistory, they are put away with
ignominy, at least should be conformable to all Articles of War.

But a strange story is writ by good Authors of that famous Duke of Alv^, whose
name is yet so hateful to most of the Netherlands. They say at that time he
marched from Italy to the Low Countries, to reduce them to the obedience of his
Master the King of Spain, a permission was given to Courtizans to follow his
Army, but they were to ride in Troops with Banners. They had their several A
strange story of Courtizans.
Capitanesses and Alfieras, or she-Cornets, and other Officers, who kept among
them an exact Discipline in all points that concerned their profession: They
were divided into several Squadrons according to their quality, and that was
distinguished no otherwise but by the difference of their beauties, faces, and
features. Those of the best sort were permitted only to traffic with men of
the highest quality, those of the second rank with Commanders of great note,
those of the third with Officers of a lower condition, and those of the fourth
degree with Officers who were of the meanest quality, and Soldiers, whom those
of the other three ranks rejected. An excellent Commonwealth! where it was
prohibited under all grievous pains, not to suffer themselves to be Courted by
any An abominable Commonwealth.
either above or below the rank wherein they were placed, and that was
impartially done according to the Talent nature had bestowed upon them; so that
every common Soldier, inferior person, or low Officer, Ensign, Captain,
Colonel, or General Commander knew to whom they might address themselves, and
from whom they might buy repentance. A practice which I suppose never had a
Precedent in either Christian or Pagan Army, and which with an impudent face
loudly cried defyance to both Religion and Moral honesty.

CHAP. XIX. Of the March of an Army.
IF there be any confusion in the march of an Army, or that the right ordering
it be neglected by general persons in appointing every Regiment or Brigade its
own place, with the Train of Artillery and Baggage, or that Colonels, Majors
and Captains be careless to obey their orders in their march, A careless march
the ruin of an Army.
and suffer their Soldiers to run, straggle, and lag behind, it not only gives
an enemy a wished advantage, but is enough of it self to ruin an Army even
without the help of an enemy. In a march an Army may be surprised in passing a
River, whether that be by Foord, Bridge or Boat, or when it marches thorough
marsh grounds, or close Countries, when it ascends or descends Hills; to all
these inconveniences a careful General should advert, and according to the
Intelligence he has, either he is to advance his march speedily to gain a pass
or advantage of ground, or stop his march, and encamp and fortify, and if
nothing else will help, he should draw up in Battle, either fronting that same
way as he was marching, or facing about to fight the enemy, whether he be in
his front or rear, and let God dispose of the Victory as seems good in his eyes.

Our Modern Armies have marched, and do* still march one of three several An
Army may ^arch in three several manners:
ways, these are first by dividing an Army into three several Bodies,
Vanguard, Battle, and Arrier-guard; secondly, by marching in two distinct
Bodies, as they use to fight, and these are commonly called Battle and Reserve.
Thirdly, all in one Battle, whereby is meant the half of the Cavalry in the
Van, the other half in the Rear, and the Foot between them. To clear all these
three ways of marching, let us suppose our Army to consist of six Brigades of
Horse, and eight of Foot. These are divided after the first way thus: In the
Vanguard First manner in three Bodies.
three Brigades of Horse, and out of these a strong party of three or four
hundred Horse to go before to search the ways, and discover. That party should
be about one English mile before the three Brigades of Horse, and out of it
should be small parties sent out about half an English mile, which should
constantly acquaint the great party, and it the Brigades behind, and so from
hand Vanguard.
to hand, till the Intelligence of all they learn, comes to the General. After
these forlorn Troops of Horse follow commanded Musketeers, with Pioneers to
smooth and make plain the ways for the Artillery, whether it be by cutting
Trees or hedges, or filling hollow grounds or Ditches. After the three Brigades
of Horse follow some Fieldpieces, suppose the half of those that are with the
Army, and some Wagons loaded with Ammunition; immediately after them march two
Brigades of Foot, these are followed by the Baggage of the whole Vanguard, and
behind it a commanded party of Horse and Foot; so you see this Vanguard is a
petty Army of it self. In the next place comes the Battle, in this order:
First, two Brigades of Foot, after them the Prince or his Battle.
General in person, attended with the Guard of his Body, and Servants; behind
these the General or Colonel of the Artillery, who is followed by the great
Ordnance, and whole Train of Artillery; after it comes in due order, the
Baggage belonging to the General Officers, and to all the four Brigades which
compose the Battle; in the Rear whereof march two more Brigades of Foot, and
these sometimes are brought up by a party of Horse. After the Battle comes the
Reerguard of our Army; and that is the Reverse of the Vanguard, for first
Reer-guard.
marches its Baggage with a commanded party of Horse and Foot, next follow two
Brigades of Foot, then some Fieldpieces; behind them, the other three Brigades
of Horse, who have a party behind them at the distance at least of one English
mile, to give them advertisement if an enemy be following. And this is the
first, and a very commendable manner of the march of an Army. But observe to
make the greater expedition, especially if an Army be numerous, these three
great Bodies may march three several ways if the Country conveniently Th^se
three Bodies may march three several ways.
afford them, and this makes a speedy march; but in this case the Battle must
have two Brigades of Horse which it had not before, and consequently the Van
guard, and Reer-guard, each of them but two, whereas by our former marshalling
each of them had three; when they divide, they are appointed to meet at such a
time and place as the General shall appoint, whether that be every night, or
every third, fourth or fifth night; this is done when an enemy is not near. The
Commander in chief marches and ^dgeth constantly with the Body of the Infantry
and the Artillery. And these great Officers who command the Vanguard and
Arrier-guard, have Majors attending them every day and night, besides
Ordinance-Horsemen, to receive their Directions, and bring them speedily to
them in regard some new intelligence may rationally move them to alter the
manner of the march, or any Orders they gave concerning it.

The second manner of the march of an Army is in two Bodies, Battle and Second
manner in two Bodies.
Reserve. You will be pleased to remember that the Army we now speak of
consists of six Brigades of Horse, and eight of Foot, which I thus order: In
the Battle shall first march 400 commanded Horse, who shall have a smaller
party before them to discover; next them Pioneers or Country people with a
party of Musketeers or Firelocks to plain the ways, then four Brigades of
Horse: Next them, Fieldpieces, then three Brigades of Foot; after them the
Prince, or he who commands by his authority, the General or Colonel of the
Artillery follows; after whom comes the great Ordnance, and whole Train, which
is followed by the Coaches and Wagons belonging to the General, and all the
other General Officers; after them comes the Baggage belonging to all the
Brigades of the Battle, in that same order that the Brigades themselves march;
after which come two Brigades of Foot, and then a party of Horse brings up the
rear of the Battle.

The Reserve follows in this order: First, a Commanded party of Horse and
Reserve.
Foot, then the whole Baggage that belongs to the Reserve; next to it
Fieldpieces with their Wagons of Ammunition, after them three Brigades of
Foot, and then two Brigades of Horse, about one English mile behind them,
follows the Reer-guard of Commanded Horse. These two great bodies for
expedition These two Bodies may march two several ways.
sake, may likewise march two several ways, (if the General have no
apprehension of an enemy) and join, when he gives order for it. Observe when an
enemy is in the rear, the Battle is the Reserve, and the Reserve is the Battle,
and consequently more Brigades should be in the Rear than in the Van, and in
the Rear at such an occasion, the Commander in chief of the Army should be.

The third manner of an Armies march, is when it neither marches in two Third
manner in one Body.
nor three distinct Bodies, but in one entire Body, which is frequently
practiced; let me then once more refresh your memory by telling you our Army
consists of six Brigades of Horse, and eight of Foot. Three Brigades of Horse
march first, and make the Vanguard, these have before them commanded Horse,
Pioneers, and Musketeers as the others had. Then follow four Brigades of Foot,
the General after them, next him the General of the Artillery, with his whole
Train, after it marches the other four Brigades of Foot, and these eight
Brigades of Foot compose the Battle of the Army; the other three Brigades of
Horse make the Reer-guard, behind which at a miles distance follows a strong
party of commanded Horse. The Baggage may be in the Van, or the Rear, or May be
divided easily into several Bodies.
if the General apprehe^d danger in them both, it may march immediately after
the Train. This great Body may be very soon divided into either two or three
several ones, and may march as many several ways as the General pleases.

But truly with submission to great Commanders I should be of opinion, that the
Baggage of an Army should never be divided, unless the Army it self divides: if
danger be in the Van, let it all stay in the Rear, the proper place of Baggage;
if the enemy be expected in the Rear, post away all the Baggage to The proper
place of Baggage in a march.
the, Van; if in both, necessity will force it to be in the middle of the Army.
But my humble opinion is, that without apparent danger it should constantly be
in the Rear of the whole Army, for the disadvantage is but small that the
Brigades or Regiments of the Van have (and withal they have but their turns of
it) that they must wait very long at night till their Baggage come from the
Rear: It is but small, I say, if you compare it with the great prejudice the
Prince or States service suffers, by having the Regiments or Brigades which
march in the Rear benighted, being hindered by the Baggage that is ordered to
march before them, two, three, sometimes five hours, whereas if that Baggage
had not been in their way, they might have reached their Quarter seasonably
enough. But there is a worse thing in it than that, when upon the unexpected
appearance of an enemy in the Van, the Brigades that are in the Reer-guard
being suddenly called up, they are not able ^^ advance for the unavoidable
Embarras of Baggage that is before them. Indeed I think the middle or center of
the Infantry a proper place for the great Guns, and Train, and the Generals
Secretaries, and Cabinets with his Papers, and for most of his, and some of the
other General Officers Coaches, especially if their Ladies be in them, and
there I think these should constantly march. But my judgment is, that all other
Baggage whatsoever belonging to either Horse or Foot should be in the Rear,
according to that priority or precedence the Regiments or Brigades have
themselves in the march, and these should change every day, that who is in the
Van one day, may be in the Rear the next, that all may participate equally of
the ease or toil of a march. Where the sick and wounded should be.
What is spoke of the place where Baggage should march, is to be understood
also of the sick and wounded Soldiers, who if they cannot be put in some secure
or fortified place, should be brought forward, though Baggage-horses should be
borrowed from the owners for that use, and in time of danger should be sent as
far from it, as may be with a good Guard or Convoy.

When ground will permit the Brigades of an Army, whether Horse or Foot to
march in one breast or front, there is a question, what distance or interval
should be kept between these Brigades. There be some, who theoretically argue,
that the distance between two Brigades, (both marching in breast, but the one
behind the other) should be of as much ground, as a Brigade drawn Distance
between Brigades on a march, should not be so great as when they are to fight.
up in front does possess; because, say they, when one Brigade is drawn up on
the right hand of a large field, where the whole Army is to be marshaled, the
second Brigade which follows, cannot draw up in full breast on the left hand of
the first, unless there be such an Interval between them on their march, as
that I just now told you of; nor can the third draw up on the left hand of the
second, unless it have that same distance: the like is to be said of all the
rest. To this I answer, when an Army is marshaled in Battel-order, that
distance is to be kept between Brigades, whereof I spoke in the last Chapter,
and so the second will have the less difficulty to marshal it self on the left
hand of the first: But that cannot make me allow so much ground between
Brigades on a march, as I willingly do, when they are to fight. To the reason
produced against it, I say, to think that a Brigade, all in one breast, and
marching directly behind another (though at never so great a distance) can draw
up in breast on the left The contrary opinion examined.
hand of another, without some turning, or wheeling, is a mere speculation. And
I say more, let a Brigade march in three Squads, at as great a distance as you
will, the second shall not draw up on the left hand of the first, without some
wheeling. And if a smaller body cannot do it, much less can a greater. And
practice will show the vanity of the other opinion, to any who will be at the
pains to examine it, and observe it in the march of Brigades in the field, as I
have done oftener than once. This opinion then vanishes, unless they who follow
it, bring a better reason for it, which I have not yet heard. But be pleased to
take notice, what an inconvenience, and that no small one, the observing this
rule will bring along with it in a march (I speak still when Brigades march all
in one front, one behind another) at that rate there shall be such avast
distance between the Van and the Rear, that the last Brigade, shall not get up
(though it run, which it should not do) to the place where it should be
marshaled, but in a very long time, which you will easily grant to be true, if
you will with me make this computation: We have spoke of eight Brigades of foot
in this Chapter, to be in our Army, each of them shall be no stronger than 1800
men, and therefore each of them must be 300 in front, allowing four foot to
every Leader; these 300 Leaders possess in rank 1200 foot of ground, as much
(by this opinion which I combat) must be allowed for an Interval between two
Brigades marching one after another, in breast; now in eight Brigades there are
seven Intervals, seven times 1200 foot make 8400: Every one of the Brigades
possess in deepness 36 foot, multiply 36 by 8 (which is the number of the
Brigades) the product is 288. Add 288 to 8400, the aggregate is 8688 foot; so
much distance there is from the Leaders of the first Brigade of Foot, to the
Bringers-up of the eight and last. Take a view of our six Brigades of Horse,
each whereof shall consist And found inconvenient.
of no more than 600, being three deep, each Brigade has 200 in front, allow
but three foot for every Rider, the front of each Brigade possesses 600 foot
of ground; as much must every Interval between Brigades have: now in six
Brigades there are 5 Intervals, 5 times 600 make 3000, allow for three ranks
and two Intervals in every Brigade marching in breast, 36 foot, and multiply 36
by 6 (which is the number of the Brigades) the product is 216; add 216 to 3000,
the aggregate is 3216 add that to 8688, the aggregate is 11904; divide this
number by 5, to make paces, the Quotient will be 2380 paces and four foot, this
will be two Italian miles, and more than one third An intolerable distance.
between the first rank of the Cavalry, and the last rank of it; the Infantry
marching in the middle, a thing intolerable, that there should be so vast a
distance between the Front and Rear of an Army of 18000 Horse and Foot,
marching in Brigades, and every Brigade marching in breast, and neither piece
of Ordnance, Wagon or Baggage-horse among them.

And this leads me to another speculation, which is, that all who have the
conduct of Armies, should in a march allow as little Interval between either
greater or smaller Bodies, as possible may be, in regard, Woods, Waters,
Passes, close Countries, Straits, and narrow ways, will make a greater distance
between the Vans, and Reers of their Armies, than is in their power Distance
between Van and Rear of an Army marching.
to make less. To verify which, let us suppose with Bockler, a late German
Author, that 10000 Foot and 1000 Horse are upon a march, where the Foot may
march ten in breast, and the Horse five; and have only ten half Cannon, with
Powder and Bullets for one day, and only some necessary Baggage with them; he
passes his word, to us, that this little Army when it is marching shall take
up of ground between Van and Rear 28000 foot; this is more than five Italian
miles, and one half. I have a little examined the computation, and I believe
his reckoning to be right.

But, if you please, let us not trust his word, but try our selves, what
distance there may be between the Van of an Army, consisting of 15000 Foot, and
3000 Horse, with which shall be no more Ordnance than ten Demi-cannon;
Instanced in an Army of 18000 men.
and twenty Fieldpieces; and a less Train, if any, you cannot allow to an Army
of 18000 fighting men. And with this Army we shall suffer no more Wagons to be
than 1200 for carrying all the Ammunition, Instruments for Fortification and
Artillery, Proviant and Baggage belonging to the General Officers, and the
whole Horse and Foot, whereas twice that number may be well enough allowed; and
to make the distance the less, we shall allow but two horses for every Wagon,
without having any regard to Coaches, or great Rust-Waggons (drawn ordinarily
by six horses,) whereof there be but too many in every Army. Let us imagine we
march not in a Champaign, but in a close Country, yet not so close, but the
Horse shall march five in breast, and the Foot ten, and there be many ways,
which will not permit so much; and to spare ground, I shall allow no Intervals
between Regiments or Brigades of Foot, only Intervals between Divisions shall
be allowed, and no Interval at all between either Regiments or Divisions of the
Cavalry shall be allowed, but the whole 3000 shall march five in breast all in
one row.

The Foot being six deep, and ten in front, will march 60 men in each Division.
15000 Foot marching ten in front or breast.
We must see how many such Divisions will be in 15000 men. To know this, divide
15000 by 60, the Quotient will be 250, so you have 250 divisions; allow, as you
must, 36 foot for the 6 ranks of every Division, that is 6 foot for the ranks
to stand on, and 30 foot for the 5 Intervals; therefore you must multiply 250
by 36 (which is the number of your Divisions) and the product will be 9000. For
an Interval between two Divisions I shall only allow 12 foot, whereas many
allow 18; now there be 249 Intervals, multiply therefore 249 by 12, the product
is 2988. Add 2988 to 9000, the aggregate is 11988: And so many foot of ground
must 15000 Foot have from Van to Rear, when they march ten in breast.

Being our 3000 Horse are to march five in breast, you are to divide 3000 3000
horse marching five in Breast.
by 5, and the Quotient will be 600, so you have 600 ranks, we must allow every
Rider ten foot for the length of his Horse, multiply then 600 by 10, the
Product is 6000. Ordinarily a Horses length is allowed for an Interval between
ranks of Horse; but because we would march close, we shall allow but the half
of that, to wit, five foot: now there be in 600 ranks 599 Intervals, multiply
then 599 by 5, the Product will be 2995. Add 2995 to 6000, the aggregate is
8995, so many foot of ground 3000 Horse take up in their marching five in
breast.

We have ten Demi-cannon which shoot each of them a bullet of 24 pound at
least, each of them shall weigh no more but 4400 pound of metal, though the
Germans allow more than 5000. Allow then one Horse to draw 250 pound of this
Piece, you shall need 18 Horses at least to draw one Demicannon, with her
Carriage, Leaver, Sponge and Laddle, these 18 Horses being Ten Demi-Cannon
drawn one after another,
coupled, make nine couple; allow then for nine couple of Horses, for the
length of the Piece and her Carriage 110 foot, and it will be little enough:
multiply then 110 by 10 (which is the number of your Demi-cannon) the Product
is 1100, so much ground they must have when they are drawn one after another,
and here is no allowance for distance between them, nor shall we give any
between the 20 Fieldpieces, but shall allow each of them to be drawn by two
Horses, nor shall we give more ground to the Horses, Piece And twenty
Fieldpieces.
and Carriage than 20 foot, that is for all the twenty 400 foot.

Our 1200 Wagons will take up much ground, nor is it possible to help it. Nor
can we allow less ground for a Wagon drawn with two Horses, and a convenient
distance between it and the Wagon which follows it, than 1200 Wagons drawn
one after another.
22 foot, multiply then 1200 by 22, the Product will be 26400, so much ground
require twelve hundred Wagons when they are drawn one after another.

The Foot then require 11988 foot, the Horse 8995, the Demi-cannon 1100, the
Fieldpieces 400, the Wagons 26400, add these numbers together, the aggregate
will be 48883. These make in paces 9776, and three foot, about nine Italian
miles, and three quarters. If you suspect I have cast up a wrong account, be
pleased to work your self, and mend it at your pleasure.

By this you may see if the Army be stronger than this of ours, as many be, or
the Train greater, as indeed it should be, or your Wagons more numerous, as
assuredly they will be, or the way narrower, as for most part it chances to
be: you may see, I say, how many miles may be between your Front and your Rear.
And indeed, though the Train of Artillery, by the sticking of great Guns and
Pot-pieces in deep, dirty, or clay ground, give no retardment to the march, as
frequently it does; or that an Army meet with no extraordinary encumbrances, as
happily it may: yet it will be no marvel to see the Van at the head quarter,
before the Reer-guard be marched out of their last nights Leaguer, though the
march be fourteen or fifteen English miles long, and therefore there is good
reason to allow as little distance or Interval between several bodies or
batallions as may be, and to A close march the best, and securest.
divide an Army into two, three or more bodies, and march several ways to make
the greater expedition, when it may be done safely, and without danger of an
enemy, and if he be in your Rear, and that you intend not to fight, dividing,
so you keep good order, facilitates your Retreat.

The two Princes of Orange, Maurice and Henry, both of them excellent Captains,
ordered that in a march, when one Regiment was divided into two great
Partitions, there should be no more but fifty foot of distance between them,
and only eighty foot between one Regiment and another. These Princes caused
their Armies to march (according to ancient custom) in three great Bodies, Van
guard, Battle, and Reer-guard, and those they called Tercias, or Tersos, a
Spanish word which signifies Thirds, and so the Spaniards called their
Regiments of old, and for any thing I know they do so still. These Tersos of
the Princes of Orange were indeed grand Brigades, and these had Ma^^rs, who
were called Majors of the Brigades besides Majors of Regiments. And in a march
the Princes allowed no greater distance between these great bodies, but an
hundred, or a hundred and twenty foot at most. And herein they did not quadrate
with the opinion of some of our modern Captains, who will have as great a
distance between Brigades as the longitude of a Brigade is, which we may
suppose to be very many times a thousand foot, though sometimes less; and
consequently if there be ten such Brigades of Foot, the very nine Intervals
between the ten Brigades takes up nine thousand foot, near two Italian miles,
and therefore if the way be not very broad, there will be several miles between
the Van and the Rear of the Infantry; but the reasons brought by those that are
of this judgment may be demonstrated to be but weak by a visible practice.

When an Army is to go over a Pass, a Water, or a Bridge, the whole To march
over a Pass, or a Strait,
Bodies of it should be ordered to march very close, losing something of their
ordinary distances, that one Brigade or Batallion being past, another may
immediately follow without intermission. Captain Rud the late Kings Engineer, a
very worthy person, says at the passing a strait an Army should make an halt,
and draw up in battle, and then pass over so many in breast as the place will
permit, and when they are all over, draw up again before And not lose time.
they march. For the last part I shall agree with him, for no sooner should any
Forlorn-hope, Troop, Company, or Regiment be over a Pass, but they should draw
up in Battle till some others be over, and if there be not ground enough, they
should advance by little and little, till they find a more spacious field,
where they may draw up in breast, and expect the rest; or if he mean that every
particular Regiment or Brigade should draw on that side of the strait which it
is to pass, till the Rear of that Regiment or Brigade come up, and then begin
their march over: I shall yet agree with him, but for a Van of an Army to stay
till the Rear come up, before it begin to pass a strait, is a great loss of
time, which in the march of an Army is very precious; for in an Army but of an
indifferent strength, that halt shall be the space of at least four hours, and
this furnishes an opportunity to an enemy to oppose the passage, or wait his
advantages on the other side of the strait, with more force, policy, and
deliberation.

CHAP. XX. Of Quartering, Encamping, and Modern Castrametation. Of the
Quartermaster General, and of the Quartermaster of the General Staff.
THE day is far spent, and the Army has marched far, Quarter must be made
somewhere, and it must be either in Towns, Villages, or the fields. If the Army
be dispersed in several Villages or Hamlets, it is done that it may To Quarter
in Villages.
be refreshed for some short time, and when there is no danger of an enemy. If
it be to lodge for one night, and an enemy is near, then both Horse and Foot
stand in the field all night, with strong Guards, Forlorn-hopes, Rounds, and
Patrovilles. If an enemy be not near, ordinarily the Head quarter is in some
little Town or Village, and the Cavalry quartered round about in Hamlets; the
Infantry is encamped close by the Head-quarter, and if it be but to stay a
night or two, it does not usually Entrench, but as the old Grecians did,
Encamps on some place something fortified by nature, as on a hill, or some
defensible ascent, or where a river may be on one hand, and a marsh on the
other, and where the place i^ defective, they must help it with Spade and
Mattock, if danger is apprehended. Or if the Foot must lodge in a Champagn,
their Wagons To Quarter in the Field.
drawn about them will be an excellent good shelter against sudden Infalls, and
this the Germans call a Wagonburg, that is a Fortification of Wagons; and it
is better than the Roman Fossa Tumultuaria, in ancient times. Where ever this
Night-leaguer chances to be, he who commands in chief, must be careful to
choose such a place as wants for neither wood, water nor foderage. An Alarmplace
should be appointed for the Horse, in case their Quarters happen to be beat up
in the night, as also a place of Rendezvous, at which the whole Army is to meet
next day, (if it be all in one Body) and at such an hour as the General shall
appoint.

The Encamping of an Army for some considerable time requires an orderly To
Encamp, and fortify for a long time.
Castrametation and Fortification, and though it be not very ordinary, yet it
has been, and may be occasioned by several accidents and emergements, such as
these: When an enemy comes unexpectedly, whose strength and designs are not
known; when a Prince or his General thinks it not fit to hazard a Battle;
Reasons for it.
when he would preserve the Country behind him, whether it belong to the Prince
himself, or to his friends, or that he has won it from his enemy. When the
Pestilence or other contagious Diseases rages so in Towns and Villages that he
dares not hazard to quarter his Army in them. When he supposes he may destroy
his enemy by temporizing, as Fabius Maximus who used to subdue his enemy more
with hunger than the sword. Or as Salust says, The greatest commendation of a
General is to gain the victory without blood: Or when ratio belli, and
sometimes, ratio status, makes him stay for more of his own forces, or those of
his friends and allies. This obliged the Great Gustavus to fortify his
Leaguers, and his Armies within them at Verben, and at Nuremburg. Or lastly,
when he is to besiege a Town, Fort, or Castle, which he conceives will not very
soon render, and may rationally expect succors and relief.

Being then there are so many, and may be more reasons for a fortified Louis de
Montgomerie's disapprobation answered.
Leagure, I cannot agree with Louis de Montgomerie, who will only allow of
Entrenched Camps in two cases, when an Army is near a considerable enemy, and
when other lodging cannot be had. And he alleges that the Roman Camps and
their Hiberna, and some of our fortified Leaguers would be only good in Arabia
the Desert, but not in a Country where Towns, Villages, and Incorporations may
be had. But besides the reasons I have given for Entrenched Camps, I shall say
to Montgomerie, that it is not improbable but many of these places where the
Romans kept both their Winter and Summer Quarters were then as Desert as Arabia
is now; and in our time it is ordinary to take in Villages, Hamlets and Castles
within the circuit of a fortified Camp; or if a fortified Town be either
behind, or on the flank of a Camp, it adds infinitely to the strength and
conveniences of it, provided there be no contagion or infectious diseases
within tha^ Town.

But let us suppose that which often falls out, that a Leaguer is to be planted
in an open field, where no Town or Village is, and then let us see, how an Army
can be conveniently quartered in it, that it be so capacious as to contain all
is ordained to be within it; and next that there be no part or place of it
redundant or useless, in regard it must be fortified, and the smaller
circumference a fortification is of, the more tenible and defensible it is, and
the fewer men will maintain it. But before a Prince or his General form his
Camp, he should be observant of such considerations as these which follow:
First, if he can choose, Some Considerations necessary before Entrenching a Camp.
he should not Encamp in low grounds, for these are unwholesome of themselves,
and will quickly be made worse. Next, if he Encamp on a hill, it should be such
a one as has a river, or water running by the foot of it, and such a water
whose stream cannot be diverted by the enemy; for a river or deep running water
does not only serve the necessities of the Camp, but defends some side or part
of it. Thirdly, he should be sure that his enemy have no fortified place or
Garrison on the side or flank of his Camp, much less behind it, which may cut
off the passes and avenues, whereby his Provisions should come. Fourthly, he
should Encamp in such a place where his Horse may not want fodder, and where
abundance of Hay, Straw, or growing Corn may be had, both to feed the Beasts,
and for the Soldiers to cover their Huts with, and to lie upon. Fifthly, if
Woods be not near him, he should lay down a way how wood may be brought to him
abundantly, for fire to the Guards, for dressing meat, for baking and washing,
for the use of the Artillery, for Pallisado's, Batteries, Platforms and
Bridges. But observe that if a great and thick Wood be contiguous, as much of
it as lies within seven or eight hundred foot of the Camp should be cut down,
and two or three Sconces or Redoubts built where the Trees stood, for
preventing ambushes, or sudden eruptions of an enemy. And after the Camp is
planted and entrenched, the Commander in chief would order Magazines for
Provisions.
strong Convoys both of Horse and Foot, for bringing all manner of Victuals,
Provisions, and Munitions to his Camp from these places where he has appointed
Magazines to be kept; as also he should appoint Guards to Convoy the empty
Carts, Wagons, and Horses back again, and cause his Soldiers to use the
Country people kindly and well, and not suffer them to be outraged any manner
of way, that thereby they may be encouraged to return the oftener.

The defense of the Camp consists in two things, the first is its
fortification, Defense of a Camp.
the draught whereof is the work of the Engineer, by enclosing it within and
without the Ditch with Bulwarks, Curtains, Redoubts, Sconces, half moons, and
Tenailles, all which go under the General name of Trenches, which word is only
proper for the Fortification of a Leaguer, and but borrowed for the Approaches
to besieged places. The second Defense of the Leaguer consists in its Guards,
and of these I shall speak in the next Chapter. The subject of this is the
orderly disposing and giving a due proportion of ground to every Regiment,
Troop and Company of Horse and Foot, whereon to pitch their Tents, or What
Castrametation is.
build their Huts, to the Generals Tents, to all the General Officers, to the
Train of Artillery, for the Proviant-master and Proviant, to the Waggon-master
and Wagons, and finally to all that belong to the Army, from the highest to
the lowest; and this is called Castrametation, a Latin word which signifies
the Measuring the Camp, for the ground must be proportionably given out by an
equal measure, and the doing it is the proper work of the Quartermaster
General.

This Officer knowing the Generals pleasure, is to give the several Regiments A
Quartermaster General.
and Brigades their Towns, Villages and Hamlets for their Quarters; nor must
any of them offer to take any other than those that are assigned to them by
him, and therefore when the Army is to be quartered, though but for one night,
the Regiment Quarter Masters of the whole Army are bound to wait upon him and
receive his directions; and if they be to Encamp in such a Leaguer as that we
now speak of, it is he who measures out to every Regiment its proportion of
ground, as shall be presently declared. It is he likewise who has the
inspection of the old Fortifications, and the directing new ones, and for this
reason the Engineers are properly under him, but he is to see the working and
finishing of these Fortifications. He has frequently a Lieutenant or D^puty
under His Office and Duties.
him. His Office is very honorable, for by it he sits in all Courts and
Councils of War. He should be an understanding person, and a good
Mathematician. The oldest Colonel of the Swedish Army used to be General
Quartermaster, but that custom is worn out long ago.

The Quartermaster of the General Staff is only needful at the Headquarter,
Quartermaster of the General Staff.
and when he knows from the Quartermaster General, where that is, he goes
thither with the force Troops, and makes the Billets ready, choosing out the
best houses for the General, and then divides the rest among the general
Officers, according to the quality of the charges they have; This Officer has
often a list (signed by the General) of the names of many others besides
General Officers, who are to be lodged at the Headquarter, and these are often
Colonels of foot, but more commonly some reformed Officers, Colonels,
Lieutenant Colonels, and Majors, and others also, who have served the State or
Prince before, and wait on the Commander in Chief for employment. But many
times, it falls out, that there are not houses at the Headquarter to serve the
half of the General Officers; and in that case, this Officer is to divide all
the Barns, Stables, Yards, Enclosures, and Hedges, as equally and
proportionably, as he can, for in quartering, no man has power to appropriate
a piece of ground to himself. In such a Camp as we are now to describe, this
Quartermaster divides the ground given by the General Quartermaster to the
General Officers according to that length and Breadth, that is allotted to
every one of them, and that is more or less according as the person is of
higher or lower quality.

The greater an Army is, the stricter and better order it should keep in
encamping; for unless it be well looked to, multitudes breed confusion. Those
numerous Armies we read of under the Assyrian and Persian Monarchs, had no
doubt the Art of encamping; but much more, I think, are we obliged to believe,
that Moses, Joshuah, and other Great Captains of the Israelites, in The
Israelites excellent Castrametators ^
their forty years wanderings in the Arabian Wilderness, had the art of
castrametation in its perfection, which I conceive was derived either by
written directions or Tradition, from one Generation of that people to another,
and so made the quartering of those vast Armies we read of in holy writ led out
to Battle by the Kings of Israel and Judah, easy to them. Tamberlan that
famous Tartarian King is much commended for the excellent order he kept, and
the rules he gave both for the march and Encamping that numerous Army of his
consisting of a Million of men. And I doubt not but the Turk has very good So
are the Turk.
Constitutions for the regular Castrametation of those multitudes of men, which
usually he leads after him. But though some undertake to describe both his
Politic and Military Government, yet they give us but a very general
intelligence of the last, whatever they may seem to do concerning the first.

Whether the Great Cyrus Encamped his Army as Xenophon says he did; and if he
did so, whether he had learned it from the Assyrians or the Persians, or
invented it himself, matters not much: it is enough that it is universally
thought to be excellent, and in the Modern Wars preferred to the Roman
Castrametation. The manner of his Encamping (as that Author informs us) was
shortly this: He Cyrus his manner of Encamping,
lodged himself in the midst of his Army, and in the Center of it; about him
were the Guards of his person, and his Engines of War, such as Tortoises, Rams,
and the like, as also his Magazine. Without these were his Horsemen, and about
them lodged his light armed Foot, as Slingers, Darters, and Archers, and
without all these quartered his heavy-armed Foot, who served for a wall (says
our Author) to the rest of his Army, though no doubt he had a retrenchment
(when necessary) without them.

If then a whole Army, Horse and Foot, Train of Artillery, Mag^zine of
Provisions, the whole General Staff, all the Wagons and Bagg^ge be to Encamp
Imitated in our Modern Castrametation.
in one Leaguer, according to this Pattern given us by Cyrus, he who commands
in chief should lodge in the center of the Army, and his Guards next him: about
him the General Officers, Train of Artillery, Magazine of Proviant, and
Wagons; without all these the Cavalry, whether they be Curiassiers, or
Harquebusiers; and without them the Infantry, which ought to be nearest the
Rampart, as fittest to maintain it, and soonest ready to run to the Parapet of
the Wall or Gates of the Camp, till the Horsemen have time given them to saddle
and bridle their Horses.

But before the Quartermaster General begin to measure out the Camp, it will
be fitting that the General by Trumpet and Drum make his pleasure Some
proclamations from the General,
known in these particulars: That none presume to come near the Quartermaster
General, while he is doing his Duty, but Quarter Masters, Fouriers, and a few
to serve them, lest by a multitude of spectators and gazers, he and those with
him be disturbed in the exercise of their charges. That none offer to pull up,
take away, or remove any staves or marks that are planted or fixed for
designation of Quarters, Huts, or Tents. That no Officer or Soldier presume to
take any more, or any other ground than that which is allotted to him by the
Castrametator. That no Turff be cast up within the circumference Must preceed
the castrametation.
of the Camp, for spoiling it, especially in rainy weather. That no fires be
made among the Tents and Huts, but only in those places which are allotted for
them. All these things should be intimated, or what else the present
circumstances of place, time, accidents, or emergences may require.

The Quartermaster General should have Lists given him of the numbers of every
Regiment, Troop or Company both of Horse and Foot; and because all Regiments
are not alike strong of Companies, nor all Companies alike strong Lists must be
given to the general Quartermaster.
of men, the Rolls must mention how many Troops and Companies are in each
Regiment. and how many men in each Company. A List must be given him by the
Quartermaster of the General Staff, how many General Officers are to be lodged
about the General; he must have Rolls of all the Persons, Guns, great and
small, and Wagons belonging to the Ordnance. The like he must have from the
Proviant Office. The Waggon-master General must give him a List of those
Wagons which cannot conveniently quarter besides the Regiments to And from
whom.
whom they belong, but he must not add to that number that is allowed by the
establishment of the Prince or State to whom the Army does belong.

Observe that the Quartermaster General after he has got all these Lists,
draws a platform of the figure of the whole Camp on paper, and shows it to the
General of the Army, and it being approved by him, the Quartermaster goes
about his work. Observe next, that there must be no measures in the Army but
conform to those of the Quartermaster General, whether these be feet, roods,
toises, or fathoms. Observe thirdly, that the length of all the Quarters of the
General, General Officers, Train, Proviant, Wagons, Regiments, Troops or
Companies must be equal and uniform, and this longitude is appointed by the
Castrametator with the Generals consent in this Camp of ours, the length of all
Quarters shall be, if you please, three hundred foot. Observe Observations
necessary for regular encamping.
fourthly, that the latitude or breadth of particular Quarters, is unequal, for
a Quarter is broader or narrower according to the strength or weakness of the
Troop or Company that is to lodge in it. By this you will see that all the
several Quarters of the whole Camp will be quadrangular, but not at all
aequilateral, for some of them are longer than they are broad, but in most the
breadth exceeds the length, so you may conclude them all to be of an oblong
figure. Fifthly observe, that all Quarter Masters should come provided with
four long Staves or Poles, which are to be placed at the four corners of that
oblong quadrangle ordained for that Quarter, these four Poles should have some
Colors, Flag or Ensign upon them, whereby it may be known for whom that
Quarter is appointed. Sixthly observe, that the Quarter Masters of Troops, and
Fouriers of Foot-Companies should come provided with four lesser Staves for
designing the four corners of the quadrangle ordained for each Troop or
Company; as also they should bring with them a great many lesser sticks,
branches, or twigs of Trees, whereof four must be pricked at the four corners of
every Hut, and of every part designed for Horses.

A Regular Castrametation being not frequently used seems to be a knotty piece;
but ^^rige Aures, Reader, observe what I have said before, and take heed to
what I shall say hereafter, and I hope you shall find it easy.

All these things, whereof I have spoken, being prepared, which need not take
so much time as I have spent in writing them; the Quartermaster General
measures out to the Quartermaster of the Staff, the Generals Quarter, in the
very middle and center of the Camp; and the ground that some would have
allotted for it, seems to be more than needs, that is 300 foot in length, and
600 in breadth. This is very much, and four times and one half more than the
Romans allowed to their Consuls Praetorium, which was two hundred foot square,
and so contained within its circumference 40000 foot, and that was eight
Italian miles. But if you will know how much ground is within the quarter
Quarter for the Lord General,
of our modern General, you are to multiply the length of it by its breadth,
that is 600 by 300, work and you will find the product to be 180000 foot, that
is 36000 paces, 36 Italian miles. It is too much for any General, below a
Sovereign Prince, or one of his blood: And therefore I think out of this may be
taken a Forum, or Marketplace, and a quarter for Volunteers or Strangers, and
the General will still keep enough. However a Generals quarter should be very
large, for he needs much ground for his Dining Room, Bedchamber, and
Antichamber, a Hall for his Council of War to sit in, Rooms for his
Major-Domo, his Gentlemen, Pages, Lacquies, Butlers, Cooks, Master and Grooms
of his horses, for his Provisions, for Kitchens, Cellars, and Stables, for all
his Servingmen and waiters; as also two places for those who wait for Orders,
or attend dispatches, one covered, the other uncovered. But few of our Generals
keep such a Port, unless they be Princes. This quarter should have a Ditch
about it, with a Drawbridge, and a strong Guard kept at it.

In the next place, the Castrametator measures out to the Quartermaster of For
the General Staff.
the Staff, a quadrangle of ground, within the Circumference of which are to
lodge all these General Officers, whom I have mentioned all over these
Discourses, and therefore I shall not need to name them here; all of them may
be quartered according to their places and dignities, in a place of 300 foot
long, and 400 foot broad; multiply the one by the other, you will find the
contents of it to be 120000 foot, and that is 24 Italian miles, which is ground
enough.

No sooner has the Castrametator seen four staves pricked at the four corners
of the assigned quarter, but he leaves the particular lodgings to be divided
(yet still according to his direction) to the Quartermaster of the Staff, and
goes with the Quartermaster of the Train, to whom he measures out a Quarter for
the General of the Ordnance, which shall be 300 foot long, For the General of
the Ordnance.
and 50 broad, multiply the one by the other, the Content is 15000 foot, 3
Italian miles, in which may be lodged, besides himself, such of his Officers as
he shall think fit. But in lodging the Train it should be considered, that
several Guns with necessary Ammunition, are often left behind at needful
places, and many of them must be planted on the Bulwarks, and Curtains of the
present Camp, the rest will require the less ground; and therefore the General
having already got his Quarter, all the rest of the Officers and others
belonging to the Train, whatever name, Title, and Office they may bear (whom I
particularly named in my discourse of the Train of Artillery) the place for the
Magazine of For the whole Officers, Guns and Ammunition of the Train.
Arms and Ammunition for all the pieces of Ordnance to stand on, and an empty
place where Wagons may be loaded and unloaded, and for some Streets, each of
them twenty foot broad: for all these I say, it will be enough to allow a
quadrangle of 300 foot long and 500 broad; for if you multiply the one by the
other, you will find the content of this quarter (beside that of the Master of
the Ordnance) to be 150000 foot, inde 30 Italian miles. If this be true, as
probably it is, Achilles Terduzzi is much mistaken, to require for a Train of
Artillery belonging to an Army Royal, (which himself will have to consist of
18000 Foot and 6000 Horse) the fourth part of the whole Camp; I do not find,
that the Lord Basta, the Imperial Lieutenant General in Transylvania, to whom I
conjecture, Terduzzi was principal Engineer, ever had so considerable a Train,
as required half so much ground.

To the Proviant-master General we shall allow a Quarter 300 foot long, and For
the Proviant-master General.
60 broad; the one being multiplied by the other, produces 18000 foot, some
more than three Italian miles, and one half. This will be enough for him and
all his Officers and Baggage, and for a large place for disburthening of
Wagons: for you should consider that all Provisions are brought to the Camp
either by Country Carts, Horses and Wagons, and these return so soon as they
are unloaded; or by the Horses belonging to the Baggage and Sutlers of the
Army, and these presently return to their Masters, and the Proviant it self is
instantly given out and distributed to the Army.

As to the Wagons it is to be considered that all of them that belong to the
General Officers and the Train, may get room enough at the several Quarters,
and so may most of those that belong to the Regiments of Horse and Foot, but
For the Waggon-master General and 600 Wagons.
upon all adventures the Quartermaster General shall appoint a place for 600
Wagons, and the Wagon master General and his Lieutenants, and for this use he
shall allow no less ground than 300 foot in length, and 512 in breadth for the
600 Wagons, and 300 foot in length, and ten in breadth for the Wagon master
and all his Officers; this last quarter makes 3000 foot, more than one half of
an Italian mile. To understand the quarter allowed for 600 Wagons, observe
first, that we allow no more Horses for every Wagon than two, with a Waggoner
and a Boy. Secondly, every Wagon must have 12 foot of ground to stand on in
length, and six in breadth, and every Horse four foot in breadth, and eight in
length; for I will not allow so much length for a Baggage-horse, as for a horse
for service, which is ordinarily reckoned ten. Thirdly observe, that both the
Wagons and Wagg^n horses stand in their length by the breadth of the Camp, and
in their breadth by the length of the Camp, as all Horses in Castrametation do,
and so do the Huts of the Horsemen, and Foot-souldiers, as you will see anon.
These grounds being laid down, fifty Wagons may stand by their bre^dth in 300
foot of ground, which is the length of the whole Camp, six foot being allowed
for the breadth of every one of them. Over against them fifty Wagons more, all
in one row likewise, so a hundred Wagons are quartered for their breadth,
which is the Camps length; for the length every Wagon has twelve foot, so the
two rows have 24 foot, and between them a street of twelve foot, and behind one
of them another empty place of twelve foot for fodder, and the Wagon men to
lie, though these ordinarily lie either in* or under the Wagons, these two
streets having allowance of 24 foot, and the two rows of Wagons 24 foot
likewise, the quarter appointed for a 100 Wagons takes up 48 foot of the
breadth of the Camp; multiply 48 by 6, because you have 600 Wagons, the
Product will be 288, this ground 600 Wagons must have for their breadth; for
their length is the same with all the quarters of the Camp, that is 300 foot.
We have now 1200 VVaggon-horses For 1200 Waggonhorses.
to quarter, and that must be besides the Wagons; you know we allow four foot
for the breadth of the Horse, and therefore in 300 foot, you may quarter 75
Horse, for 4 times 75 make 300. Over against these 75 more in one row, these
make 150. Behind the one of the two rows an empty place for fodder, 6 foot
broad, between the two rows a street 6 foot broad, the two streets have 12 foot
in breadth, and the two rows of Horses have 16, that is 8 foot for every row,
(and you remember 8 foot are allowed for the length of a Baggage-horse) 12
being added to 16, make 28, so many foot do two rows of Horses with two streets
take up of the breadth of the Camp; and in these two rows are contained 150
VVaggon-horses, whose whole number are 1200, 8 times 150. Multiply then 28 by
8, the Product is 224 foot, and so much ground do these 1200 VVaggon-horses
take up of the breadth. Be pleased to add these 224 foot to the 288, which is
allowed to the Wagon, the aggregate will be 512, which we allowed for the
breadth of the Quarter measured out to 600 Wagon, and 1200 VVaggon-horses,
the length allowed is the same of all other quarters 300 foot. Multiply 512 by
300, the Product is 153600, some more than thirty Italian miles, and one half,
in the superficial measure.

Our Castrametator has left the VVaggon-master General to divide
proportionably that allotted ground among his Wagon, and is gone to quarter
the Cavalry, but he finds unequal Lists, therefore he must be at the greater
trouble to give to every Regiment ground according to its strength; for as I
said before, all Regiments (even those under one Prince) are not of equal
Quarter for the Cavalry.
number of Troops, nor all Troops of equal number of men. But here we shall
suppose we are to Encamp a Regiment of eight Troops, and every Troop to consist
of a hundred Riders, comprehending in that number the Corporals and Trumpeters;
you will remember that the breadth of the Horse is measured by the length of
the quarter, and his length by the breadth of it. Observe secondly, that ten
foot are allowed for the length of a Horse, and four for his breadth. Observe
thirdly, that we allow to every Rider ten foot for the breadth, and four for
the length of his Hut. But I hope the Horseman will not be so capricious as to
think his Horse and he are laid in equal balance, because they have a like
proportion of ground allowed them, for if I cannot make a differen^e, I shall
immediately make a distance by putting a Street five foot broad between him and
his horse, and that shall be for his horses fodder.

A Troop then of a 100 Horses is quartered in two several rows, 50 in a row,
side for side, which fifty Horses take up for their breadth; and of the length
of the quarter 200 foot, to wit, four for every horse. The length of every
horse has 10 foot, every Riders Hut has 10 foot, that and a Street between
them 5 foot broad, make 25 foot, the other row of horse and riders take up the
like quantity of ground, to wit, 25 foot, these added together make 50 foot.
Quarter for a Troop of one hundred Horse.
The horses stand tail to tail (because their heads must be to their Masters
huts) and between the horses tails there is a Street 20 foot broad; add these
20 to the other 50, the aggregate is 70, and that is the breadth of a quarter
allotted to a Troop of a 100 horse. As to the length of this quarter, it is as
the rest 300 foot, whereof I told you the breadth of 50 horses took up 200. The
other 100 is thus divided, The Ritmaster has 20 foot of it for the length of
his Tent or Hut, the Lieutenant has 10, and the Cornet has 10, and between
him and the Troopers Huts there is a Street 20 foot broad, these make 60 foot;
in the length at the rear of the Troopers Huts, there is a Street 20 foot
broad, and that 20 added to 60 make 80; behind that Street the Saddler, Smith,
and Sutler have a quarter 10 foot in length, which being added to 80, make 90;
behind them there is a place for fires, and dressing meat, 10 foot long, that
being added to 90 makes 100 and so the length of a quarter for an 100 horse is
300, and the breadth 70, multiply the one by the other, the Product will be
2100 foot, which is the superficial measure of that quarter. But observe that
the Ritmaster quartering in the front takes up with his Hut all the 70 foot;
the Lieutenant and Cornet behind him share that breadth between them, and
accommodates likewise the Quartermaster, and him who assists the Cornet to
carry the Standard, whom the Germans call San Junckher, the Gentleman of the
Standard, or Colors.

Having lodged one Troop, it is easy to quarter a Regiment, and consequently a
whole Cavalry. I told you our Regiment of horse should consist of 8 Troops, and
every Troop of 100 Horsemen; if one Troop then require 70 foot in breadth, 8
must require 8 times 70, multiply then 70 by 8, the Product is 560. Some allow
no more ground to a Colonel of horse than to a Ritmaster, there may be reason
for it, if he quarter on the head of his own Troop, as ordinarily For the
Colonel, and his Staff.
Colonels did when they had but the temporary command of 3 or 5 Troops, but now
that he is absolute Colonel of 8 Troops, we allow his Captain Lieutenant to
quarter on the head of the Troop, and we give to the Colonel and his Field and
Staff Officers a Street of 70 foot broad, and 300 long; which I thus divide,
The Colonel shall have all the 70 in breadth, and 40 in length behind him, the
Street 20 foot broad, which traverseth the whole Regiment, then there shall be
200 foot in length, and still 70 in breadth, for all his Field and Staff
Officers, and for Stables and Wagons. In the rear of these that Street which
traverseth the rear of all the Horsemens Huts; behind that a plot of ground 10
foot long for Saddlers, Smiths, and Sutlers belonging to the Staff; and behind
that 10 foot are allowed for Kitchins and fire, add th^se together, they make
300 foot in length, and 70 in breadth. Now the 8 Troops, and the quarter for
the Colonel and his Staff, being all of equal length and breadth, must have 8
Intervals, for every one of which must be allowed 20 foot of breadth; so for
all the eight 160 foot. The 8 Troops you remember had for their latitude 560,
the Colonel 70, these added make 630, add for the Intervals The latitude^
latitude of the whole Quarter.
160, the aggregate is 790, for the breadth of a Regiment of Horse of 8 Troops,
the length 300. If you would know the superficial measure of this quarter for a
Regiment of 8 Troops ^^ Horse, multiply 790 by 300, and if I have operated
right, the Product is 237000 foot, 47 miles, and near one half.

The Castrametator has now leisure to measure out ground to the Infantry, and
he finds the same difficulty as he did in the Cavalry, that is, the inequality
of the Companies in each Regiment, and the numbers of men in each Company. But
having done his business on paper at home, he will easily give to each Quarter
for the Infantry.
Regiment Quartermaster his due proportion of ground in the Field. But since
all along in these Discourses, I have spoke of a Foot-regiment consisting of
ten Companies, and of a Company consisting of a hundred men, we shall in this
place quarter them according to that number. And first we shall lodge a Company
according to the pattern whereof the rest shall be soon accommodated. In the
number of the hundred I comprehend Caporal, Lancespesatas, Appointes, Gentlemen
of the Company, and common Soldiers. Those who shall be quartered as Officers,
are Captain, Lieutenant, Ensign-bearer, two Sergeants, Clerk, Fourier, Furer of
the Colors, Captain of Arms, and two Drummers, for these last are almost
universally enrolled with the Officers, I know not why.

The custom was in most places for the Captain, Lieutenant, and Ensign to lodge
all three in the Van or front of the Company, and this is continued yet in many
places. But truly, since a Lieutenant will needs be the second Officer of the
Company, I think he should quarter as he marches, and that is in the rear.
Henry of Nassau Prince of Orange, altered the custom, and ordered them all
three to pitch their Tents in the rear of the Company, at least the Captain,
for two reasons, that the Soldiers might more readily get to their place of
Arms, and not be hindered with the huts or cords of their Officers Tents; and
next that by their presence in the rear, debates and brawls betwixt Soldiers
and Sutl^rs should either be prevented, or quickly voided. But let us in this
place follow the old way, (which may soon be altered according to emergents, or
the Generals pleasure) and quarter our Foot Company in the Field thus:

The Captain being in the front, shall have for his Tents 40 foot in length,
and 24 in breadth; and observe that 24 foot is all the breadth that is allowed
to the whole Company. Behind the Captains lodgings, on the right hand, the
Lieutenant has 10 foot of length, and 8 in breadth allowed him for his
quarter, and on the left hand the Ensign has as much. Observe that behind the
Captains Tents beg^ns a Street which runs to the rear of the whole Company, and
divides the Lieutenant and Ensigns quarters, and the two rows of Huts For a
Company of 100 men.
equally, and this Street is 8 foot broad; this Street is a direct one, and
goes the length of the quarter; but there is another which is a traverse
Street, and goes through the latitude of the Company, and it is 10 foot broad,
it begins behind the Lieutenant and Ensigns Huts, and traverseth the whole
breadth of the Regiment when the Companies are joined together. Observe that
all the Huts of the Company are 8 foot broad, except the Captains, and
therefore hereafter I shall only speak of the length of the Huts. Behind that
traverse Street of 10 foot broad in a direct line, under the Lieutenant the
oldest Sergeant has his Hut, for which are allowed 8 foot in length, below him
the Fourier has 6 foot long, below whom the Clerk has likewise 6 foot, and
below the Clerk the oldest Drummer shall have 5 foot in length. Add these
together, you will find that these four, Sergeant, Fourier, Clerk, and Drummer
have 25 foot allowed for their Huts in length, and 8 for the breadth, as all
the Soldiers have. Behind the oldest Drummer in that same row are 50 huts for
50 Soldiers, for each whereof are allowed three foot and one half. Multiply
then 50 Allowance of ground for Huts.
by 3^, and the Product will be 175, add 175 to 25, which the four Officers
have, the aggregate is 200, and so many foot of ground does the huts of that
row beginning at the traverse Street take up in length. Over against the oldest
Sergeant, in a parallel line, and directly under the Ensign, is the second
Sergeant lodged; below him the Captain of Arms, under him the Furer, and below
the Furer the second Tambour, and under him the other fifty huts for the other
fifty Soldiers all in one row; all these having a proportion of ground allowed
equal to the first row on the right hand. In the rear of the Soldiers huts
there must be a Street 20 foot broad for Wagons and Carts to pass and repass,
and this Street traverseth the whole breadth of both Company and Regiment, as
the other of 10 foot does at the Van of the Inferior Officers huts. Next to
this traverse Street in the rear there is a place for Wagons and Sutlers 10
foot long, and behind that there is another place 10 foot long likewise, for
fires and dressing meat, for there must be no fire among the huts, and both
these places enjoy the full breadth of the Company, which is 24 foot. Be
pleased then to remember that 40 foot in length are allowed for the Captain, 10
for the Lieutenant, 10 for the first traverse Street, 200 for the rows of under
Officers and Soldiers huts, 20 for the second traverse Street, 10 for Sutlers*
and 10 for fire, add these together, the aggregate will be 300, which is the
length of the quarter. Remember also that 8 foot are allowed for the breadth of
all Officers and common Soldiers huts, except the Captains. Then two rows of
huts require 16 foot in breadth, between these rows there must be a direct
Street running from the back of the Captains Tent to the rear, as I told you
before, and it is 8 foot broad, add 8 to 16, makes 24, and so much ground the
Captains Length and breadth of a Foot companies quarter.
Tents possesses, and it is the breadth of the Companies quarter. Multiply the
length by the breadth, that is, 300 by 24, the Product is 7200 foot, near one
Italian mile and a half within the Circumference of this Companies quarter.

Let us in the next place quarter the Colonel with his Field and Staff
Officers, which shall be done thus: There shall be a place in the middle of the
Regiment, which shall be 300 foot long, and 64 broad; on the right hand of this
place five Companies shall lodge, and on the left hand of it the other five. Of
this place Quarter for the Staff of a Foot Regiment.
the whole breadth, to wit, 64 foot, shall be allowed to the Colonels Lodgings,
and 50 foot in length, by which means he shall have all the Tents and Huts of
his Captains, Lieutenants and Ensigns in a parallel line with his own. Be^ind
the Colonels Lodgings is that Street whereof I spoke before, of 10 foot broad,
which traverseth the breadth of the whole Regiment, and in which most
Castrametators, will have the Colors and Arms to stand, but Tents and huts
before that Street will make it in my judgment very improper for that use.
Below that Street there shall be a plot of ground 40 foot in length, and 64
broad, to be equally divided between the Lieutenant Colonel and Major, if they
do not quarter besides their Companies, and behind them a Street 20 foot broad.
Below that Street shall be a quarter 50 foot long, and 64 broad, to be divided
among the Minister, Quartermaster, Auditor, Secretary, Surgeon, and
Marshal; and below them the third Street 20 foot broad. Next to that shall be a
place 70 foot long, and 64 broad, for Wagons and Baggage; behind that the
fourth Street of 20 foot broad, which is at the rear of all the Soldiers huts,
and traverseth the breadth of the whole Regiment. Next to that are the two
places formerly mentioned, for Sutlers and fire, one behind the other, each 10
foot long, and 64 broad. If you then remember that the length of the Colonels
Lodgings is 50 foot, 10 for a Street, 40 for the Lieutenant Colonel and Major,
20 for a second Street, 50 for the Staff-Officers, and 20 for a third Street,
70 for Wagons, 20 for the fourth Street, and 20 for Sutlers and fires* It Is
length and breadth.
when you add these numbers together, the aggregate will be 300, which is the
length of this quarter, as it is of all other quarters of our Camp, the breadth
of this particular one being 64 foot, as I told you before.

In the quartering the ten Companies of the Regiment, five on the Colonels
right hand, and five on his left, respect would be had to the dignity,
antiquity, and precedence of the Captains; my own opinion is, they should be
quartered according to that order wherein they were marshaled in the field, and
what that is you may find in the Eleventh Chapter.

Let us then take a view of the whole breadth of this Regiments quarter, for
doing whereof we must first consider that the ten Companies make ten distinct
Bodies, and the quarter for the Colonel and his Staff the eleventh. Eleven
Bodies must have ten Intervals, for every one whereof we shall allow 16 foot,
that one Wagon may pass by another: multiply then 10 by 16, the aggregate is
160; this much is allowed for the ten Intervals, every Company has 24 foot for
its Length and breadth of a Regiment of Foots quarter.
breadth; inde for 10 Companies, 240 foot, the Colonel and Staff has 64, add
160 to 240, and both these to 64, the aggregate is 464, and that is the
latitude of a Regiment of Foots quarter. If you would know the superficial
measure of this quarter, multiply the length of it, which is 300 foot, by the
breadth of it, which is 464 foot, the Product will prove to be 139200 foot,
near ^ts Superfici^l measure.
28 Italian miles.

By what has been said, it will be easy to know how any Troop, Company, or
Regiment either of Horse or Foot, of what strength soever, may be quartered* as
if the Colonels Company be stronger by fifty men, than the rest, as in some
places they be, it may have a row of Huts more than others have. In the Low
Country Wars, the Princes of Orange allowed four foot for the length of every
Foot-Souldiers Hut; but the Germans for most part allow but 3 whom in this
Princes of Orang^, their allowance for Soldiers huts.
point I have followed in this Castrametation. By the account o^ four foot long
for every Hut, a row of Huts for fifty men should have the allowance of 200
foot; but in our days Henry Prince of Orang^ took away 20 of that, leaving but
180, and these 20 foot he joined to the breadth of the traverse Street in the
rear of the Huts, which before was but 20, but by this addition came to be 40
foot broad, that Wagons and Provisions might have more room to go out and in,
and pass and repass. The 300 foot which I have allowed for the length of every
Companies quarter, may be abridged or enlarged as the General shall find
occasion for it; but an uniformity in the length of the whole Camp is both
decent and requisite. He who commands in chief, may order (if his affairs Two
Soldiers may qua^* in one hut.
require it) that in one row of fity Huts an hundred Soldiers shall quarter,
it will be no prejudice to them, but rather helpful, provided they have no
wives.

Between the quarters of the Foot, and the fortification of the Camp, there is
a void place of 200 foot broad, this the Ancients called Pomerium, we name it
the Alarm and Paradi^g place, or place of Arms: And though as I told you
before, many would have the Colors and Arms to stand in that S^reet which
traverseth the quarters behind the Colonels Tents, yet assuredly in time of
Alarms the Soldiers running to their Arms, and the Ensigns to their Colors,
Place of Arms.
cannot in so narrow a place but be much embaras'd; besides, they have not room
to draw up, therefore it were more fit to have the Colors fixed before the head
of the quarter in this place of Arms, and to have the P^kes of every Company
leaning on a Tree laid across other two Trees fixed in the ground, and in fair
weather the Muskets also, but in time of rain the Soldiers should carry them
into their huts; and in that case I shall advise Officers to cause the
Musketeers to draw their Ball, because when an accidental fire comes, careless
Soldiers (and how many be there of these?) will be more ready to run out of
their huts, Muskets changed with ball, dangerous in huts.
and carry their Knapsacks and Cloaks with them, than their Muskets, and these
being charged with Ball, render all endeavors to quench the fire exceeding
dangerous, if not altogether impossible, because the Powder wherewith these
Muskets are charged, being fired, sends their Bullets so extravagantly at
random on all quarters, that men know not how to shelter themselves from them;
an experience whereof I once saw in a transient Leaguer, which for that reason
I speak of, was well near burnt to the ground, and yet next day I heard of no
order given to prevent the like mischief for the future, which should have been
done.

After the Regiment Quartermasters have given the Quartermasters and Fouriers
Fouriers a^^ to mark all the several huts.
their proportions of grounds; and that the four corners of each hut are marked
with four twigs or sticks, the Soldiers that are not working at the
Fortificaon fall to and make their huts, but the Officers must see it be done
regularly, that none take more or less ground, than what is allowed them, lest
thereby they spoil the uniformity of the Quarter.

If the General can spare none of that spacious ground allowed for his
lodgings, for a Marketplace, and a quarter for Volunteers and strangers, then
the Castrametator must measure out ground for both, not far from the Proviant
Office, for none of them must be neglected. When all is done, the Quartermaster
General, or one of his Engineers, is to draw the Fortification of the Camp, all
the Lines whereof are to be marked, by making a furrow in the earth, half a
foot deep, and half a foot broad: The whole Trenches are to Soldiers are to
work at the Fortific^on o^ the Camp.
be wrought by the several Regiments of Foot, according to their numbers of
men; because the Retrenchment is for their own safety, unless the Prince
General get them to be helped by Country people or Pioneers. By what is said,
you see our* Quartermaster General should be a person of strong Intellectuals,
and well seen in the Mathematics, especially Geometry, which both
Fortification and Castrametation acknowledge to be their Mother.

For avoiding Infection, noysom and contagious Diseases, procured by the daily
killing and slaughtering Beasts in a plentiful and numerous Leaguer, it is
convenient that deep pits be dig'd, and that all that is not useful be cast
into them, about the middle of the pit there should be a thick board laid fast,
thorough which a whole should be cut, and what is cast in the pit should be let
down through that hole, and therefore a board should be laid over that hole and
then so much of the earth as was dug out of the pit, should be cast in, till
the mouth of it be made equal with the superfice of the ground, and that earth
may be taken out as often as you will, till the pit be full of these noisome
things up to the board, and then it should be closed up; and if pits be used in
this fashon, it matters not if these pits be dig'd among the huts, or in the
Streets of the Camp. The carrying these things three or four hundred foot
without the Camp, is exceedingly troublesome, and the killing the beasts so far
without exceedingly inconvenient, and of no consequence, since thereby the Air
may be Infected as well without as within the Camp, and that is all one matter.
Whether pits may not be dig'd for Soldiers to do the works of Nature in, and
some Cloth Canvas or some such thing put about it, as the Turks do; or if it be
best to continue the custom of going without the leaguer, one hundred paces,
(which should be marked by a long pole, and a wisp of Straw at the top of it)
shall not be the Subject of this Discourse: for assuredly, the d^bate of it
cannot be very savory.

Where there is no great danger of a visible enemy, a General may quarter his
Army in two distinct Bodies, Battle and Reserve, the distance between them
being 4 or 500 ordinary paces; the Foot in the middle, and the Horse on both
Wings, as the General thinks most expedient; as to these Oblong Quadrangles,
wherein are encamped several bodies, whereof I have so often spoke, you may if
you please, call them as the French do, Parks, and that properly enough: Know
likewise, that Custom has obtained, that the outward line of Fortification of
Camps that regards the Enemy without, is called Ci^cumvallation, and the inward
one toward the Besieged place, has the name of Contravallation: Whereas in
very deed and in common speech, both of them are Circumvallations; nor are they
so to be termed, in strict sense and proper language, unless use be made of
Stakes or Pallisades, which the Old Romans constantly practiced, and are called
in Latin, Valli, whereof I have spoken largely in another place.

CHAP. XXI. Of Guards, Watches, Parads, Sentinels, Rounds, and Patrovilles.
IT is to little purpose to fortify either a Camp or a Castle, unless men be
appointed to maintain the Fortification; and because men cannot watch
constantly, therefore they must watch by turns, either according to the number
of the men, that are quartered within the fortified place, or the danger the
place may be in of a near and powerful enemy; for though Guards should be kept,
and strictly kept, even when no danger seems to threaten, yet it were madness
to weary Soldiers, as much by watching, when no enemy is exp^cted, as when one
is assuredly looked for. If the Companies of Horse and Guards to be* stronger
or weaker according to the nearness of an Enemy.
Foot be full and complete, I think either in Field or Garrison, an Enemy not
being near, the fourth nights Duty is enough to keep Officers and Soldiers in
mind of their business, though I know, others think the third night easy
enough. If an Enemy be near, and have not yet made approaches, it will be to no
purpose, to weary Soldiers more than is needful, the third nights watch will
be sufficient, for it is not so much the number, as the carefulness, order, and
diligence of watches that preserves a Camp, Town, or Fort from surprizal. But
when an enemy has invested the place, and made approaches, more Sentinels are
requisite, and consequently more men ough^ to be on the guard, and this may
bring the duty to the second night, sometimes I have seen Soldiers kept on
Duty two nights together, and have only the third night allowed them to repose,
and not to go to bed or put off their clothes that third night neither, but to
lie in readiness, to run to their Posts, so soon as called upon. But when a
B^siege^ has made Galleries over the Ditches, it is ordinary for the Besieged
to lie constantly at their several Posts.

Our modern Guards are, as the ancient were, either of Horse or Foot, in the
Fields whether the Camp be Fortified or not; Foot and Horse have some Guards
appointed without the Leaguer, sometimes together, sometimes Guards of Horse.
the Horse without the Foot, who are obliged to keep Sentinels on horse back in
such places as the Major General, or Adjutant General shall appoint, and these
Guards and Sentinels are to be visited often by the Officers of the Cavalry,
who are on the watch, ^r by the Lieutenant or Major General of the Horse. These
visits are ordin(...)y called Patro^llies, or Patrovilles, to distinguish them,
I think, from the visits of the Foot Guards, which are called Rounds in
Garrison; Horsemen are seldom required to watch in the night, unless it be in
the time of a Siege, but in the day time they are obliged to ride out in
parties as strong, and as far as the Governor of the place shall think fit to
appoint, and this duty is ordinarily called, recognoscing, or beating the
streets.

Within a leaguer, the Foot keep Guards constantly, besides these outer posts
spoken of already. The Guards within are twofold, ordinary, and Foot Guard^
twofold.
extraordinary. The ordinary are those which are kept within the Fortification,
for its necessary defense; whether it be in the Bastions, Curtins, Redoubts, or
Sconces. The extraordinary are such as are kept at the General, Lieutenant
General, or other general Officers lodgings, at the Proviant, the Wagons, at
the Artillery, and Ammunition; but observe that here the Sentinels must stand
with Pikes, for being so near powder, they are not permitted to have burning
Matches, and consequently not to take Tabaco.

There are also two kinds of Sentinels, extraordinary Sentinels, and ordinary
ones. The extraordinary Sentinels are those we call forlorn, the word we
Forlorn Sentinels or perdues of Horid.
have from the Dutch, which signifies lost, the French call them perdues,
which is the same. There are of them both Horse and Foot. The first sits on
Horse back with his ordinary Arms; the Foot perdue lies on his belly, but has
Forlorn Sentinels of Foot.
neither Musket, Fusee, or Carabine, only a Sword drawn, and if he be Master of
a Dagger and a Pistol he may have them too: He is called lost, because he is
put in the most dangerous places, and nearest the Enemy; neither is he to come
back, if he be only attacked by one man; if by two, he may retire to the next
perdue, if there be any, but if a greater number than two come upon them, they
are bound to run quickly and Alarm that Guard to which they belong. In this
place, speaking of an Alarm, I wonder, why Monsieur de Gaya in the 82 page of
his Book tells us, that in Garrisons, when Alarm is beaten or sounded, all
Soldiers should first meet at their Captains houses, and from thence march to
the places appointed for them to maintain. This to me seems very strange
doctrine, unless he have assurance that an Enemy will neither enter nor
scalade, till his Soldiers first very fairly meet at their Captains lodgings,
and then march to their Posts; But by his favor, I hold it more convenient,
that the Soldiers run as fast as they can, though man by man, ^ la desbandad,
directly to the places of the Ramparts or Retrenchments ordained for them to
defend, commonly called Posts, or Alarmplaces, without taking notice of their
Captains quarters. We make it the Sergeants duty to place the Foot perdues at
these Posts appointed by the Sergeant Major; but I have known it done by the
Fur^r, or Caporal of the Gentlemen, and where such an Officer is allowed, it
seems to belong to his office, and not to the Sergeant, who has employments
enough beside. He who is to be perdue, should be a Gentleman of the Company,
whom the French call Appointe; and where these have no allowance of Pay, the
Captain should make choice of some, whom by their birth and behavior, he
conceives most fit for that employment. The Furer, or* Sergeant, is to bring
the Fo^lorn to his Post, and bring the other away with* him, he is also obliged
frequently to visit his Perdues; for very often, if they be not vigilant, they
are stolen away b^ an active Enemy. And therefore no Perdues, either of Horse
or Foot, should be entrusted with the Word, that they may not* be able to give
it to the Enemy, if they happen to be taken: A better order, in my opinion,
than that of the Romans, who entrusted their Common Soldiers with the Tessera.
Our fo^lo^n Sentinels are much used in the Field, when two Armies ly^ near
other, waiting their advantages. But they are especially made use of at Sieges
of Towns, Forts, and Castles.

The ordinary Sentinel, if he belong to the Cavalry, stands on Horseback;
Ordinary Sentinels of Horse. Of Foot.
the Footman, whether it be in Camp, Town, or Garrison, stands with his
ordinary arms. It is true, I have seen Gentlemen of Companies stand with drawn
Swords at the Chamber-doors* of Princes, when they have been visiting
Garrisons; but notwithst^nding that, all Foot Soldiers should stand without
Their Duties.
doors with their ordinary Arms, whether t^^ be Pikes or Muskets, when they are
Sentinels, and constantly at their Se^^^nel posture; neither should any of them
be permitted* to set down their Arms the whole time they are on that duty, but
if they be weary, they may shoulder their Pikes or Mu^kets, and walk to and fro
with them, and so refresh themselves; but at the approach of a Commissionated
Officer, they are immediately to return to their Sentinelposture, yet they are
never suffered to set their Arms out of their hands. But this is too much
connived at by Officers, who thereby show either their negligence or ignorance,
in not heeding or not knowing what belongs to a Sentinel; whose first duty is
to have one of his hands at his Arms, when either they are ordered or
shouldered, and both hands at his Mu^ket, when he is at his Sentinel-posture:
Nor do I know a more proper punishment for this neglect, than to make that
Soldier who would not carry his own* Musket one hour, carry both it, and three
Muskets more belonging to his Comrades upon bot^ his Shoulders two hours. As
for the time, how long an ordinary Sentinel should stand, whether on Horse or
Foot, I know no reason why he should be on that duty longer than one hour, for
he may grow either weary or sleepy, or both, and in that time he would be
sometimes visited by his Caporal, or Lancespesate: And in a rigid frosty winter
night, he should not be permitted to stand longer than half an hour at one
bout. In Garrisons and Fortified Camps, Sentinels of Foot should be provided
with Frocks and Hoods, to keep them from rain, snow and cold, which every one
of them is to deliver to him who relieves him. There should also be little
Wooden houses (which commonly are called Sentinel houses) built for them on the
Walls of Towns, Castles, and Camps, three on every Bastion, and two on every
Curtain.

Those who stand Sentinels at Commanders and Officers doors in Towns or
Sentinels at Officers doors.
Leaguers, need not, and I think, should not challenge any man that passes,
unless he offer to come within his Arms; and if Officers would advert to this,
neither themselves or others would be so much troubled with the needless
vociferations and clamours of those senseless Sentinels, who stand at their
doors. Sentinels on Walls.
A Sentinel on a Wall in the night time should challenge all who come near him,
if they be Rounds, he is to permit them to pass; if not, or that he knows not
what they are, he is bound to fire upon them, and cry Alarm; upon which, not
only the guards, but all within either Garrison or Camp, either do or should
run in Arms to their several Posts. Those who stand at Sentinels at corpse de
guards.
the door and Arms of the several Corpse de guards, ought indeed in the night
time to challenge all who come near them, but should hinder none to pass about
their affairs, unless they misdemean themselves by word or deed, but if those
who come near them be Rounds, or call themselves so, the Sentinel is to stop
them, requiring them to stand, and immediately to call out his Caporal; and if
those persons, who call themselves Rounds, will not stand, after they have been
twice or thrice required so to do, the Sentinel may lawfully fire upon them, or
push at them with his Pike, and be free from any mischief that is done them, as
being procured by either their own wickedness, or folly, or both.

The duty of a Sentinel to a Round, should lead me to speak of Rounds; but
before Rounds be appointed to go, the Watch must be set, whereof the Round is
an appendix or part. In setting Watches, and appointing Guards, Four
particulars to be observed in all Watches.
observe shortly four things. The time when, the place where, the number how
many, and the persons who should visit these Watches or Guards. A Guard that is
vigilant preserves those who sleep, and Sentinels are the Guards of that Guard.

All these four particulars, are absolutely to be determined by him who
commands in chief, and as his pleasure should overruled in them all, so time,
place, occasion, emergence, and the pleasure of the Prince or State whom he
serves, should overruled him. To keep too many on Watch, will in a short time
render those who watch, incapable to Watch at all; to keep too few, encourages
your enemy to attempt that, from which a well ordered and sufficiently strong
Guard would deter him. But by all Soldiers, though there be no danger to be
imagined, a Watch should be kept; neither can a command issue from a Prince,
that can or should hinder an Officer to keep Watch, though their orders may be
such, as may render men incapable both to do the main business about which they
are sent, and keep any considerable Watch, or any Watch at all. But to our four
particulars observable in Watches, I say,

The time when the Guards should be set in Armies (for I shall speak of The
time (...) when.
Watches in Garrisons afterward) if they be on a March, is immediately after a
whole Army, or a part of it is quartered, whether that be in Towns, Villages,
or the Field: The Cavalry are to send out Troops and Parties to recognosce, and
keep outer Guards, sometimes they have Foot with them, but for most part they
watch alone, and the Foot is to set their Watches instantly after their
arrival, before any of them begin to quarter. The place where the Horsemen The
place where.
are to keep their Guards is without the quarter, further or nearer, as it
shall please the Major General, or Adjutant, to whom it belongs to appoint
those Guards. The place for the Guards of Foot, is within the quarter, or very
near to it, fortified by some Hedge or Enclosure, some Church or Church*yard,
helped with the Spade and Mat^ock. The number, how many should watch The number
how many.
either of Horse or Foot is uncertain, as that which depends on the
Intelligence a General* may have of the nearness or remoteness of an Enemy. The
persons appointed to visit these Guards are appointed by him who commands at
the The persons who visit these Guards.
Head-watch, and these visitors are called Patrovill^s and Rounds, as I
observed before. In our Modern Militia we do not follow the Grecian nor Roman
custom, in giving the office of riding Rounds only to Horsemen, for with us
those of the Cavalry ride their Patrovils, and those of the Foot either ride or
walk their Rounds; of which more anon.

I^ Fortified Camps, where Armies are to stay for some time, there is a
definite Watches in Fortified Leaguers.
hour appointed by him who commands in chief, when the Trumpet shall sound and
the Drum beat for setting the Watch. So soon as the Horsemen are conveen'd,
they are sent to their several Posts without the Camp; for the Foot there is a
place appointed where all the Guards shall meet, and* this is called the
Parading-place: Parad signifies a show, and so does Monstre. Military A
Parade, what.
men have appropriated the first to that show, Watches make before they go to
their several Posts, and the second to that show Officers and Common Soldiers
make to Muster-masters and Commissaries before they enter into Pay, or after,
when they are reviewed.

In Leaguers the Foot-Watches are twofold, first, private; these are Guards to
keep Sentinels at the Tents of the Field Officers, the Colors, Arms,
Ammunition, and Wagons. Next, public Guards, and these consist of whole How
guards march to the Parade.
Companies, one, two, or three sometimes out of a Regiment, as the duty seems
to require; these meet at the several Captains Tents or Huts, and after the
Drums have done beating the Gathering, the Captains march with their several
Companies in good order to the Parading place of the Regiment, or of the whole
Army; more ordinarily to the last, which is either a place appointed peculiarly
for it, or is the Forum, or Marketplace, near the Generals Lodging, or
Pavilion. Here they are drawn up according to the antiquity or precedence of
the Regiments to whom they belong, by either the Major General, or Adjutant
General of the Foot. At this Parade should all the Majors of the Foot be, as
also one Sergeant out of every Company, and most of the Captains of the whole
Army. The Companies being marshalled in breast, the Major or Adjutant General
calls the Majors together, to whom he imparts the several orders and directions
of the General, which may, and very often does vary every night, because they
depend on emergencies. The Majors stand in a ring on How the Orders and Word
are given to the Majors.
both hands of him, according to their dignity, the first standing on his left
hand, in whose ear he whispers the Word, and he whispers it to him who stands
on his left hand, and so successively, till the youngest Major deliver it to
the Major General: If it be returned right to him, there is no necessity to
send it about the other way, as some would have; but if the Word be not
delivered right to him, then he gives it to the Major who stands on his right
hand, and so it is re-deliver'd to him by the Major, who stands on his left
hand, not without a check to him or them, by whose inadvertency it was
mistaken. This word, for most part, is the name of a Town, a Country or a
Castle, sometimes it is the proper name of a Man, and sometimes it is a
Sentence, as it pleases him who gives it, who is still he who commands in
chief. Men may pass any Sentinel without it in the night time, but none should
pass the Corpse de guards that An abuse i^ making it common.
are on the Fortification unless they give the Word. And from the
misunderstanding of this, many gross abuses are committed, as when Servants, or
other mean persons are sent in the night time either into Camps or Towns,
concerning affairs very lawful in themselves, and have the Word given them,
that they may pass the Guards, which should not be suffered; for if the
business is necessary, and will admit of no delay, as the sending for a
Physician, Apothecary, Chyrurgion, or Minister for sick or wounded persons, in
such cases addresses should be made to him who commands over the whole Guards,
who is obliged to send a Caporal, or a Gentleman of a Company along with the
person that is sent, who should see him pass and re-pass without interruption.
When the Major General imparts his orders to the Majors, the Sergeants of the
Parade should make a ring at a good distance about them, standing with their
Halberts ordered, and this both to show with what respect orders should be
given and received, as also to hinder any to come near, and hearken to what is
said or spoken either to the Majors, or among themselves.

After the Majors have done their business with their Major General, they Where
Orders should be given by the M(...) in Fo(...)fied Camps.
should give both the orders they have received from their superiors, and
their own to the several Regiments; and many think, they should do this at
their own quarters, beside the Colors, which I think is formal enough, and may
well enough be done: but my humble opinion is, they should do it at the great
Parade, and therefore I said before, that at it there should be a Sergeant of
every Company there; and the reason I give for my opinion is this, that the
several Companies that are to be sent from that Parade to diverse places of the
Fortification, there to keep Watch, may carry the Word along with them, and so
not need to wait so long as for the Major first to go home to the quarter of
the Regiment, and then give out his Orders, and send them to the Companies that
are on duty in several Posts. And to anticipate that objection which I suppose
will be made against my opinion, that Majors are to give to the Companies All
Commissioned Officers should be present at a Parade.
the orders of the Colonels, as well as of the Major Generals; I say, that at
Parades, all Colonels, all Field and Commissionated Officers should be present,
for a Parade is the Exchange of Officers, neither should any thing excuse their
absence, but indisposition, or being on present duty, and this is incumbent for
Officers to do, wherever the Parade be, whether in Camp or Garrison; when the
Major gives orders to his Sergeants he does it in the same manner as the Major
General does to the Majors, and should have a ring of Musketeers about him, to
hinder any to approach or hearken, unless they be Commissionated Officers of
that Regiment, who may be within the ring, and may hear, but ought not to
speak, while the Major is discoursing to the Sergeants. After Orders and the
Watchword are given, every Captain marches How the Posts are divided.
to that Post that is appointed him, and that appointment is made two ways,
either as the Major General pleases, in sending Companies several nights to
several Posts, and not constantly to one; or it is done by billets, the way
thus, The names of the several Posts being writ in several Papers, they are
cast into a Hat, and are drawn by the Majors, who according to the billets they
draw, send their Captains to their Posts: And this indeed is the best way, for
it saves the Major General from suspicion of partiality; and does a more
general good than that, for it prevents Treachery, whether it be in Camp,
Garrison, Town, or Castle.

After the Watch is set, it should not be permitted to any, whether he be No
Officer or Common Soldier should go from his Guard.
Officer, or Common Soldier from the highest to the lowest, to leave his Post,
unless sickness occasion it, neither indeed should an Officer (of what quality
soever he be) by absenting himself, give example for Soldiers to desert their
Posts; those Officers who do it should be exemplarily censured, yet for most
part this piece of Discipline is neglected, which too often encourages an
Enemy to make attempts, which perhaps otherwise he would forbear. Truly, it is
a shame to hear, what excuses I have heard in more places of the World than
one, and none more ordinary, than for an Officer to say, I was no longer from
my Guard than I was taking my Dinner and Supper at my Lodging. If Officers
would dine or sup in their Corpse de guard, as they are bound to do, Soldiers
would not offer to go home to look for their meat. Officers servants should
bring their Victuals to them, and Soldiers Wives should carry their Husbands
meat to them, if they have Wives, if not, their Comrades should do it.

Watches being set, they should have Houses wherein they may shelter themselves
from rain, snow, cold, or excessive heat, and fire should be in them, even in
Summer, for kindling of Matches: These houses we ordinarily call Courts of
guard, which some do not like; but I think they are wrong, for a Corpse de
guard, what.
Corpse de guard in English signifies the Body of a guard, which may be in an
open Field or Street, or where men may sit, stand or lie, and so the Corpse de
guard cannot properly be interpreted to be a House, which I think may be well
enough called a Court of Guard. In these Houses all that watch in too hot or
cold weather, or if it rain or snow, may stay within, except Sentinels, yet Two
thirds of a Guard may be permitted to sleep.
they must not all be permitted to sleep, for a third part at least should be
still kept waking, and to that purpose they may be permitted to play, so they
make no clamor or noise; and if it be fair weather, Officers should constantly
see the third part of the Guard walking without doors. The Caporal and his
Lancespesate, or he who assists him, should not both be asleep, and seldom
should they both be within the Court of Guard, but without, either visiting the
Sentinels, or attending the Rounds, for both these Duties belong to them.

Having spoke so fully of Watches and Parades in Leaguers and Fortified Watches
in Garrisons.
Camps, there is but little to add concerning them in Garrisons, whether Towns
or Castles: In these, the Governors, and in their absence, their Deputies
appoint the time when, the places where, the number how many, and the persons
who shall keep Guards, and who shall visit them. The time when The time.
to set the Watch is ordinarily some hour in the afternoon, sooner or later,
according to the length or shortness of the day, or the pleasure of the
Governor: The Emperors Armies had a custom to do it constantly at twelve a
clock of the day. The places where, are the several Courts of Guard, one in the
Marketplace, The place.
where the Head-watch lodges, one at every Port, one at every Bastion, one at
every Half Moon, Raveline, and Horn-work, and sometimes not so many, according
as the danger is great or less. The number how many The number.
is variable, according to the Intelligence or Strength of an Enemy, or
according to the trust or distrust the Governor has of the Citizens,
Burgesses and Inhabitants. The persons to visit the Guards, are not only all
Officers of whatsoever The Visiters.
quality that are upon the Watch, but also the Gentlemen of the Companies,
Appointes, or Reformadoes. If there be more Regiments than one in a Who gives
the Orders, and how.
Garrison, the Governor either calls all the Majors to him, and gives them the
Word and other Orders, or if there be a Town Major, he gives his directions to
him, and he imparts them to the rest of the Majors, and they to their
Sergeants, in that same manner as I told you was done in a Leaguer; those that
are on the Watch, and those that are to relieve them, standing all the while in
Arms, and in great silence. After that, the Town Major divides the whole To
divide the Posts.
Watch into as many parts as there are several Posts, and sends them thither,
either by his own command, or by billets: These Posts are of greater and lesser
concern, and accordingly have more or fewer men allotted for their defense, and
according to the number of the Soldiers, Superior and Inferior Officers are
appointed to command them, as Captains, Lieutenants, Ensigns, and Sergeants,
the Head guards being reserved for Field Officers, unless the place be
besieged, and then they may have Posts assigned them at Ports, Bastions,
Half-Moons, or Horn-works. So soon as Guards come to their several Posts, the
Officers who are to be relieved, show what duty they are to do, and where their
night and day Sentinels should stand; these being relieved, the Guard which
has watched, draws up in one body, and either marches or troops (according as
the Governor orders it) if it have Colors, to the place where they lodge; but
if it has had no Colors, it marches to their Captain or Colonels door, and
is there dismissed.

Those who visit the Guards, to see whether they and their Sentinels do their
Rounds.
duty, are called Rounds. These are ordinarily divided into Grand, and Petty
Rounds; nor do I know how to discourse better of both, than to reduce their
Questions concerning the Great Round. First.
duties to these questions which are made concerning them, and wherein many
differ in their opinions, and resolve them as well as I can. First, Whether the
G^and Round should give or receive the Word? Many are of the opinion; that
though the General himself go the Great Round, he should give the word to the
Caporal, because under the notion of trying whether all the Caporals of the
several Guards have the Word right, an Enemy giving himself out for the Captain
of the Watch, may get the Word, to the great prejudice of the Camp or Garrison.
And indeed I find it was constantly given to the Caporal by all Rounds fifty or
sixty years ago, but the other custom has now prevailed over all, except it
be with the Spaniard. But the Officer, be he who he will, that goes the Grand
Round, being known, there is no danger to give him the Word; and so any of the
two may be used, as it pleases the Prince or his General to appoint. The
second question is, Whether the Captain of Second.
the Watch be obliged to go the first Round, or if he may send Petty Rounds
before him, and go the Head round at any hour he pleases, because his main
business being to see that all the Guards be present on their Posts, the longer
he delays his coming, the better Watch will be kept, his presence being by them
all expected every hour: Yet Custom in many places, obliges the Great Round
to go before midnight, and to send Petty Rounds before him, if he go not the
first Round himself, which he may do if he please; nay, some think he should go
the first Round; but much of this, without hazard, may be left to his
discretion, who is Captain or Colonel of the Watch, unless he be limited by the
General. But if the Governor intend to go the Head Round himself, he should
acquaint him who commands the Watch with his intention; yet most Governors
choose rather to go Petty Rounds, because so they may best see how Sentinels
behave themselves, and when they come to a Corpse de guard they give the Word to
the Caporal, who knowing him, presently calls out his whole Guard in Arms, that
the Governor may see them all present; this is a duty which the Governor owes
among many others: But I shall have a fitter opportunity to speak of him in my
Discourse of Towns and Forts. The third question Third.
is, Whether this Colonel, Governor, or Captain of the Watch, may ride his
Great Round, or if he be obliged to walk on Foot? It being granted he may ride,
(as all Rounds in ancient times did) the fourth question will be, Fourth.
Whether he should receive the Word on Horseback, or if he should alight, and
either give it, or take it? I think, if he be permitted to ride, I know no
reason but he may either receive or give the Word on Horseback. The fifth
question is, Whether the Grand Round be obliged likewise to go the last Round,
Fifth.
which ordinarily is called the Morning Round? and if he do, ^ whether he
should likewise receive the Word? Inded I have seen it in some places refused,
and in some practiced; in my judgment, there is no show of reason why the
Caporal should give the Word to any Round but the Head Round, though the
General go it in person; for the receiving the Word by the Grand Round from the
Caporals, is to know, that they have the Word so right, that they cannot be
cheated with another Word by any of the Petty Rounds; there is neither
necessity or convenience to demand it again from them, and least of all for the
Morning Round to seek it, for that is the last Round, after which it is no
matter whether the Caporal have the Word right or not. Indeed, it is my
opinion, that he who commands the Watch in chief, should go more Rounds than
the Grand one, and especially the Morning Round, for then is the danger of an
Enemies infall most to be suspected, but the receiving the Word once from the
Caporals is enough in Conscience, and I think too much. But the Caporal is
still obliged to call all his Guard to their Arms, whenever he sees him who
commands the Watch in chief, let him go as many Rounds as he pleases. Our
Rounders propose a sixth question, Whether he who commands a particular Si(...).
Corpse de guard, either in Camp or Garrison, be he Captain or Lieutenant, be
obliged to give the Word to the Grand Round, or if it be enough that the
Caporals do it. To which I answer, that the Caporals having the Word right is
most necessary, because it is he who receives all the Petty Rounds, and the
Word from them: But if the Grand Round demand it from all the Officers, be they
what they will, upon all the several Posts, they are obliged to give it to him,
but this is seldom practiced. When the Caporal hears the Caporals duty to the
Grand Round.
Sentinel, who stands at the Court of Guard, bid the Round stand, and calls him
to come out, he should immediately issue with his Sword drawn, and two
Musketeers with cocked Matches attending him: The Caporal is bound to ask, What
Round? and if it be answered, The Great Round, then the Caporal calls out all
the Officers and Soldiers to their Arms, and letting the point of his Sword
fall, either gives the Great Round the Word, or takes it from him, according to
the custom of the place, and after that he waits on him, till he be past all
the Sentinels on the Walls that belong to that Corpse de guard.

Petty or common Rounds, where Guards are strong, are frequently gone, Common
Rounds.
by Lieutenants, Ensigns and Sergeants; yea, and by Captains, where all the
Watches are commanded by a Colonel, or a Lieutenant Colonel: But for most part,
Reformadoes, Appointes, and Gentlemen of the Company, do that duty, as I said
before; nor do they go these Petty Rounds when they please themselves, but when
they are directed to do it by their superiors. At their return, they inform
those who sent them, how vigilant or negligent they found Sentinels and Guards.
They are obliged at every Corpse de guard, to give the Caporal the Word, which
if they do not right, he who commands that Guard may disarm them, and detain
them Prisoners, and the two Musketeers (who ordinarily convoy them) till he
acquaint the Captain of the Watch with the whole matter. There is a question,
when a Round and Counter-round meet Question concerning them.
on the Wall, which of the two shall give the Word to the other? Some say, that
he who challenges first, should receive it; others aver, that the inferior
should give it to the superior; ard so say I, if they know one another, as a
Gentleman of a Company to a Sergeant, a Sergeant to an Ensign, and he to a
Lieutenant; but they add that equals should pass by other, without giving it at
all, but this may prove dangerous; and truly, I think the best way to take away
contests of that nature, is to send no Counter-round at all, but make all the
Rounds go one way. Neither do I think the sending many Rounds the Too many
Rounds useless, and hurtful.
safest way to keep good Watch, for Sentinels (as experience daily shows) are
more careful to take notice of Rounds who are their Friends, than of Enemies,
who are without the Walls; especially when they are sure to be complained of
and punished for neglecting to challenge the Rounds, but may easily shun to be
questioned for not challenging an Enemy who surprises them. I have known
Watches and Guards kept in better order by a few Rounds, and the Officers who
were upon Guard, their frequent visiting their own Sentinels, than when the
Ramparts and Parapets of both Camps and Garrisons, did loudly echo with
challenging, Who is there? and answering, Round; and then the reply, of either
Round go by, or Round stand; and for that very same reason which I gave you but
just now.

There go likewise Rounds from the Head Watch through the Streets of Camps and
Garrisons, and these are called Patrovils; they are sent to see Patrovils.
that no abuses, thefts, robberies, clamours, squabbles or Riots be committed;
and if they find any such, they are not to connive at the doers of them, as too
many of them do, but are to bring them to the Head Watch till they be examined
next day; and for this reason, I would not have fewer Musketeers Carabiners, or
Firelocks sent out with a Patrovil than eight or ten, because three or four
may be beat back to their Guard by some that are very insolent, with whom no
authority will prevail, but that which is armed; and indeed authority is not at
all terrible, but when she appears in Arms, for V^na sine viribus ira.

If Garrisons be kept in Towns, Forts or Castles, where Clocks are, the
Sentinel may be relieved, as the hour strikes, and so save Match; but if in the
Fields or Leaguers, where no public Clocks are, or in besieged Towns, where
ordinarily Clocks do not strike, nor Bells ring, then the Caporals are to have
allowance of Match, which they call Passelunt, whereby they regulate Passelunts.
themselves to relieve their Sentinels, when six, seven, eight, or nine Inches
of it are burnt.

In Camps and Garrisons, Drummers are to beat Taptoo at night, and in the
morning Revallie. This word Zapzu or Taptoo is High and and Low Dutch, and
Taptoo.
signifies, no more drink to be tapp'd or sold; and is not, as some fancy, to
advertize the Guards to place their Night Sentinels, but to acquaint Sutlers to
sell no more drink, and Soldiers to go home to their Lodgings; and who is
found out of their quarters after it, ought to be punished. It should be ^eat
constantly at one hour Summer and Winter, and ten a clock at night is a proper
time for it: But By-Guards (as they are called) and Night Sentinels are to be
put to their Night Sentinels and Byguards.
Posts when daylight is well near spent, and this in Winter will be about
four, and in Summer about ten a Clock at night; neither ought the last Night
Sentinels to leave their Posts till the Dian or Revallie beat, which cannot be
done at one constant hour (as the Taptoo) for in Winter it may be eight, and in
Summer three or four in the morning; and beat it should not, till the Captain
of the Watch gives order for it, and he is not to take up his measures by
daylight, Dian, Travaille or Revallie.
but by the clearness, darkness, or mistiness of the morning, the Night
Sentinels being to continue on their duty, till they can discover all the
Fields about them: When by order of the Colonel or Captain of the Watch, the
Dian is beaten at the Head Watch, all the Drummers of the rest of the Guards
ought immediately to beat, and then the Night Watches and Sentinels come to
their several Guards. It is then also, that the Soldiers (who have been in
their quarters or huts all night) and either Townsmen or Country people who
are ordered to work at the Fortification either of Town or Camp, are to go to
their work; and therefore this beating of the Drum in the morning, I think, is
more properly called Travaille than Revallie.

CHAP. XXII. Of things previous to a Battle, of a Battle it self, and of things
after a Battle.
OF all Martial Acts, to fight a Battle well, and gain the Victory, is of the
highest importance, and makes the Prince or his General most renowned: It is
this, (and neither Retreats nor taking Towns, though both these show the
qualifications of an excellent Captain) that crowns them with Laurel: By the
winning of Battles, sometimes one, sometimes more Kingdoms are gained by one
party, and lost by another. Let us then take a view of those things that should
be adverted to, before so great a hazard be made. Most men are of opinion, that
he who has the conduct of an Army should never Generals should not be forc^d
to fight, if they can choose.
suffer himself to be forced to fight: I say so too, if he can help it, and
what is the meaning of this, but that his Intelligence should be so good, that
if he intend not to fight, he should either quickly get himself out of the way,
or strongly entrench his Army in a place where he cannot want provisions. But
when he has done either of the two, he may be forced to fight, for who can
save his Army without fighting, if his Enemy storms his Retrenchment, or in his
Retreat pursues him fiercely and powerfully? To force an Enemy to fight, To
force an Enemy to Battle succeeds sometimes well.
has a doubtful event, for many times it succeeds well, as it did with
Alexander at Arbela against Darius, with Scipio against Hannibal at Zama, with
his Brother against Antiochus in Asia, with Charles the Fifth against the King
of France at Pavia, and Gustavus his Army against Wallenstein at Lutsen. Yet
peruse History, you will find that many more have lost, than ever gained by it,
take a few instances: Edward, the Black Prince, was forced to fight at
Poi^tiers, so was Henry the Fifth* of England, at Agencourt, yet both gained
glorious Victories: Harold, when he might have protracted the War, being Master
of all England, forced William of Normandy to fight, and thereby lost both his
Crown and his life: Edward the Second, of England, forced Robert Bruce,
Sometimes very ill.
King of Scotland, to fight at Bannockburne, but lost the honor of the day,
and most of his numerous Army: Julius Caesar made himself constantly master of
his own diet, either by Entrenching or Retiring, so that he was never forced to
fight, but when he pleased: But when he forced Pompey, he tried both Fortunes.
At Dirrhachium he was beaten off with loss, and was glad to retire, which
indeed he did with admirable Prudence and Courage: At Pharsalia he braved the
same Pompey to Battle, which so soon as he accepted, Caesar got the Victory.
Yet it seems most agreeable to reason, that men should fight well, when they
are forced to fight, Despair whetting their Courage; and for this reason many
Captains take away all means of escape from their own Armies, to make them
sensible their safety is in their hands, and not in their feet, and withal,
they leave an open way for their Enemy to run away; and hence is the common
Maxim in War, That a Bridge of Gold should be made for a Flying A Golden
Bridge.
Enemy.

Before a Battle it is fit to view an Enemies countenance, and try his Courage,
by frequent Skirmishes, and these very often (each Army sending help to their own
parties) draw on a Battle insensibly. Good Intelligence (if possible)
Intelligence.
should be had of his numbers of Horse, Foot, and Artillery, and in which of
these his greatest strength lies; but I will repeat nothing in this place of
what I have said in my Discourse of Intelligence. In the next place our General
should view (if he have time and opportunity for it) the situation of the Field
Situation of the Field.
where both his own, and his Enemies Army are to fight, that accordingly he may
either lay ambushes, or shun them: This was one of Hannibal's Masterpieces: he
should take notice how the Wind blows, that accordingly by the The Wind.
ordering his Batallions, he may take the advantage of it. He should cast up
his account, how the Sun will shine (if it be a fair day) at such hours, when
he The Sun.
conceives the fight will begin, that thereby he may o^der his affairs. If his
Intelligence be good within his Enemies Army, he should endeavor to stir up
jealousies, divisions, and dissentions in it, and in the time of these, if his
To make an Enemy jealous.
Friends give him the sign, fall upon him. After his Army is marshalled, if he
have ti^e, he should ride along the Front of all his Brigades, and by short
Speeches, Courageous looks and gestures, and with Promises of noble Rewards
Harangues.
he should inflame the Spirits of his Soldiers with a desire to fight, and
withal, he should assure them, that the honor of their Prince, and their own
safety, depends only on their courage and gallant behavior, all hopes of
Retreat being taken away. But this commendable custom of haranguing Armies by
Generals is much worn out in our late Wars; and I shrewdly suspect most of
those Orations we read are the fine fictions of Historians, who are better at
that, than the describing the manner how Generals marshalled their Armies. If a
General be strong in Cavalry, he should shun fighting in a strait or close
Country; if his Infantry be numerous, he should shun Heaths and Champaigns;
yet it is but seldom in his power (though sometimes it be) to choose either the
one or the other. He should advise well with the Master of The planting the
Ordnance.
the Ordnance, how to plant his Artillery, whether on the Flanks, in the great
Intervals, or upon some height and ascent, whether that be before or behind
the Army, or if his train be great in all these places; this should be done
before the beginning of the fight, that accordingly Batteries and Beds may be
readily made, and the Gunners ready to fire when they are commanded. Our Army
being marshalled either in one, two, or three Bodies, as our General's own
reason and experience will direct him, or the ground permit; of which I have
spoken in the seventeenth Chapter. All these things being done, the Word and
the Sign should be given, and these are quickly carried through the Army by the
Major Generals and the Adjutants. At suce a time the Word The Word.
is ordinarily a Sentence, (for Soldiers are no Grammarians) as, God with us,
For God and the King, Our trust is in God, and Vivat such a Prince, and the
like. The Sign may be a Handkerchief on the Hat, or a piece of Linen The Sign.
on the right or left arm, a twig of a Birch, an Elm, an Oak, or a Sycamore,
or it may be a Fur, or what else the Prince or his General pleases. The Word
and Sign are given both to Officers, Common Troopers and Soldiers; and
sometimes they are altered in the time of Battle, if there be any ground or
Both many times altered.
suspicion that the Enemy has got them, or any of them. I remember, when the
I^perialists had lost the Battle at Oldendorpe in Germany, in the year 1633.
the Prisoners (who were all Roman Catholics) pretended they had been beaten by
the just Judgment and Revenge of the Blessed Virgin, in regard, before the
Battle began, the Word was Sancta Maria, and in the time of the Fight, it was
changed (for the reason I spoke of) to Viva Ferdinando.

Being ready to advance to the Charge, the General takes his place, having The
Battle.
assigned before, a Station to all his General Officers of the Field. Many have
reason enough to think that the General himself should stand in the middle of
the Infantry of the Battle, where he uses to march, but that is not constantly
practiced, yea, and but seldom in our late Wars; for many times he A Generals
station in time of it,
who commands in chief takes his station in the right Wing of the Cavalry; so
did the Great King of Sweden at the first Battle of Leipsick, and so he did at
Lutsen likewise: So did Count Tili at that same Battle at Leipsick, and so did
Banier at Woodstock. I told you formerly in my discourse of marshalling Armies,
That Charles the Fifth intending to fight Sultan Solomon at Vienna, drew up all
his Cavalry in the two great Intervals which his three great Batallions of Foot
made, fifteen thousand Horse were in each of the two Bodies, and in that on the
right hand stood the Emperor himself, and with that on the left, his Brother,
King Ferdinand. Nor was, nor is, this custom of a Generals standing in the
right Wing of the Horse, or between it and the Infantry, a new thing, the Roman
Consuls using it frequently, when two of them joined together. Sometimes in our
late Wars, when the Army was marshalled in Battle Should be where he pleases.
and Reserve, five General persons have commanded in five several places, as
thus: In the Right Wing the Commander in chief; in the Body of the Infantry,
which makes the Battle, he who has the command next to the General; in the
Left Wing stood the third person in dignity; in the Right of the Reserve, the
fourth; and in the Left hand of it, the fifth. So the Suedish Generals ordered
their business at Woodstock, where two of their Armies were joined against an
Imperial and a Saxish Army. Banier the first Felt-Marshal, commanded the Right
Wing of the Cavalry; Leslie the second Felt-Marshal, commanded the Battle of
the Avant-guard; Lieutenant General King the Left Wing of the Horse, Lieutenant
General Vitsdrun the Right hand of the Reserve, and Major General Ruthven the
Left. But in ancient times a General of an Army chose to stand where he
pleased, and where he thought his presence could be most steadable: so Pompey
made his station in the Right Wing of his Army at Pharsalia; which Caesar
observing, chose to stand on the Left Wing of his, that he might be opposite to
his Grand Competitor. And I know nothing can tie a General in our times to take
a station, or no station to himself, but as he pleases. For my own part, I
think, he should tie himself to no particular place, but should ride where he
sees or hears the greatest danger to be. Indeed, he ought to appoint particular
stations to all his general Field-Officers, from which they should not budge
upon any pretense whatsoever, without express command from the Commander in
chief, and these places should be given them, according to the honor and
precedence they enjoy by their several charges. As let us suppose he has under
him a Lieutenant General of the whole Army, a General and Major General of the
Horse, and a General and Major General of the Foot; he may place his Lieutenant
General Stations of the general Field-Officers.
on the Right Wing of the Avant-guard, the General of the Cavalry on the Left,
and the General of the Foot in the Battle, the Major General of the Horse on
the Right Wing of the Reserve, and the Major General of the Foot on the Left:
And keep himself free from any one station, to ride with his Adjutants and
Guards, where he thinks his presence is most necessary, and shortly to be an
Ubiquitary, that being restricted to no place, he may be every A General an
Ubiquitary.
where. If he have more General Field Officers than these just now mentioned,
he may place three more, one on the left hand of the Right Wing, the second on
the Left hand of the Left Wing, and the third on the left hand of the Battle.

Before the Battle begin, there use to be fore-parties of both Horse and
Forlorn Hopes.
Foot sent out to skirmish, these are called Forlorn Hopes, and Enfans Perdues:
Those of the Foot should advance one hundred paces before the Body; those of
the Horse further. But I find, at the Battles fought both at Dreux and St.
Dennis, between the Protestants and Roman Catholics of France, none of those
Forlorn Hopes were made use of at all, and as few were used at Lutsen, where
Gustavus Adolphus lost his life.

When an Enemy is marshalling his Army, your Artillery should incessantly To
advance on an Enemy.
play upon him, to hinder him all you may to order his affairs; and if your
Battle be already marshalled, under the shelter of your Ordnance, you should
advance, and take your advantage of him, before his Batallions or Squadrons be
drawn up; but in so good order, that the Scene be not changed, that by your
precipitation you give not him an opportunity to take advantage of you. Your
advance on an Enemy, in what posture soever he be, should be with a constant,
firm, and steady pace; the Musketeers (whether they be on the Flanks, or
interlin'd with either the Horse or the Pikes) firing all the while; but when
you come within Pistol-shot, you should double your pace, till your Pikes
closely serr'd together, charge these, whether Horse or Foot, whom they find
before them. It is true, the business very often comes not to push of Pike, but
it has* and may come often to it, and then Pike-men are very serviceable.

If a misfortune fall out, that a Brigade, Regiment, or other part of an Army
be beat, or begin to run and quit the Field, this should be concealed from the
rest of the Army; and the Soldiers told that the Enemy in other places is
beaten, and if they fight but a little, the Victory will be instantly theirs. I
shall not speak here of what advantage a large Front is, having done it so
often before; but if a General perceive that the business may be quickly
decided, To marshal the Foot in three Rank^.
I think he should double the Front of his Foot, and make but three Ranks,
where formerly they were six, and so being able to out-wing his Enemy, he may
fall on his Flank; for at no extraordinary march an Army may be brought to push
of Pike, before three Ranks of Musketeers have fired successively, if they do
not begin to fire till they be within distance less than Musket Shot, and after
they have given their three Volleys, then they may give the fourth (which will
signify as much, if not more, than all the three) by kneeling, stooping, and
standing; whereof I have spoke in the eleventh and twelfth Chapters.

When any Regiment or Brigade runs, or offers to quit the Field, the Reserve
behind should be ordered immediately to advance, and encounter the Victorious
Enemy, who will hardly be able to withstand that fresh charge, for it may be
almost received as a Maxim, That a Troop, Regiment or Brigade, A good Rule,
but not Infallible.
how strong soever it be, which has fought with and beaten that Body of equal
number that stood against it, may be easily routed by a Troop, Regiment, or
Brigade that has not fought, though far inferior in number. If any part of an
Army get the Victory of those who stand against it, he who commands that part,
ought to send some Troops in pursuit of the routed Enemy, and Not to fall on
the Flank of an Enemy a great neglect.
with the rest fall on the Flank of that Batallion which stands next him, and
yet keeps ground. The neglect of this duty lost the famous General, Count Tili,
the Battle of Leipsick, for himself being on the Right hand of the Imperial
Army, beat the Duke of Saxe, and his Army out of the Field, whom Tili hotly
pursuing, did not fall on the Left Flank of the Swedish Army, left naked
Inflanced.
by the flight of the Saxons: But at that same time the King of Sweden (who was
on the Right hand of his own Army) had routed Count Pappenheim, who The doing
it contributes to the Victory.
commanded the Left Wing of the Imperialists; upon which that martial King did
not fail to charge the Flank of the Imperial Battle, which was left naked by
Pappenheim's Flight; and this helped to procure the Victory to the Sweed. As I
told you in another place, Banier's Right Wing was well near beaten at
Woodstock, nor did the Reserve come so soon to his succors. About that same
Instanced.
time, Lieutenant General King had routed the Right Wing of the Imperial Army,
and with it bore down the Right hand of their Reserve, and ^^ll on the Right
Flank of their Battle (which yet disputed their ground with Felt-Marshal
Leslie) who thereupon cast down their Arms, and yielded the Victory to the
Swedes. And the mentioning this Victory puts me in mind to advertize all
Officers of Foot not to teach their Musketeers to neglect the use of their
Rammers, a lesson too often taught and practiced; for at this Bartel I speak
of, the Imperial Foot were on a Hill, up which Leslie advanced with his
Infantry, but neither his, nor the Imperial Musketers made use of Rammers, only
(as the common custom is) when they charged with Ball, they knocked the Buts
of their Muskets at their Right foot, by which means most of the Bullets of the
Imperial and Saxish Fire-men fell out at the mouths of their Musket, when they
presented them down the Hill upon the Sweeds; whose Bullets could not run that
fortune being presented upward: And for this reason it was observed that few of
the Sweedish Foot fell.

When a Reserve, or a part of it, advances, those who fled have a fair
opportunity to rally, and in a short time to second the Reserve; and though To
rally.
rallying at so near a distance is not frequently seen, yet it is not banished
out of the Modern Wars, or Armies. At Dreux both Armies rallied twice or thrice
with various success, the Generals of both Armies being both made Prisoners.
And at Lutsen both Armies rallied often (for they fought from morning till
night) most of the Imperial Cannon being twice taken, was as often retaken. Fresh
succors in time of Battle discourage an Enemy.
Some Great Captains have thought it fit in time of Battle, to make a show of
their Waggon-men, Carters and Baggage-men at a distance, as if they were
succors newly arrived; and certainly nothing terrifies an Army more in time of
equal sight, than an unexpected Enemy; as Robert Duke of Normandy's fortunate
arrival in the time of Battle between Godfrey of Bouill^n, and Instance.
the Saracens, in the Holy Land, delivered the Victory to the Christians. But
these feigned Musters of Baggage-men and Carriage-horses, produce not always
False shows sometimes happy,
the wished effects. Sulpitius, a Roman Dictator, being to fight with the
Gauls, ordered all that attended the Baggage of his Army to mount upon Mules
and Sumpter-Horses, and hide themselves in some near Hills and Woods, and in
the time of fight to make a show as if they would cut off the Gauls, pass to
their Camp, which the Muleteers doing upon a sign from the Dictator, the Gauls
immediately fled. Such a Stratagein did King Robert Bruce happily use against
Edward the Second, of England, in the Battle n^ar Sterling: But Not always.
the like being practiced by the French at Agencourt, against Henry the Fifth,
King of England, had an issue contrary to the thing intended.

It has been always, and ever will be a rule of War, Tha^ no man offer to
plunder, or look for booty, till the Enemy be totally routed, and chased No
plunder till an Enemy be totally routed.
out of the Field; but for most part it is ill observed. When Parmenio, at
Arbela, sent word to his Master Alexander, that the Perstans were fallen on the
Baggage, which was but slenderly guarded; it was well answered of that great
Prince, Let, says he, the Enemy be master of all the goods that belong to my
Army, so I over master him, for then I shall recover my own, and get his to
boot. The not observing this rule lost the Christians the Victory against the
Turk at Agria. At the Battle of Janquo in Bohemia, in the year 1644. (if I
mistake Instance^.
not) the Imperialists were well near masters of the Field; in so far that
several Brigades of the Swedes had run away, and very many of their Officers
were taken Prisoners; but they fell too soon to the plunder of the Swedish
Wagons, which Torstensone, Christina's Felt-Marshal did not offer to rescue
(though his own Lady was taken with them) but took the advantage of the Enemies
disorder, and with fresh and courageous Troops plucked the Victory out of his
hand, beat them out of the Field, recovered his Lady, all his Prisoners and
Baggage, and made himself master of all the Imperial Coaches and Wagons, took
numbers of Prisoners, and among them him who commanded in chief, the Count of
Hatsfeld.

I know not how the proposition of some will relish with our great Captains,
that some lusty strong men should be armed with Head-pieces and Corslet, and
long and large Targets, all Musket-proof; and a Rank of these serr'd together,
ordered to march before every Batallion of Pikes, and so protect them from
shot, till they be within two Pikes length of the Enemy, that they can make use
of their own Weapons. But whether this be approved or not, I think it would be
of no great charge to the Prince or State, who manageth the War, to order every
Pike man to have at his girdle a Pistol, with a Barrel two foot long, whereof
the three first Ranks may make use before they present their Pikes, and the
other three fire over the heads of those who are before them, in the time they
are charging.

Now the Battle is done, and if it fall out, that it has been so well fought,
Things to be done after the Battle.
that none of the Armies can boast of Victory, but that both have left the
place of Combat, as it were by mutual consent, or that they are parted by
night, then either both prepare to fight next day, or the one finding those
wants, of which the other has no knowledge, takes the advantage of darkness,
and retires to some place of security, where he may provide for his hurt men,
be furnished with what he wants, recruit his Forces, and so give a stop to his
Enemies further progress; and this, no doubt, is a tacit acknowledgement that
he yields the honor of the day to him who keeps the Field. But this was never
laid in balance by any prudent Captain with the preservation of his Army, the
loss whereof may lose the Prince his Master more than such a Punctilio of
Honor, which at a more fortunate Rencounter, may quickly be recovered. But if
both resolve to try their fortunes next day, then both prepare for it, the
wounded are sent away, Ammunition is given out, and those who are sound, are
refreshed and encouraged. This falls out but seldom, though sometimes it has
happened. The Victory is pronounced to be his, Badge of Victory.
who remains master of the ground where both fought; and in ancient times he
acknowledged himself to be vanquished, who desired liberty to bury his dead.
Bernard Duke of Saxon Weymar having besieged Reinfeld, and two Imperial Armies
coming to raise the Siege, he fought both till night parted the fray, but with
this difference, that the Imperialists got between him and the besieged Town,
and so succored it; upon which the Duke retired, and left his Enemy the badges
of Victory; but with a resolution to return, and throw the Dye of War once
more, as he did, as you shall hear anon.

When an entire Victory is obtained, he who has lost the day should not lose
What a Vanquished General should do.
his Courage too, but ought to gather up his Shipwreck, rally his dispersed and
broken Troops, get new recruits, dissemble his losses, encourage his party, and
draw to a head again; these are things practiced by all intelligent Generals;
withal he should with all convenient diligence send a Trumpeter to the
Victorious General, to demand a list of his Prisoners, which when he has got,
he should make all the haste he can to get them ransomed or exchanged: and this
is a duty he owes to Prudence, Honor and Conscience.

On the other hand, he who has gained the Victory may lose himself if he be
What a Victorious General should do.
secure, for a resolute enemy may soon take him napping. As that same Duke of
Weymar did the Imperial Army that had beaten him; for having got together the
rest of his Forces that were not with him at his late overthrow, he returned
and gave Battle to the Imperialists, who dreamed of no such thing, and obtained
so complete a Victory over them, that he made all the general persons his
Prisoners, who were led into Paris in triumph: Duc de Savelli, an Italian, was
one of them, who escaped afterward out of Prison; but the deep contemplation of
the sudden change of fortune in his Military employments, moved him to make an
exchange of his Helmet with a Cardinals Cap. It is for that, that he who
commands a Victorious Army should not in sloth pass away his time, but improve
his Victory to the greatest advantage of his Master; and not be guilty of that
whereof one of the greatest Captains among the Ancients, Hannibal, was taxed,
that he knew not how to use Victory; whereof two others, one before him and
another after him, could never be accused, and those were the Great Alexander,
and the Great Julius Caesar.

CHAP. XXIII. Of Retreats.
TO Retire after a Battle, or a brisk Rencounter, leads me to speak of
Retreats. Next the sighting well, and winning of a Battle, the three great
Masterpieces of a Captain are to make a Retreat, to take a fortified place,
Four Masterpieces of a Great Captain.
and to defend one: Of the first I shall speak in this, of the other two, in
the two following Chapters. Here I am not to speak of those petty Retreats
which parties of Horse and Foot make purposely, dissembling fear, to make an
unwary Enemy follow too eagerly, till he be brought to that Ambush prepared to
entrap him, as is frequently practiced in skirmish, when two Armies face each
other, or in Battle when they fight, or when either an Army or a strong party
faceth a Town, whether it be blocked up or not. But this discourse is of the
Retreat of an Army, from the Post it once undertook to maintain from the
Country, through which it once intended to march, or from the Town, Castle or
Fort, which it once intended to besiege, or block up.

The occasions of Retreats may be these, Pestilence, Flux, or other contagious
Occasions and Reasons of Retreats.
Diseases in the Army, want of Provisions and Munitions, the approach of an
unexpected or a strong Enemy, some Disorders, Discontents or Mutinies, or just
apprehensions of them; the courageous, or sometimes obstinate holding out of a
fortified place, contrary to expectation; the sudden diminution of the Army by
some accident of War not foreseen, or to join with those Forces who are coming
to strengthen the Army, which conjunction, without such a Retreat, might be
hindered by an active Enemy. Or though none of those be, yet he who commands an
Army often retires, for reasons known only to himself, or when he thinks it not
conducible for his Masters service to hazard Battle with an Enemy, though no
stronger, perhaps not so strong as himself.

To make a Retreat from an advancing Enemy, or from Armies whose conjunction
cannot be hindered, is not at all difficult, if he who is to make it, Retreats
should be made in time.
have so good Intelligence as he may begin it in time; but if it be bad or
uncertain, or that his Scouts and Parties disappoint him, nothing is more
difficult; and in this place I refer you to my Discourse of Intelligence; when
an Enemy is near, orders are given and obeyed with so great haste and
confusion, that the March looks rather like a flight than a retreat: and this
has ruined many Armies, and loaded their Generals with dishonor and disgrace.

If for want of good intelligence, an enemy comes unlooked for, or that a
General have fought with loss; in both these cases, the retreat should begin in
the night. It is true, all Retreats infuse fear in an Army, which is augmented
by the darkness and horror of the night, and therefore the common Soldiers
should be encouraged, and told by their several Officers, that the Retreat will
be but of a short continuance, and that if an Enemy follow, they will face
about and fight him; but withal very strict and severe Discipline should be
kept that none straggle, for in such occasions, they are very apt to run away,
and indeed at some times, and in some places, it is better to hazard a Battle
than to offer to retire; for if an Army must be lost, it is done To begin a
Retreat in the Night.
with more honor by the first than by the last. But if an Enemy be near and a
Retreat is resolved on, it should I say begin in the night, because in the day
time it will be seen, and then it is not to be supposed, that an Enemy will be
so supinely negligent, as not to follow the Rear immediately; but though one
Enemy know of another dislodging, yet he will be very cautious to pursue him
in the night time, having just reasons to fear Ambushes and other stratagems;
and if a retiring Army get the advantage of one nights march, he who commands
it may next day possess himself of some fortified place or Pass, and thereby be
able to force him who follows to stand, and then he may advise whether In some
cases better Fight than Retire.
it will be more convenient for his affairs, to continue his retreat or to
fight, and many times this last succeeds well, but sometimes it succeeds ill;
but I say still, better fight than still retire, when the retreat cannot
probably be made without the loss of all or most of the Army. A Champaine or a
long Heath, a numerous Cavalry of a pursuing Enemy, the weariness of both Men
and Horses of the retiring Army, hunger and want of sleep very often render the
fighting a Battle more feasible than a Retreat. Cornelius Arvina a Roman
Dictator, perceiving the Sabines would storm his Camp, not yet well fortified,
left his fires all burning, and retired in the dead time of the night,
Instances.
with all imaginable silence and diligence; but being overtaken next morning,
and seeing he could not make his Retreat good without a visible loss, faced
about and fought with success. Cneius Scipio sped not so well, because he
fought not in time. This Consul perceiving three Armies against him in Spain,
retired in the night time; next day the Enemies Cavalry was in his Rear, with
whom he only skirmished, but that retarded his March so much, that the
C^rthaginian Infantry reached him at night, before he could entrench himself;
he fought them, but was beaten and killed: but if he had faced about in the day
time, with his whole Army, and fought the Enemies Cavalry, he knew not what
effects it might have produced. Philip of Macedon, being worsted by the Romans,
retired in the night time to the Mountains, and thereafter presented them
Battle. Let us briefly sum up some of Hannibals Retreats from the Romans, and
theirs from him, for they will very aptly show the benefit and safety of
Night-Retreats.

After this great Carthaginian had fought Marcellus at Numistr^ with equal
Hannibals Retreats from the Romans, and theirs from him.
fortune, knowing his own wants, he dislodged in the Night and retired:
Marcellus knew it, but durst not follow him for fear of his Ambushes. Next Year
Marcellus sought out his redoubted Enemy, found him at Canusium, fought with
him and was beaten, but fought the next day and did beat Hannibal into his
Camp, out of which he retired that same night, Marcellus not daring to follow
him. In the Bru^ian Country, the Consul Sempronius is worsted by Hannibal, and
gets him to his Camp, and in the Night with great silence retires, and joins
with the Proconsul Licinius, returns, fights the Carthaginian and defeats him,
and he in the Night retired with safety to Croton.

Julius Caesar intending to march away from Pompey to Appoll^nia, sent away his
sick men and Baggage in the beginning of the Night well guarded with a Caesar's
Retr^^^ from Pompey.
Legion; at the fourth Watch he sent away the rest of his Army, except two
Legions and the Cavalry, so soon as they were gone, to save a punctilio of
honor, he caused a March to be sounded, and got him away with all possible
speed, and made his retreat good, notwithstanding Pompey's pursuit at the River
Genuso, with his Horse mixed with Foot. But I find, that for the space of four
days he retired still, sending his Baggage constantly before, and following
with his Army in the night, and what stands he made to face the Enemy behind
him, were all in the day time.

Nor have Princes and great Captains in our Modern Wars thought it
dishonorable to follow the example of that famous Carthaginian, and those
illustrous Charles the fifth from the Duke of Saxe.
Romans, in making their Retreats in the Nightime, whereof I shall not weary
you with more instances than three. The victorious Emperor Charles the fifth,
finding himself not in a capacity to fight Maurice Duke of Saxe, (who was got
very near him, before he had any knowledge of his march) retired with great
silence in the Night time from Inspruck, for have leaving some of his
Household Stuff behind him. Francis the first of France, having Victualled the
besieged Town of Landrecy in view of both the Imperial and English Francis the
first from Charles the fifth.
Armies, marched twelve Leagues ba^k to Guise, where he stayed till the Emperor
came in person, who marched with a puissant Army to give the King Battle. But
Francis being sensible of the danger of an engagement, left some Tents and
Baggage, and many fires, and in the Night without Drum or Trumpet retired to
places of saf^ty: This was looked upon as one of the bravest actions that ever
was done by that Martial King; yet some blame him, perhaps with reason, for
staying the Emperors coming, after he had relieved the Town, which was his only
errand. Wallenstein Duke of Friedland, fought the Sweedish Army at Wallenstein
from the Duke of Weymar.
Lutsen, till night parted them, and though he knew the King was killed, and
that his own Forces were more numerous than the Duke of Weymars, yet knowing
his own wants, he resolved to retire, and did it that same night without noise
of Trumpet or Drum, and left some Cannon behind him, and though he staid next
day at Leipsick, yet the night after, he got him away, and made but short stay
at any place, till he came to Prague, where he put himself in a posture to meet
and fight that Enemy, from whom he thought it then fit to retire.

But many who have preferred a vain punctilio of honor to the safety of their
Armies, have lost both their Armies and their honors. Whereof take only two
instances. After Lautrec Captain General of the French Army had obstinately
continued the Siege of Naples, notwithstanding that a pestilentious Disease had
consumed the best part of his Army, and made the rest unserviceable, whereof he
dyed himself. The Marquess of Salusses who succeeded him in the command, with
the advice of the other prime Officers, resolve to quit the Siege, and retire
to Anversa, where a French Garrison lay, three Leagues from the Camp; in
pursuance whereof, knowing their danger (since the Imperialists were very
strong within the City, commanded by two great Captains, the Prince of Orange,
and Davalo Marquess of Guast) they divide their infirm and sickly Army,
equally, into three parts, Foot and Horse, mixing the one with the other, and
with every Batallion appointed three Falconets, leaving all the rest of their
Artillery and Baggage in their Leaguer as a prey to the Enemy. At break of day
they march without Drum or Trumpet, and a tempestuous Rain falling in the mean
time, hindered the Imperial Sentinels and Guards for a great while to take
notice of the French Retreat; yet for all that they are overtaken by 500. Horse
and some Harquebusiers on foot, and though the last Batallion of the French
fired, and fought right well, yet did the Imperial Horse, increasing in
numbers, fiercely charge them and rout them, and immediately after, the second
Batallion likewise, killing and taking all. Those Error in the F^ench retreat
from Naples.
of the first Batallion by a speedy march got to Anversa, and saved themselves
till the Prince of Orange came, and made them render on discretion. Now it is
very clear, that if the Marquess had begun his Retreat in the beginning of the
night, or at midnight (for it was in Autumn) he had undoubtedly brought his
Army safe to Anversa; for his Rear would have been sooner by that account at
that place, than his Van was, which came safely, though it began not to march
till break of day, and by the bargain he had saved his own life, for there he
got his mortal wounds* whereof he dyed.

The second instance is of Piter Strozzi, a Florentine, who commanded in chief
over an Army of French under Henry the second, near to Sienna, within which
Marshal Monluc was Governor; An Army of Spaniards under the command of James
of Medici, stronger by far than Strozzi, lay close by him. Strozzi resolves to
retire to Lusignan, but would needs do it in the day time, and consulted the
matter by Letters with Monluc, who dissuaded him from it, with many reasons,
and particularly by the fresh example of the late King of France his retreat in
the nightime from Guise, and so prevailed with him to retire in the
Nightime. And so soon as day was spent, he sent away two Pieces of Ordnance
to Lusignan, intending to follow with the Army. But the haughty Florentine
looking upon it as a dishonorable thing for him to show his Error in Strozzi
his retreat from Sienna.
back in the nightime to Medici, to whose Family he carried an inveterate
hatred, would needs make his Retreat in spite of him in the day time; and the
issue was, his Army was routed, and himself hardly escaped. But that which
Monluc writes of this, is very observable, That he no sooner understood that
Strozzi had resolved to retire in the daytime, but foreseeing the event of so
frantic a resolution, he instantly conveened the Podesta, the Magistrates and
principal Citizens of Sienna, and assured them the Army in which they trusted,
at that very time and hour in which he was speaking to them, was defeated, and
therefore advised them without delay to prepare for a Siege; and the event
showed he spoke truly, if not Prophetically, for that day was the French Army
beaten, and next day the City was invested by the victorious Army.

It is true, two of King Ferdinands Generals, Cazzianer and Rocandolf, Retreats
should be made in time.
(each whereof lost an Army to their Master of 24000, or 30000. brave Germans)
retired, the first from Esecchio, the last from Buda, both in the nighttime,
but they did it not soon enough, and lost their Armies deservedly, because they
obstinately continued at these places against all reason, and the advice of
their principal Officers, when they had certain intelligence of the daily march
and approach of the Turks. I never said, nor thought that a Retreat in the
Night would infallibly save an Army; I have been an eyewitness of the
contrary, but I ever said, and still think, that when an Enemy is near, a
Retreat is much more proper to be begun in the Night than in the day. The
timely and orderly breaking up and retiring of Armies from the Sieges of Towns,
has saved many of them, whereof it will be more proper to speak in the next
Chapter, when I discourse of the Sieges of Towns and Fortified places.

The manner of Retreats, whether they be made by day or by night, uses The
manner of a Retreat.
to be this. 1. The whole Train of Artillery (except some Fieldpieces, which
should stay in the Rear) with the Generals Coaches, Chancery, and principal
Secretary, are sent away with a strong Convoy of Foot and some Horse, then all
the sick and wounded men, next to them the Baggage of the whole Army, next to
it a party of Horse, behind whom comes the whole Brigades of Foot, and after
them the Cavalry, and in the Rear of it all the Dragoons, with as many
commanded Musketeers out of the several Foot-Regiments as the Commander in
chief thinks fitting, and as many of them mounted on Horses as can be, and
behind them a select party of Horse and Foot for present service, which are to
be relieved by turns, by those who are before them, one Party still facing the
Enemy till the Party that was behind them be past. This is to be observed if
the whole Army march one way; but if it can divide and go several ways, the
expedition will be the greater, the time and place being named (the last
whereof should be a Pass or fortified place) by the General where all shall
meet, so that he who is first shall stay for the rest, unless some command be
given afterward to the contrary. The same order in retiring is to be kept by
several grand Divisions or Wings of the Army, as if it marched in one Body.

But the truth is, the Baggage of an Army makes so long a train, that it
retards Wagons and Carts rather to be left behind in the highways than to be
burnt in a close Country.
the Retreat exceedingly, especially where there are enclosures and hedges; and
thefore I wonder that in all Retreats, order is not given to leave all Wagons
and Carts behind, (for in a close Country that will be a great deal more
advantageous than to burn them) and every man should take his best and most
precious things out of them, leaving all trash and luggage of small value in
them (which will likewise retard the pursuing Enemy) and these goods the
officers should cast upon one Horse, or two at the most, and upon the rest of
the Baggage-Horses either sick men should be mounted, or Musketeers for
service, and this should be seen done by the Colonels themselves under pain of
I^famy; and no less do they deserve who will prefer a little paultry stuff to
either the welfare of the whole Army, or the safety and preservation of any one
sick or wounded member of it; yet this is not done so often as occasion requires
it should be, which gross oversight can be imputed to none so much, and indeed,
I think, to none else but to the General.

In all Retreats great care should be taken that none get leave to fall behind,
to prevent which not only all the Superior and Inferior Officers of Regiments
should do their duties, but the General Marshals should severely execute their
power against Delinquents; and here, if at any time, it is lawful to shoot
those who will not keep Rank and File. I told you that some light Fieldpieces
should be left in the Rear, for there they may be serviceable; and the loss is
not great; if they be taken, for if he who commands the Army see he cannot with
any probability ^ace about and fight, nor can retire in that order that I have
spoke of, being hardly pursued by a powerful and prevalent Enemy, he should
rather bury, or if he cannot do that, break and spring his great Ordnance,
Ordnance to be broke or sprung in sudden Retreats.
than lose his Army by a hopeless hazarding it to preserve his Artillery, and
rather leave his Foot to fight for good quarters, than lose both it and his
Cavalry; for the rule never fails, That it is better to save some than lose
all; yet all means should be tried before either Infantry or Artillery be
deserted. I have heard that the staying two or three hours for a Mortar which
was a great one, and bemired in deep and dirty way, occasioned the loss of
Prince Palatine and Lieutenant General King's little Armies in their Retreat
from Lemgaw to Vlotho. When a party of either Horse or Foot, or of both,
perceives they are neither able to fight, nor retire in a Body, it has been,
and may be practiced to disband the party; he who leads it, bidding every man
that belongs to it to go what way he pleases, or shall find most safe or
convenient for him, and to meet at such a place as he then names, so soon as
possibly they can.

That famous Retreat which the two Felt-Marshals, Banier and Leslie, made in
the year 1637. from Turgaw in Saxony, made a great noise in the World. It was
indeed a noble action, and the matter was shortly this: Banier had besieged
Banier and Leslie*s Retreat from T^rgaw.
Leipsick, which kept out gallantly against him; he makes some breaches, and
prepares to storm it; in that very time come Letters from Leslie, showing that
he was forced to retire from the River Saal, and march toward him, Count Gots
with an Imperial Army being much too strong for him: Banier immediately gave
over the storm and the Siege too, sends away his Artillery, Baggage and Foot,
and follows with his Cavalry, and joins Leslie at Turgaw, this Town they
fortify, and bring in a world of provisions both for Man and Horse, and
resolve to make it the seat of War, against all the Imperial and Saxish Armies
joined together at that time, to the number of fourscore thousand fighting men,
under the command of Count Gallas, for the destruction of the Swede; whereof
the two Swedish Felt-Marshals had good enough Intelligence, yet persisted in
their resolution, till the Imperialists were come very near them, and then they
began to cast up another account, and found they had lost by their stay there a
third of their Forces; and therefore, though a little too late, they resolve to
march to Pomerania; and so broke up, and got over the River of Oder at
Landsberg, in spite of all opposition, and maugre all the Enemies they had
about them, joined with Felt-Marshal Wrangle, without loss of either Infantry
or Cavalry. A very gallant and memorable action, yet it cannot be denied but
they should have begun their Retreat sooner, and so have saved that third part
of their Army which they lost. Next year Banier made Gallas retire with a
quicker pace than he had made when Gallas pursued him. But that same Banier was
not so fortunate four or five years after, in his Retreat from Archduke
Leopold; for in it he lost well near the whole Left Wing of his Cavalry,
commanded by Lieutenant General Wittemberg.

CHAP. XXIV. Of several ways to take fortified places, particularly of Sieges,
Trenches, Approaches, Redouts, Batteries* Zaps, Galleries* Mines, Storms, and
Assaults.
THE Art to take fortified Towns and Castles, has been always, and still is
accounted one of the necessary endowments of a Great Captain. The manner used
by the Ancients, and those of later times is still the same; for Breaches made
by the Ram, and by the Cannon are still Breaches; and Approaches made by the
help of the Vines, Tortoises and Muscles, and without Three ways to take
fortified places.
them, are still Approaches. Fortified places may be taken three several ways,
by Intelligence, by Surprizal, and by Siege. Of these three, that which loses
least time, and costs least Blood, is to be chosen; and therefore that of
Intelligence with a party within the Fort is the easiest and the safest, and
this, without doing it wrong, you may in plain English call Treachery: It
proceeds By Treachery.
principally from the villainy of some within; and though this be one of the
most hateful vices that corrupt our depraved nature, yet Princes and their
Generals look upon themselves to be obliged not only to cherish it in an Enemy,
but to hire men to commit it at excessive rates: For the price a Traitor will
seek for the delivery of a Town, Citadel or Castle, will seldom exceed that
which the maintenance of an Army will amount to in two or three days: This is
Amo proditionem. Whether it be lawful for men to solicit, encourage, yea, to
hire men to sin, I leave to the Divines; but I can assure them, Military men
think it very convenient to practice it. This way of taking Towns, Philip,
Father of Alexander called his Golden Key. This treachery is committed either
by the Governor, and then the whole Town or Fort is betrayed, and the hazard
which he without runs is little or none at all; or it is committed by one man,
or one party within the Town, by betraying a Port, or Post, or part of the
Wall, whereby he who commands without, may quickly make himself master of the
whole Fort; but here he runs the hazard of opposition from those who are not
in the Conspiracy: But he to whom the place should A ticklish piece.
be betrayed, ought to take good heed that he be not cheated, for it is a
ticklish piece. All Intelligences should not, nay, few Intelligences are to be
trusted. I have told you in my discourse of Intelligence, how wary a General
should be to trust those who offer to betray Forts, and gave you some Instances
of those who have been abused by it; let me add one more out of the Duke of
Roan's Memoires: A Roman Catholic Gentleman, one Meslay, who had married a
Protestant Wi^e, A Traitor not to be trusted.
pretended some discontent with his own party, and having a Foot Company within
Montpellier, watched every* fourth night in the Citadel; this, upon a
stipulation of very advantageous conditions, he offers to deliver to a Cousin
of his own, one Bretigni, a Protestant Gentleman, who served in the Duke of
Roan's Army: After some demurr, the Duke approved of the matter, and marched
with six thousand men very near Montpellier, sent fifteen hundred men with
Bretigni the Architect of the design, but advised him not to hazard within the
Citadel, till Meslay came out and put himself in his hands; but credulous
Bretigni neglected this so important a part of the business, and entered with
thirty seven well armed men; the Traitor not daring to let more come in:
Bretigni and his Brother and sixteen more were killed, and nineteen taken
Prisoners. Roan who was not far off with the gross of his Army, retired in good
order, more sorry for the loss of two brave Gentlemen, than the missing the
Citadel, as having mistrusted the design all along.

The second way of taking fortified places is Surprizal, whereof there By
surprizal.
are so many kinds that they cannot all be reckoned: Sometimes Forts are
surprised by Soldiers disguised like Country people, both as men and Women
with short Carabines, Pistols, or Daggers under their Cloths, wherewith they
dispatch a Guard, and so are masters of a Port, and immediately give the sign
to them to advance, who are ordained to second them. Sometimes it is done by
Armed men hidden in Wagons and Carts under a little Hay, or Straw, whereof the
first stops on the draw-Bridg to hinder the drawing it up, then all leap out of
their Wagons, and whilst some are killing the Watch, others are underproping
the Portcullies with Forks, made purposely for hindering it to fall; in the
meantime they give the sign to their Friends, who are not far off. Sometimes a
Town is surprised by an Enemies entering man by man at a Postern or hole made
for evacuation, or at some ruinous place of the Wall; sometimes by a sudden and
unforeseen scalado; sometimes by petarding the Ports or Draw-bridges. If any of
these ways of surprizal succed, it is the next easy way to intelligence. In
the next Chapter you may read how Forts are defended against all these ways of
surprisal.

The third way to take Fortified places, is by Siege, and it is twofold, By a
Blockade.
either by not making approaches, which is called a Blockade, or by
approaching, and this is more properly called a Siege. A Blockade is made by a
General when he has hopes to starve a Garrison, as knowing that they within
have either consumed their Victuals themselves, or lent them to their Friends;
and this was Brisac's condition when the Duke of Weimar blocked it up. The way
to block a place, is, to lay Regiments and Companies of Foot and Horse at all
Passes, Advenues, or other convenient places, to hinder all persons, all
Provisions, and all things to enter the Blockaded Fort. This way to take Forts
saves blood, and is of least danger, provided he who blocks up the Fort be
absolute Master of the Field during the whole time of the Blockade, but it
ordinarily loses very much time to the Besieger, for I have known a Town
blocked a whole year, and not taken then without a petty Battle.

A Siege properly so called, is, when an Army invests the place, entrencheth By
a Siege.
it self, makes Approaches, Redoubts, Batteries, Zaps, Galleries and Mines, and
after all that, either leaves it or takes it by surrender or assault. The
forming and carrying on a Siege is no small Masterpiece of a General, to whose
own spirit, conduct and prudence, many circumstances must be left; as to the
consideration of the nature, strength or weakness of the place he is to
bes^ege, the season of the Year, the stou^ or weak resistance he may expect
from the Garrison within; of which and of the abilities of the Governor he
should have good Intelligence: He should also have a serious consideration of
his own Provisions, Considerations before a Siege be formed.
Money, Meat and Munitions; and many more particulars, of which, and concerning
which, no definite or certain rules can be given. And before he form or lay
down his Siege, he ought to weigh and consider well all the advantages and
disadvantages that may accrue to him: As whether the gaining the Town or Castle
he Besieges will counterpoize the loss of men, and that vast expense of money,
meat and munitions, that must be hazzarded and bestowed in reducing it; how
long time his own Provisions will be able to hold out, whether he be able with
probability of success, to withstand or fight any Enemy that dare adventure the
relief of the Besieged place. And that which concerns most both his Masters
service and his own honor, is to cast up his account so well, that if any
unexpected accident or adventure fall out, such as are the change of Weather,
inundations of Waters, a mighty and unlooked for Succourse, a Pestilence or
other heavy disease in his* Army, he may notwithstanding these, and in spite
of an Enemy, raise his Siege, and march away to places of safety, and
consequently make an honorable Retreat with little or no loss of Men; for it
is not to be thought that an Army marches away from a Besieged place with
dishonor, because ratio B^lli depending on emergencies, and accidents,
changes as often as ratio Status; and as in this nothing is thought
dishonorable that can save the State, so in that, nothing can be dishonorable
that can save the Army.

I have not the vanity to prescribe or give rules for what should be done at
How to begin the Siege.
Sieges, but I pr^sume, I may be permitted to tell Novices, (for to them only I
write) what is done and ordinarlly practiced at Sieges. After a resolution is
taken to Besiege a place, diligence and expedition should be used, that all
Passes, Highways and Avenues be possessed by the Cavalry, that no entrance to
the Fort be permitted; and that all Citizens or Soldiers belonging to it, be
seized on and made Prisoners, that intelligence may be got of all affairs
within. Many Generals at Sieges entrench their Armies, and many do not. Those
At some Sieges Armies are not entrenched.
who do not, have no apprehension of an Enemy, and therefore upon intelligence
of the approach of one, they must be ready to march, either to meet and fight
that Enemy, or leave both him and the Bes^eged place for good and all; both
which I have known practiced. Those who Entrench their Armies, Armies
Entrenched at Sieges.
take the far surer way; though the doing it costs a great deal of time and
labor. The Entrenchment must be made both against those within the Town, and
against any without, who will hazard to relieve it. The Fortifications of the
Camp are properly called the Trenches, (though the word be frequently taken for
approaches) and in that word are comprehended the lines of Communication, which
Lines are divided into several parts, Field-sconces, whole and half Bulwarks,
Star-works and Redouts. None of these should have a Curtain between them above
six or seven hundred foot long, for the distance of them one from another
should be less than a Musket shot. They should be built of black Earth, if it
can be had; but if the ground be sandy, it must be knit together with Withs,
fascines, Straw, or growing Corn, and without with a Ditch and Pallisado. Of
the same matter should the Redouts and Batteries in the approaches be built.
The Star-sconces having their sides 40 or 50 foot long, and their points far
distant, are ordinarily made in have, when time will not permit better to be
made.

If an Army be numerous enough, or that there be store of Pioneers with it, a
General may fortify his Camp, and begin his approaches both together, and this
will save him much time, which in such occasions is very precious. But if he
cannot do both at once, he should Entrench himself, and then begin those works,
which are called Approaches, running Trenches, and by the Dutch La^fgrabon. In
making these to break Ground without the range of a piece of To approach to a
For^.
Ordnance, will be too far, and within Musket shot perhaps too near, yet many
think 8 or 900. foot from the besieged Fort is passable. At this place where
the approach begins, a Sconce should be made, and in it a Court of Guard;
neither were it amiss here to make a Battery, and in it to plant some
Culverines and twelve pounders, to beat down the nearest Parapets of the Fort,
from whence those who are to work in the approaches may be infested. But before
I approach any nearer the Fort, I must tell you, that I admire how Captain Rud
the late Kings Engineer has left it upon Record, That the Romans were the
first that used the Spade at Sieges, and that Julius Captain Rudd's opinion
disputed*
Caesar was the first that besieged Towns by circumvallation. Against the first
assertion, though we should not speak of profane Authors, yet we find it
written in the 15. verse of the 20. Chapter of the second book of Samuel, That
Jacob cast up a Bank, (says our Translation) against Abel, where the Rebel
Sheba was. Deodati in his Italian translation calls it Bastione, a Bulwark: Now
these could not be done without the help of a Spade or something like it; and
this action of Joab was done some ages before Romulus. Against the second
assertion, I object the ten years Siege of V^n, which was by circumvallation,
and that was some Centuries of years before Caesar besieged Alexia. And we read
in holy Writ, that Trenches were cast and Towers built against besieged Towns,
and that was nothing else but circumvallations; and those who made them, did so
little know Caesar, that they did not foresee, that ever such a man would be in
the world as Caesar.

But to return to our first Sconce or Battery, from it a line, or if you please
A running Trench.
a running Trench (which upon the matter is nothing else but a Ditch) must be
dug, and run either to the right or left hand, 3, 4, or 500. foot long, a
little crooked and oblique, for doing which, Soldiers are appointed with
Pickaxes, Spades and Shovels, one behind another at the distance of 4, or 5.
foot, the foremost digging 3, or 4. foot deep, casting the Earth up either to
the right or left hand between him and the Fort, and so by him who is first,
and them that come after him; the running Trench is made 6, or 8. foot deep,
and at first 6. Foot broad, and thereafter 10, or 12. broad; sometimes more, if
it be necessary to make use of Wagons in the approaches, which falls out
sometimes. At the end of this first Line a Redout is to be made* this is a A
Redout Equilateral.
work of four sides and four Angles, for most part equilateral, each side 40,
50, or 60. foot long: And sometimes, but very seldom, Redouts are built of an
oblong figure, and then the longest side may be of 120, 100. and the shortest
An oblong one.
40, 50, or 60. foot. From that Redout another approach runs 5, 6, or 700. foot
long to the other hand in the same manner, and at the end thereof another
Redout or Battery should be made, from whence begins the third running Line to
that hand, that the first Trench did run, and so alternately till Batteries be
made, and the Zap begin. Observe, that the ground without, on which the
approaches are to be made, is divided by the Generals appointment into several
Posts. The approaches whereof to the Besieged Fort, go equally on; and
therefore all the Redouts and Batteries of them should defend, flank, and
secure one another against the outfalls and Sallies of the Besieged.

The nearer the approach come to the Ditch of the Fort, the deeper and broader
it should be, the better to defend the Soldiers; and the deeper any work be,
that requires a Breast-work, the higher will the top of that Breast-work
Breast-works, and Footbanks.
be: for that reason, many times three steps of a foot bank will be necessary
for Soldiers to ascend to the defense of their Breast-works, either in case of
Sallies, or yet to give fire upon the Parapets of the Towns Fortifications.

In such convenient places of these approaches, as either the General of the
Artillery or Quartermaster General (for to their charges and inspection belong
the Approaches) shall think fit, some of these Sconces should be made, which
commonly are called Batteries; for properly a Battery is nothing else but A
Battery.
the Platform on which the Ordnance stand, which is also called the Bed of the
Cannon; and on these Batteries such Pieces are planted as are thought
necessary, ordinarily whole and Demi-Cannon, and whole and Demi-Culverine. In
making these Redouts and Trenches, consideration should be had of the nature of
the Earth that is dug; if it be good black Earth, it will serve without help
for Breastworks; but if not* then must Baskets be made, and filled with Earth
or Sand compactly. But whether the Breast-work be of Earth, or made of Gabions,
it is necessary it be ten or twelve foot thick. If the ground be marish, no
doubt, it will Gabions and Baskets.
exceedingly retard the Approaches; for Wooden palls must be struck in the
Earth, and Withs, Straw and Rubbish laid upon them for a foundation to a
Battery; and upon the Battery, Gabions and Baskets filled with Earth, as was
done by Prince Henry of Orange at the Siege of the Busch, and there he was well
helped in that marish Ground by a dry Summer. Where a running Some running
Trenches direct, some oblique, some Serpentine.
Trench is made, if the ground be tollerably good, and yet marish on both
sides, it must be made in a straight and direct Line, and not an oblique one,
as the other whereof I spoke: and for the defense of the Soldiers, there must
be blinds, and the Trench it self should be two foot deeper than an approach
which is either crooked or serpentine.

When the Approaches are brought near the Ditch of the Besieged place, the
Counter-scarp (which is the shield of the Fortress) is in danger, and then the
Zappe begins. This Sap or Zappe is nothing else but a digging, as all Zappe
why so called.
the rest of the Approaches are; but men have appropriated it to that digging
which is near to, or in the Counter-scarp. We have borrowed it from the
Italian, in which Language Zappa signifies a Mattock, Zapare to dig or delve,
and Zappamento a digging or delving. The Sap then begins at both sides or
faces of the Bulwark, toward which the approaches have been made, sometimes
but on one side the Soldiers Zappe under favor of the Canon, which should
play lustily from the several Batteries, and of the Musketeers, who should
incessantly fire upon the Flanks and Parapets of the Bastion, from both
Batteries and Redouts; the manner of Sapping is this: Against that part The
manner of a Zappe.
of the Bulwark which the Besiegers intend to undermine, (which ordinarily is
the capital point, or that angle that coupleth the two faces of the Bastion)
one man kneeling or bowing, digs three foot deep and three foot broad, throwing
the Earth both before and on both sides of him, and still advances; another
follows him close, and makes it three foot broader and deeper, if the Ground
permit it; to him succeeds the third, who adds three foot more to the depth and
breadth, so that a man may walk covered. In this manner (the Zappers being
often relieved by turns) the Zap is continued, till they have dug through
the Counterscarp, which must be done, though it be lined with Stone and Mortar,
otherwise all their labor is lost. When this is finished, the Besiegers are to
fight with the two merciless Enemies and Elements of Fire and Water, the first
from the Walls of the Fort, the second from the Ditch, over which they must be,
before they come to the Wall, for doing whereof all the Earth and rubbish that
has been cast out in Zapping, must be cast in How to fill the Moat.
the Fosse; and with it, a world of Fascines, which are bundles or knitchels of
the twigs and smaller branches of Trees, in every one whereof should be S^o^es
to make them sink, they should be six or seven foot long; for this reason, at
Sieges, Soldiers, when they are not on other duty, are ordered to make many
thousands of them. There must likewise use be made of great logs of Timber,
great Stones, and sacks full of Sand, or any thing else that may be thought
fitting to fill the Ditch; and this is continued without intermission (your
Ordnance and Musket firing incessantly on the Flanks and Parapets of the
besieged) till a damm be made to the place you would be at, suppose it be that
angle of a Bulwark I just now spoke of, because it has no other defense but
from that part of the Curtain which is called the second Flank, which, for that
reason, the Besiegers should make as useless as may be with Cannon and
Culverine. Observe in passing (since you are passing over the Ditch) that if
there be any Casemates (as now they are not much used) they must be destroyed
before the Casemates.
damm be begun. Upon this damm (which must run more to one side of the angle
than the other, that so it may be subject but to one Flank) a Gallery A Gallery.
must be made, the one side whereof, which is in greatest danger, must
according to the damage it is to expect from the Artillery, be seven, eight,
nine or ten foot thick of strong Balks, coupled together in manner of a
gallows, covered above with Boards, above which is to be laid Earth three foot
thick: If the other side of the Gallery be made up with strong boards, it will
be sufficient. These Galleries may be more or fewer, according to the number of
the Bastions of the besieged place, or the strength and number of the Besiegers
Army. Prince Maurice of Nassaw had seven of them at Juliers when he besieged
it, about sixty years ago.

Galleries being made over the Moat, the Besiegers either make a breach with To
make a Brech^.
their Ordnance, or they Mine before they come to the Assault, or they do both.
If a breach or Briche be resolved on, it is the most expensive way; for, as I
told you in my Discourse of Artillery, some require to make a breche, eighteen
pieces of Ordnance, eight whole Cannons, six Culverines, and four
Demi-Culverines; and for these some Gunners require three Batteries, one for
the Cannon to shoot in a direct line, and two for the Culverines to shoot
crosswise or obliquely, to cut away those parts of the Wall which the Cannon
has shaken. I shall not trouble you with a discourse of Batteries, which are
those platforms of Boards on which the Pieces stand, how even and plain they
should be made, that they should be higher behind than before, according to the
greatness of the Piece is to be planted on them, both to hinder her to recoil
too far, and bring her the more easily forward to her Loop hole; nor of the
length of a platform to fit a piece for her carriage and recoil; nor of the
several sorts of Batteries, as those of Earth, of Timber, and of Woollen Sacks;
nor of sunk Batteries, nor of the Appareill, which is nothing but the ascent to
the Battery, for the more easy bringing up the Cannon to it: All these things,
and many more concerning Batteries, belonging properly to the Gunners Art, and
but accidentally to this Discourse. I shall only tell you, that when a Breche
is to be made, Gunners differ about the distance that should be between
Distance of Batteries from the place to be battered.
the Battery, and the Wall to be battered. Some are of opinion that one hundred
and fifty paces are far enough, and that no Battery should be made further from
the mark; and those say likewise that the nearest Battery should be four
hundred foot from the mark: Others say two hundred foot makes a convenient
distance, and a third sort (it may be with greatest reason) aver, that a
Battery at the Counterscarp, where only the breadth of the Moat is between the
Battery and the Wall has the greatest force, and the Ordnance prove most
efficacious. But the nearer the Battery be, the greater care should be taken
that their Parapets be so strongly and well contrived, that neither the
Ordnance may be in danger of dismounting, nor the Gunners and Matrosses in
hazard of their lives, but neither these, nor many things else can be secured
by the wit of man. These old Stone Towers that stand on Walls, fortified a
l'antique, ought to be battered down, at least their Parapets* for I have seen
more hurt done from those to Approaches, than from either Curtain or Bulwark of
any Modern Fortification.

I have said, that to make a breach some require three Batteries, one for the
Three several Batteries to make a breach.
8 Cannon, the second for the 6 Culverines, and the third for the 4
Demi-Culverines. The first to play on direct angles, which terribly shakes the
Wall; the second to play traversly and cross, to cut out what the Cannon has
shaken, and the third to beat down the Parapets, or render them useless. By
this means it is conceived, that in less than twelve hours time a sufficient
breach may be made, which the Defendants must not be permitted to repair, for
an Assault should immediately follow. Nor will I in this place trouble my
Reader with the different opinions of Gunners, yea of Captains, whether it be
more conducible for gaining the Fort, to make a breach in a Bulwark or a
Curtain. Some say, as I Whether to batter a Curtain or a Bulwark.
told you formerly, the faces of a Bulwark near the Capital having least
defense, are with least danger attacked and assaulted, and therefore should be
first battered; others think, that Bastions having most terreplein (for we must
suppose them full of Earth) render Breaches for a long time ineffectual,
because having so much Earth so near at hand, they may quickly be repaired, and
other Retrenchments may be made successively behind one, two, or more breaches;
whereas there is a far greater difficulty to do so in a Curtain, where there is
no more earth or terreplein than the thickness of the Rampart; and to that,
that the danger of assaulting a Curtain comes from two Flanks of the two
nearest Bastions, they say, they may be made useless before the Assault both by
the direct and traverse Cannon, adding of Demi-Culverines, Quarter Cannons, and
Fieldpieces.

But having overcome the difficulties of the Moat, it is many times thought fit
to lodge at the foot of either Bulwark or Curtain, and there to undermine. What
use the Ancients made of Mines, I have shown you in its Mines.
proper place; nor are Mines other things now than they were in the days of
yore, except that they differ in their contrivances; for of old, the principal
end of Mining was to underdrop the Wall with Timber, till the underminer was
ordered to fire that Timber, and therefore the Mine might be greater and wider
than now, when Gunpowder is to be put into it. Norton in his practice of
Artillery says, that Pietro di Navarra was the first who made use of Pietro di
Navarra.
Gunpowder in Mines, and made Furns or Ovens, or as we call them, Powder
Chambers. If this be true, (as I know nothing to the contrary) it seems strange
to me, that the composition of Powder being found out by the German Monk about
the year of our Lord 1301. it should not have been used in Mines two hundred
and thirty years after its invention, for it is not yet one hundred and thirty
years since Pietro di Navarra dyed. He was a very ingenious man, and a subtle
and vigilant Captain, for his great and good services Charles the Fifth gave
him great rewards, and made him an Earl: But Pietro having deserted him twice,
and gone over to the French King, he was taken at the Siege of Naples, and kept
Prisoner in the Castle del Ovo (which by his dexterity himself had formerly
taken from the French for that same Charles) and old, crazy, and sickly as he
was, his Head, by order from the Emperor, was appointed to be taken off; but
the morning before his execution, it was prevented either by himself, or his
favorable Guardian Hickard, and he was found dead in his Bed, as Giovio
relates the story.

To demolish a Wall by a Mine is to be preferred to a Battery, for two reasons;
first, it is of far less expense; secondly, Batteries being soon perceived, may
be made useless, by Countermures and Retrenchments; but Mines are more
imperceptible, yet they are dangerous works for them that are in them, because
of Countermines, which when the Mine-master finds, he is to divert his course
Countermines.
to the Right or Left hand, or sink his Mine deeper; and if the Counterminers
be under him, he had need make haste and take his advantage, by piercing holes,
and chacing them away with scalding Water. But take a few general Rules for
Mines. The entrance should be seven foot high and five foot broad, say some;
four foot and a half high and four broad, say others: This last, and indeed
perhaps no Mine is for a fat corpulent man* The Mine all along General Rules
for Mining.
must be lined on both sides, and covered above with boards, and underpropt for
keeping up the Earth. The mouth of the Mine should be carefully concealed from
the besieged. Philip King of Macedon, who was afterward beaten by the Roman
Consul Flaminius, did not ill to cause a great heap of Earth to be laid on the
other side of a besieged Town, there where his real Mines were, and so deluded
the besieged. The height and breadth of the Mine should decrease, and grow
less by little and little, from the entry till it arrive at the place which
should be undermined, so that the mouth of the Furn should be no wider than to
receive the Vessels wherein the Powder is, whether these be Barrels or Troughs.
Some will have this Powder Chamber to be six or seven foot high, four or five
broad, and five or six long; others say, only four foot and a half high, the
breadth four, or three foot and a half: But I think assuredly it should be
proportioned to the quantity of the Powder, and the number of the Vessels that
are ordained to be put into it. These Furns should be closely and strongly
stopped, that the Powder get no vent, but that which naturally it seeks,
upwards* The train whereby the Powder in the Furn is to be fired, The Train*
should be so well ordered that it be not too long a firing, for that
disappoints them who are to storm, making them apprehensive of danger of they
know not what: And this occasioned the death of two French Marshals within
these forty years, who admiring why the Mine did not spring, after they had
ordered the train to be fired, went into the Mine to know the cause, where they
both dyed; the Mine at their being there, working its effect: Nor must it fire
too soon, lest he who fires the train, be buried in the ruins of the Mine.
Besides Countermining, What hinders Mines to spring.
several things hinder the effectual operation of a Mine; such are, the ill
stopping the Powder-Chamber, the weakness of the sides, occasioned by
Countermines, Caves, Caverns, and hollow grounds, as also the failing of the
train in its duty, by reason of its wetness, moisture, or some bad contrivance,
and the placing the Powder too low in the Furn. When a Mine has sprung* if it
cast the Wall outward toward the Besiegers it makes the entrance very
difficult for the assailants, if the Defendants act their part with Courage;
and it is just so with a breach after a Battery, which Charles the Fifth, and
his General the Duke of Alva, experimented at the memorable Siege of Metz.

When large Breaches are made by furious Batteries, and that Mines have
Assaults.
operated happily, then an universal Assault should be given by the whole
besieged Army, each part of it being to storm at its assigned Post. These
Assaults being given resolutely, and continued obstinately, though the first or
second may perhaps be beat off, will probably reduce the place: And then it
will be a noble part of the Victorious General to order fair Fair quarter to be
give^*
quarter to be given; or if the besieged have with too much obstinacy, and upon
weak grounds, by holding out too long, and by making him spend too much of his
time, provoked him to wrath and revenge, to make examples of them to others, he
should order no hurt to be done to women, old men, and children; and in one
word, to kill none but those who are found in Arms: But a promiscuous putting
all to the Sword, sparing neither sex nor ag^, is too often practiced; for the
Pillage, the Ancients used after the expugnation of Towns, to bring it all to
the Treasurers Lodging, who sold it, and distributed the money, as he was
appointed by the General, sometimes all of it to the Army, sometimes a part of
it, and sometimes none of it. The like has been often practiced in the Modern
Wars, but the custom is almost worn out, the Plunder belonging to those who
can take it, which is Capiat qui capere potest; and this is truly a very
unequal partition, for those who stay in Arms upon the Wall, or perhaps in the
Marketplace, to make them good against any opposition may arise from hidden
Reserves of the Enemy, share not so well as those, who so soon as they Plunder.
enter, run presently to the Plunder. Some Princes and Generals give the
Pillage of Towns, taken by storm, to their Armies for so many hours, sometimes
for a day, for two days, or three days. It is commonly thought, the Prisoners
and their ransomes belong to those who took them, and so it is commonly
practiced, unless they be great Officers, and those should be delivered to the
General, yet that General should be so generous as to bestow some handsome
Present or gift on those who took them, which some do, but many do not. The
Ordnance, and all that belong to it, all public Magazines of Provisions,
Munitions, and Arms belong to the Prince or State who manageth the War.

But if all Assaults be beat off, and all the Besiegers have done has proved
successless, or that the besieging Army is wasted, as no doubt, it will
diminish Beasons to leave a Siege, and retire.
every day, or that a numerous and fresh succourse be expected, or other
unhappy accidents fall out; then a wise General will raise his Siege in time,
and rather march away, than be chased away, and he should go where he may
refresh and recruit; and be wise by the examples of those otherwise renowned
Princes and Generals, who have obstinately continued Sieges, to their
irreparable Obstinacy in continuing them loses Armies.
loss and danger: So did Lautrec, a great Captain, continue the Siege of
Naples, fighting against a redoubted and courageous Enemy within the City, and
a contagious disease which raged within the bowels of his own Army, which
occasioned first the loss of his own life; secondly, the ignominious rout
Instances.
and destruction of all his Forces; and thirdly, the utter undoing of the
French Interest in that Kingdom to this very hour. So Charles the Fifth, a
fortunate and wa^like Emperor, and his General the Duke of Alva, a renowned
Captain, continued the Siege of Metz (which was gallantly defended by the Duke
of Guise) till the Imperial Army moulder'd away, and was made despicable, by
the sword, sickness, and grievous winter weather, and at length was forced to
make a pitiful Retreat from it, after which that great Prince retired to a
Cloister, and from it to another world. So did that Emperors Great
Grandfather, Charles of Burgundy, with a great deal of vanity, but with a
greater deal of loss, continue his Siege of Nuise as it were in despite of the
Roman Emperor, and all the Princes of Germany, till he was forced to sneak
away from it, with damage and dishonor enough. So did Rocandolf continue the
Siege of Buda, notwithstanding all the prayers and persuasions of all his great
Officers to the contrary, to the utter undoing of a rich and a gallant Army, as
has been told you in another place.

But as in ancient times, so in our late European Wars, it has been an
ordinary To raise a Siege without taking the place no dishonor.
thing for brave Generals to raise their Sieges, either upon the intelligence
of the advance of a strong succourse, or some other weighty consideration. So
did the great Gustavus raise his Siege from Ingolstadt in Bavaria: The Swedish
Felt-Marshal Banier from Leipsick in Saxony: His Successor Torstenson from Birn
in Silesia, and Wrangle, who succeeded him, from Eggar in Bohemia: So did
Instances.
Wallenstein from the Sieges of both Magdeburg and Stralsund: So did Marquess
Spinola raise his Siege from Bergen op Zoom, upon Count Mansfeld's conjunction
with Maurice Prince of Orange, and was not ashamed to bury some of his Cannon,
that he might make his Retreat with more expedition: So did that same Prince
Maurice raise the Siege he had formed at Groll, upon Spinola's advance toward
him. And so did his Brother Henry Prince of Orange rise from Venlo, upon the
approach of the Cardinal Infant. But if a General be well provided, and there
is no sickness in his Army, and if he have strong hopes to To march from a
besieged Fort to fight an Enemy, hazzardous.
carry the place, he ought not to leave it, unless it be to fight the succourse
that is coming to it. This has been often practiced, sometimes unfortunately,
and sometimes successfully. Take a few instances of both. Count Tili left the
Siege of Leipsick, marched toward the King of Sweden, who came to relieve the
Town, and fought him, but to his great loss: So did the Duke of Weymar, and the
Suedish Felt-Marshal Gustavus Horn leave the Siege of Nordling, and marched
Instances.
to fight the Hungarian King, but with the loss of the day, and their Army too.
But that same Duke of Weimar had afterward better fortune when he besieged
Brisac, from the Siege whereof he rose twice, and fought the Armies that were
sent to relieve the Town, and returned both times to the Siege, crowned with
Laurel. So did the Swedish Army leave the Siege of Hameln, (that Town out of
which they say a Piper played first all the Rats, and next all the Children, and
of the last none returned) and met the Imperial Army which advanced to relieve
it, and sought with Victory. So did the French and English leave the Siege of
Dunkirk not many years ago, and fight Don Juan d'Austria, and beat him.

But if the Besieging Army be well, and strongly entrenched against an Enemy To
lie still entrenched notwithstanding of any succourse.
both within and without the Town, and want for no provisions, he should make
no such hazard, but lie still, and when a succourse comes, it must either look
on, and leave the attempt, or storm the Besiegers fortified Camp. If the
succourse be forced to march back without doing his errand, then the Besieger
is master of the Town or Fort. So did the Duke of Alva when he besieged Mons in
Henault, keep himself within his fortified Camp, and endured all the bravadoes
of William Prince of Orange, who came with an Army out of Germany to relieve
the Town, the Duke knowing well that the Prince for want of Money would in a
short time be forced to disband his Army. If he who comes with the succourse,
resolves to storm the Besiegers fortified Camp, he does it with as To storm an
entrenched Camp often unsuccessful.
much disadvantage as an Army without shelter can fight with one that is
entrenched, and seldom such attempts are successful. Hannibal tried it at the
Siege of Capua, and though he did it both skilfully, cunningly, and
courageously, yet after he had stormed the Roman Camp, and was beat off, he was
forced to leave that rich and great City to be a prey to its exasperated Enemy.
Count Pappenheim, though a brave Captain, yet gave cause to question his
discretion very much, when he was so lavish of his Master, the Emperors
Soldiers (at a time when he had so much need of them against the Victorious
King of Sweden) as to storm the fortified Camp of Henry Prince of Orange at
Maestricht, where he left not so few as 1500 dead men on the place, besides as
many more who were wounded. The Prince followed a precedent was given him by
Spinola, when he besieged Breda, who kept himself within his Trenches
constantly, when first Maurice, and then Henry Prince of Orange and Count
Mansfield offered him Battle, and beat off likewise some assaults more made on
some places of his Camp, by that same Prince Henry, and Sir Horatio Vere.

When an Army that has attempted the relief of a Town has retired, and is
either baffled or beaten, the Governor of the besieged place may with
reputation Of rendition.
yield on honorable conditions, which will not be so good as they would have
been before; but be what they will, they ought to be punctually and inviolably
kept; but of this I shall speak in another place. If a Besieger obtain a
Victory over the Army that comes to relieve the besieged place, some think To
drive Prisoners to the Port of a besieged Town.
he may drive all his Prisoners to the Ports of the Town, and if the Governor
will not take them in, he may suffer them to starve. But I can find no reason
why the Governor should admit them, and far less why the Victorious General
should have respited their lives from the Sword, to put them to a more
merciless Death; yet I saw some part of this practiced at that Town of Hammeln,
whereof I spoke but just now; for after the defeat of the Imperial Army, the
Swedish General sent all the Prisoners (who were no fewer than three thousand)
to the Ports of the Town, but the Governor gave entrance to none of them. But,
I conceive, this was done only to frighten the Garrison out of the thoughts of
further resistance, and to give them within, assurance that their Friends were
defeated, and not to starve those poor Creatures. But the matter came not to
the trial, for next day the Governor sought a Parley, and got it, and then
made an accord, got Articles fair enough, and gave over the Town.

The several works that are without the Ditch of a Royal Fortification must The
several kinds of Outworks.
be taken notice of so much, that it will be necessary for a Besieger to make
himself master of them, before he make his approaches to that side of the
Fortress, on which any of these outer works are. Engineers ordinarily make five
kinds of them; these are, Half-Moons, Ravelines, Horn-works, Crown-works, and
Tenailles; some add a sixth kind, Traverses. The manner to take them is the
same I have already described, only I add, that it will be sitting (if
possible) to take away the Water out of those Moats that are not dry, for the
ground of Water-Ditches often proves muddy, yet the mud is sooner made passable
with Fascines, than water is. It is true, if the Ditch be any thing deep, after
the Water is away, you must have Ladders to descend at the Counterscarp, but
these may help you to ascend the Scarp, or the Fausse Bray, if the Fort have
one. The taking away Water from a Ditch is very ordinary, and practicable To
draw Water from a Ditch.
by any Engineer, if there be a descending ground from any part of the Moat.

But notwithstanding all has been said, he who leads an Army, if he find none
of these works without the Counterscarp to retard him, and the place it self
either is not well fortified, or scarce of Men and Munition, or those within
are timorous, or do not well agree among themselves, or that by his
Intelligence he has learned that the Governor is either not experienced, not
vigilant* or is a man of little Authority or Courage, after his first summons
(by the answer whereof he may guess at the Governors resolution) he may, to
save his Master much expense, and himself and his Army much time and labor, To
storm without Approaches.
so soon as he arrives make Batteries, and after a furious Cannonading, fill up
the Moat as well as he can, especially if it be a dry one; clap Ladders to the
Wall, and his Soldiers being well refreshed and encouraged, hazard a storm
with probability enough of success: But on the other part, if the place be well
manned, (though the Fortification be none of the best) and commanded by an
Inconsiderate assaults seldom successful.
active and experienced Governor, who has good Officers under him, and wants
for neither Meat, Artillery, Arms, or Munition, it is but high presumption, or
rather madness, to give an Assault without these previous Approaches, Breaches
and Zaps, whereof I have spoke. The late King of Sweden, a very martial Prince,
blemished his reputation in Military affairs by his inconsiderate storming
Copenhagen, in which was the Danish King with all his Family, many of the
Nobless of Denmark, a good Soldiery, three thousand Students well armed, and
some thousands of Burgesses, who were to fight manfully for all that could be
dear to men on Earth. The event of this Assault was correspondent to the
attempt, for Charles Gustavus was beat off with a great loss of Charles
Gustavus.
both his Army and Honor. Nor was his Uncle Gustavus Adolphus excusable
(though he was the Mars of his time) for storming the Imperial General
Wallenstein's Gustavus Adelphus.
Camp at Nuremburg, strongly fortified on a Hill, and who with his own and the
Bavarian Forces, had as many men within his Leaguer as the King had without,
yet was the Assault obstinately continued almost a whole day, and as resolutely
was the Camp defended by the Imperialists; insomuch that the Hill seemed to be
nothing but fire and smoke. The conclusion was, the King was beaten off, and
forced to leave some thousands of dead men on the place, and fill all the
Lazaretto's of Nuremburg with those who were hurt and wounded. This action of
his proceeded from the great confidence he had in his fortune, and former
successes; but here she turned her back and frowned upon him, nor did she ever
smile on him afterward, for about three months after that he lost his life at
the Battle of Lutsen.

There is a Book of Military matters, dedicated by an Italian Earl to the late
French King, this Kings Father; it is called, Il Guerriero prudente and
politica del Conde Galeazzo Gualdo priorato: After he has discoursed of the
attacks of Forts, he concludes thus, Il lavoro delle quali Battery, Traverse,
Gallerie, Approci, and al^re simili attioni, essend^ opere insegnate
Diligentissima mente da molti buoni Autori, sparmi^ro il tedio, che potesse
ricevere il Lettore da queste mie imperfette fatiche. The labor or travel of
these Batteries, Traverses, Galleries, Approaches, and such other Actions,
being works which have been most diligently taught by many good Authors, I
shall be sparing to give my Reader the trouble he may receive from these
imperfect fatigues of mine. These words I desire my Reader to look upon as my
language or at least as my sense, by which I excuse my self from running out
more copiously on those particulars.

CHAP. XXV. Of the Defense of fortified places against all the ways of
expugnation. Of all things necessary for Forts; of Governors, of their duties
and qualifications.
THere be as many several ways and means to preserve and defend Towns, Forts,
Castles and Cittadels, as there be to take them: But the most difficult part of
all is to guard against Treachery; it is a close and hidden Engine, How to
guard against Treachery.
against which open defenses are seldom proof. Nor do I know any better way
than for a Governor still to imagine he may be betrayed, and therefore to be
constantly on his Guard, to trust but few, and yet seem to trust all: He should
have a wary eye (without seeming to be jealous) on all the Inhabitants of the
place, upon the Officers and Soldiers of his Garrison, especially on such as
are known to be of revengeful, discontented, or avaritious Inclinations; and if
he learn that there is any tampering between any one of them and an Enemy, he
should do well to proceed against them with just severity, for that will prove
to be poena ad paucos, terror ad omnes. If the Governor have any Intelligence
at the Court of the Prince or State who are Enemies to his Master, or with the
Secretaries of their Generals, it will be easy for him to learn what Traitors
he has in his Garrison, and to proceed accordingly against them. A good
antidote also against the poison of Treachery, is neither to trust the several
Ports nor Posts of a Garrisoned place constantly to one Officer, nor to one
Company or Band of Soldiers, whereof I spoke in my Discourse of Watches and
Guards. It has been of bad consequence in all ages, and will be ever a
temptation to all base and treacherous Souls to hatch treasonable designs. The
doing it ruined the late gallant Duke of Guise, and all his great actions, The
late Duke of Guise.
whereby he went fair to have disburthen'd the King of Spain's head of the
Crown of Naples, immediately after the unexemplified Rebellion of Masanello;
but the Duke's entrusting the several Posts of that great City of Naples,
constantly to the same Officers, encouraged one of them to treat with the Count
d'Ognati, and fell him that which was entrusted to him, when the Duke was
reducing an inconsiderable Isle without the City: this blasted all his fair
hopes, and shortly after lost him his liberty.

I told you in the last Chapter, that Surprizal was the second, and next to
Treachery, the easiest way to take fortified places. I spoke of several kinds
of Surprizals; of any of which, if a Governor gets Intelligence, it is easy
for him to render it ineffectual, with the great hazard, if not the inevitable
loss of many of the intended Surprizers; but without Intelligence, a Scalado is
prevented by Guards duly ordered and set, strictly and severely kept, and
Against a Scalado.
by the diligent going of Rounds either the circuit of the whole Fort, or from
Post to Post: for a Scalado is^soon perceived by vigilant Sentinels and careful
Rounds, and as soon are the Ladders thrown down, with those who are upon them.
So were the Duke of Savoy's people used at Geneva seventy years ago, where the
Inhabitants expecting no such thing in time of Peace, kept but a very careless
Watch. And when Spinola besieged Breda in the year 1625. Prince Maurice of
Orange his design to scale the Citadel of Antwerp was utterly defeated by a
more than half sleeping Sentinel. In the next place, there will be Against a
disguised Enemy.
no danger, for a Fort to be surpised by Soldiers disguised like Country
people, if a vigilant Guard examine and search narrowly all who enter the
Ports, especially in the mornings and evenings, which should be done in all
Frontier Garrisons; and the proper place for doing this is eight or ten paces
without the Drawbridge, where there should be a great balk, laid traverse the
Streets, tied at each end by an Iron Chain to a Post made firm in the ground,
and A Spanish Reuter.
through that balk are great holes bored, through which are pales of Wood made
fast, and these sharp at both ends, this denies access to any, either Horse or
Foot, till it be opened. And here likewise should all Wagons and Against
Wagons and Carts.
Carts be searched, especially if they seem to be laden with Hay, Straw or
Corn, through and in which Halberds should be thrust, for many times under such
coverts, armed men are carried in at Ports of fortified places. Neither should
any Cart or Wagon be suffered to stop on a Drawbridge, for that is often done
to hinder the drawing it up, till an Enemy lurking not far off, runs to the
Port and surprises it; and in such a case, if the Portcullis (at which, for
that purpose there should constantly stand a Sentinel) be not very soon let
down, an Enemy may underprop it with strong Forks, shorter or longer, made
purposely for that use.

If the Ports of a Town, Castle or Fort, be in the midst of the Curtain, as
they should be, and ordinarily are, the Flanks of the nearest Bastions seem
sufficient to defend those Ports from Petards, or any other manner of
Surprizal; Against Petards.
yet some think that long and great pricks of Iron of five or six foot length,
sixth in the lower part of the Drawbridge would do well, that when the
Drawbridge is drawn up, those pricks standing out may hinder Petards to be
affixed, as also that in the upper parts of the Gates and Ports loop-holes be
made, pretty wide, out of which may be thrown Stones, Logs of Timber, and
Grenades against the Petardeers, or Water poured to quench the Petard, if it
be already hung on. There are several other ways to be used against Petards,
concerning which I refer you to Engineers and Gunners. But it were good to have
within every Port a piece of Ordnance of a large Caliber, constantly A great
piece of Ordnance within a Port.
charged with Cartridges, wherewith to welcome those who first offer to enter,
for one of those unexpected Vollies does often make an Enemy (who in all
Surpriz^ls has the half, if not more, of the fear) retire faster than he
advanced. I knew an Enemy who had got over the Walls of a little Town in
Germany, without opposition, and had advanced to the Marketplace, where
receiving not above fifteen or sixteen Musquetades, run over the Walls faster
than he entered. There be two general ways good against all manner of
Surprizals. Two defenses against all Surprizals.
The one for the defense of Ports, that is, a Raveline before every Port
defends it from all manner of Attacks and Enterprizers. The second to defend
Curtains and Bulwarks, if the Ditch be dry, a row of Pallisadoes planted in the
middle of it, secures the Wall, for these cannot be cut down so soon, but the
Guards (unless they be all asleep or drunk) will be sufficiently alarmed to
receive an Enemy: If there be two Moats, and Water in both, a row of
Pallisadoes between them secures the place; if there be but one, and Water in
it, it should not be full to the brink, for so Boats may easily transport men,
but they cannot descend with them, without being heard, and then they may be
assured of a shrewd reception. But all this depends on the carefulness and
watchfulness of the Guards, on which indeed does principally depend the
security and safety of the place.

To defend Forts against Blockades, or formed Sieges made by Approaches, there
be six things requisite; first, the fortification of the place, whether that
Six things requisite for a Fort against Sieges and Blockades.
be by Nature, or by Art, or both; secondly, Men; thirdly, Money; fourthly,
Victuals; fifthly, Ammunitions; sixthly, all kind of Arms, Defensive and
Offensive, therein comprehending Artillery. The first of these belongs to the
Engineer, wherein I have no more skill than to tell my Reader, that he, or any
who will study Fortification, will profit more by one lesson taught by word of
Fortification.
mouth from an Engineer, than by twenty writ in a Book, and illustrated every
one of them by Figures. I shall speak a word or two of every one of the other
five necessaries for a Fort.

The second requisite is Men, of whom there should be no more nor fewer than
are able to maintain it. Horsemen, if the Siege continue long, prove Men.
burdensome, yet in three cases they may be made useful, first to make
Sallies, both before and after the Besieger makes his Approaches, till those
come so Horsemen how serviceable in a Siege.
near, that Horse dare not hazard out; secondly, if there be a void street or
Interval between the Houses and the Rampart of the Fort, so broad that Horsemen
can ride five or six in breast, they may be very serviceable to beat an Enemy
out, after he has come over the Wall confusedly. This Interval all ancient
Towns had, and they called it Pomaerium, for they had two of them, one before,
or without, and another within the Wall. Thirdly, If the Horses be called to
the Shambles (which in Sieges is no extraordinary case) the Horsemen may
either have a Post given them to defend, or they may be divided among the Foot.
When Count Nauso (about one hundred and thirty years ago, an Imperial General,
stormed Peronne, after a great breach made in the Walls of it, he was beat off
by the French Gens d'arms belonging to the Lord Florenge, who left their
Horses, and in full Harness, with Pikes, Partisans and H^lberds, maintained the
breach two hours till they were relieved. And I have seen my self, Horsemen
alight from their Horses to storm with the Foot. The estimate of the number of
the Foot for maintaining a fortified place against a Siege must be taken from
the circuit of it: Some will have for every Bulwark of the greater Royal
Fortification one thousand Soldiers, and for the lesser Royal eight hundred,
meaning still besides the Inhabitants, others four or five hundred Soldiers
enough with the Citizens. But since we know not what the number of the
Inhabitants will be, such, I mean, as are able to bear Arms, or whether they
may be trusted or not, we must cast up our account without them. Some therefore
will have for every ten foot of the circumference of the whole Fort six
Soldiers, but others think one Soldier enough for two foot, and so five
Soldiers for ten How many men requisite to maintain ten foot of ground.
foot of ground. If this calculation hold for all the outworks, Counterscarp,
and Fause bray, as well as for the Fort it self, then it can hardly be denied
me, that the whole Infantry of an Army Royal, will be few enough to maintain a
lesser Royal Fortification of ten Bastions, commonly called a Decagon. But let
us speak only of the Fort it self, and suppose it to be an Octogon, that is, a
Town fortified with eight Bastions, a greater number than which our late
Engineers require not in regular Fortifications, though there be some to be
seen of ten, some twelve, and some more Bulwarks. We are first to see of how
many foot of circumference our Octogon will be. We shall appoint every Curtain
of this Fort to be five hundred foot long (an Engineer may make it shorter or
longer as he pleases) by this account eight Curtains take four thousand foot;
every Flank shall have the allowance of one hundred foot, and there being
sixteen Flanks in our Fort, they require sixteen hundred foot, for the face of
every Bulwark shall be allowed three hundred foot, and there being sixteen
faces in the Fort, they must have four thousand eight hundred foot. Add these
three numbers 4000, 1600, and 4800, the aggregate will be 10400 foot. Allow
then one Soldier to maintain two foot of ground of this Town, you shall need
5200 men. But if you will allow six Soldiers to every ten foot of ground, then
you must have 6120 Foot Soldiers to maintain this Octogon, without mentioning
How many requisite to defend an Octogon.
any of its Outworks; and how necessary these be, I shall not offer to
dispute, since it is certain that the longer an Enemy can be kept from the
principal Fort, he is at the greater loss of time, men, munition, and expense,
and consequently the longer time is gained to the Prince or State, to whom the
besieged place belongs, to provide for its relief. But on the other hand, many
Outworks require many men to maintain them, many men require much meat, and
the shorter time meat lasts, the sooner will the Outer-works.
Fort give over: besides, the mouldering away of men in Outworks hugely
weakens the defense of the Fort it self. Neither are these Outworks of an old
date, if it be true, what Cardinal Bentivoglio says, that Maurice Prince of
Orange first added them to Fortification. I dare not believe this, for I
suppose it is not above sixty four years since Maurice was Captain General of
an Army. But if the Inhabitants of this Octogon of ours be the Subjects of the
Prince or State for whom the Fort holds out; and more especially, if they be of
that Of the Inhabitants of a Fort.
same persuasion in matters of Religion with the Garris^^ Soldiers, then fewer
Soldiers will serve, perhaps by half, for those Burgesses within the Walls
will fight stoutly for their Wives, Children, Goods and Liberties, which is pro
aris and focis. But if neither of these be, and that the Citizens are to be
mistrusted, the Governor has to do with a double Enemy, an avowed and open
one without, and a secret, yet a certain one within: And therefore he had need
of both more Men, and more strict Watch; neither must he fail to disarm these
Inhabitants, and command them, for most part, to keep within doors; but in such
cases Cittadels are ordinary. These Fortresses, that are by nature strong, as
situated on a Hill, or flanked with some inaccessible and steep Rocks, or
helped by the nearness of some River or Marsh, besides their artificial
Fortification, will need by a great deal, fewer men, and so be defended at a
far less expense. The number of these Soldiers I spoke of is to be reckoned
without Officers, neither are you to imagine, that in storm or assault all the
How Musketeers should fire from a Parapet.
Soldiers are to be drawn up in one Rank or row, on the Bulwarks or the
Curtains; for at that rate, two foot being allowed to every man, none of them
should have room to handle their Arms; neither should their giving fire be
successive as it should be. In time of storm Soldiers appointed for the guard
of a Post should be drawn up three deep, or in three Ranks, that when one Rank
has given fire over the Parapet, it may descend, and the second mount the
Footbank, and after it the third.

The third thing requisite for a besieged place is Money, and so long as there
Money.
is Money to pay the Garrison, and meat and drink to buy for that Money, the
public Magazines of Proviant should not be touched, and for this reason many
Governors cause Brass to be coined, some Leather, and order it to pass for
current Money, engaging thereafter to give good coin for it: So did Toyras,
Marshal of France, forty years ago, when he was besieged in Casal, by the
famous Marquess Spinola. Yet a Governor should always reserve, if he can, a
stock of Money unspent for all accidents, as knowing the difficulties of the
Siege will increase with time: for though loyalty, duty, reputation, good
words, and hopes, prevail frequently with Soldiers to stand out against all
hardships and difficulties manfully, yet, as the French say, Argent faict tout,
Great use for it in Sieges.
Money does all. Intelligence is bought with Money, fellows will be hired with
Money to go through the strictest, closest, and best guarded approaches, and
this is ordinarily done in time of a Sally made for that purpose; and if the
Intelligencer have agreed with the Governor concerning the precise time of his
return, another Sally is made for his reception. At the time of a desperate
Sally, at the reparation of a dangerous breach, at the work of Retrenching in
time of a furious Cannonade, or when an Assault is assuredly expected, a
largess of Money, with large promises of more, has a wonderful influence upon
the hearts of Soldiers. Nor should a Governor spare, in time of want, to A
Governor may borrow from the Inhabitants.
borrow from the Inhabitants; for if they be disaffected, he may force them to
lend, and if they be friends, it will not be time for them to hoard up their
Moneys, when they are in danger to lose all, as the unhappy Constantinopolitans
did when Sultan Mahomet took their City by assault.

The fourth and fifth things requisite for a Garrison are Munitions of War,
Ammunitions.
and Arms. Powder, Match and Ball should be frugally husbanded, or freely
spent, according to the quantity and store, wherewith the Fort is provided: It
should not be lavished away in the beginning of the Siege, nor should it be
spared in the time of Zaps, Batteries, Galleries and Assaults, but no needless
waste should be made of it in all or any of these; for this purpose a
considerable Magazine of Ammunitions should be put in all Forts, especially in
frontier Garrisons, where the attack of an Enemy is soonest expected; for many
times to supply this want, great hazzards are run to convoy Horse men into the
besieged place, who carry leather bags full of Powder on the croups of their
Horses. Our Fort should likewise be provided with all manner of Arms, Defensive
and Offensive, Pikes, Half-Pikes, Halberds, Partisans, two-handed Swords,
Hangmens Arms.
Swords, Morning-Stars, with all manner of Fireworks and Hand-Granadoes, for
resisting a storm, against which there should be prepared also huge balks and
logs of Timber, tied to Posts with Ropes or Chains, to let fall over, and pull
up again: for these (as likewise a great number of greater and lesser Stones)
do good service in time of Assaults, when an Enemy is mounting either the
Curtain or Bulwark, and cannot be reached by shot unless from the Flanks, which
for most part are made useless by the Enemies Cannon before the Assault. We
read, even since the invention of Powder, what use our Ancestors made of molten
Lead, scalding Water, and boiled Oil in time of Assaults, at which Louis de
Montgomery in his French Milece makes good sport, and says, the Defendants had
as good throw handfuls of Ashes at their Enemies: But I am nothing Louis de
Montgomery his opinion.
of his opinion; for though experience were silent, both reason and sense do
teach us, that Fire does more hurt than Ashes, and is not burning fire in all
these I speak of? Scalding Water no question does mischief, and may be used
with no other expense than fire, but Lead and Oil are chargeable, and may, I
think, be employed for better and more proper uses.

The sixth and last, but not the least requisite and necessary thing for a
besieged Munitions for the mouth.
place is Munitions for the mouth, without which all the rest signify nothing.
What several provisions of meats and drinks (presupposing there be Water enough
in the Fort) are necessary for a Garrison, I have told you in the eighth
Chapter, where I have discoursed of Proviant. The question is now, what
quantity of them should be stored up in a Garrison that apprehends a Siege.
There be some who think that six months provision is enough, and For how long
time a Town should be provided with meat and drink.
of these Louis de Montgomery is one, because, say they, in that time either
the Winter season will force the Besieger to remove, or the relief of the place
will be attempted by him to whom it belongs. But we have seen in our own times
the contrary of both, though we had never heard of the Siege of Troy. Others
speak of three years provision, and this does well; but the Governor when he
is not besieged, should every year lay in one years fresh provisions, causing
the Soldiers to eat and pay for that which is oldest. I believe none will deny
but a Garrison should be provided with meat and drink for one whole year at
least: And no sooner should a provident Governor foresee or apprehend a Siege
(whereof he may have many grounds for a probable conjecture) but he should
command all the Inhabitants to provide themselves of a Citizens to provide a
years ^^^^.
whole years food and maintenance, that his public stores may be preserved for
the Soldiery, and all Citizens who are either unable or unwilling to do so, as
also all unnecessary people should be commanded to remove out of the Town or
Fort.

But after a place is invested, and the Siege formed, it is, I think, an act of
inhumanity to thrust out the Inhabitants, especially if they have not had time
to provide themselves, yea, I think, it is more mercy to cut their throats
within, than to send them out* for it is not to be thought that an Enemy will
suffer them to pass, but will force them back to the Town-Ditches, where they
may lamentably languish and starve to death. Such an action as this, in my
opinion was an eternal blemish to the reputation of Monluc, that famous Marshal
of A merciless act of Marshal Monluc*
France, who, after Sienna (whereof he was Governor) had been strictly
besieged, shut out of the City four thousand Inhabitants, Men and Women, young
and old: The Marquess of Martignan, who commanded the Emperors and Cosmo di
Medici's forces, caused all these miserable wretches to be chaced back to the
Ditches; Monluc would receive none of them within the Town: Some lusty strong
fellows broke through Martignan's Trenches, and escaped; many Women and Maids
were privately (contrary to the Marquess his command) taken into Tents and
Huts, to satiate the lust of the Spaniards; but there dyed of them of mere
hunger near three thousand. Upon this woeful occasion the same Monluc in his
Commentaries has this expression: These are, says he, the merciless laws of
War, we must be many times cruel to disappoint our Enemies: God be merciful to
us for doing so great mischief. Indeed he had reason to cry for Gods mercy for
committing so horrible a wickedness. But in what Codex did he read of such a
Law of War? Nay, where did he hear of such a custom of War? Strange it was in
him to expel and expose those to a merciless death, whom he nor none else had
appointed to provide for a Siege, and whom he might have expelled before the
Siege was formed, that they might have shifted for themselves, or begged
through Italy for bread. If ever there was a precedent for this, it was not to
be imitated by one who professed the name of Christ. And that which made this
action of his altogether inexcusable was, that he expected no succors, And
altogether inexcusable:
for after he was forced to yield the Town, wherein many of those Citizens whom
he permitted to stay, were consumed with Famine, and the remnant of his
Soldiers so hunger-starved that they looked like Skeletons: He confesses in
the first Tome of his Commentaries, That he could never think of what he did,
but with a sad affliction of spirit for his folly, (he should have said, vanity
and arrogance) in reducing that noble City, and his own Soldiery, to the last
morsel of Bread; and submitting them to the mercy of an incensed Enemy, when he
knew well enough that his Master, Henry the Second of France, was neither able
to relieve him at that time, nor desirous he should bring himself and the City
to those extremities.

Reinach, Governor of Brisac, in the year 1638 had a great deal more reason
Brisac.
to keep out that strong Town to the very last against the Duke of Weimar,
since he knew his master the Emperor, would use all means under Heaven to
relieve a place that was of so great a concern to the house of Austria, yet did
he shut no Inhabitants out of it, after it was besieged. This Brisac, for the
famine it suffered during that Siege, was an Epitome of the miseries of Samaria
and Jerusalem in the Holy Land; and of Sancerre and Rochel in France. Caesar in
his Gallick War tells us, with a great abhorrency of the fact, That when he had
reduced Vercengentorix and his Gauls to great want within Alesia, at a Alesia.
Council held by the besieged, one of the prime men among them proposed, that
all the old and unserviceable people of the Town should be killed, and
preserved for food to those who were able to work and fight. But the provisions
for the belly, be they great or small, should be sparingly measured out after
the public storehouses are once broke up. To what I have said of things
requisite and necessary for besieged places, I shall add the care that should
be Physicians, Apothecaries, and Chyrurgions requi^^te.
taken ^or the sick and the wounded, for which Apothecaries Shops and
Chy^u^gions Chests should be well furnished, for curing both sicknesses and
wounds; for the inspection whereof some skilful Physicians should be
entertained.

Our fortified place, be it never so strong, is but a dead body till men be
put* into it, and then we may say it has living members, whereof Victuals are
the nutriment, and Munitions of War, Arms, and Moneys shall be the supporters.
In this Body, to make it serviceable to the Prince, who is the Creator of A
Governor of a For^ress;
it, a Rational Soul must be infused, and that Soul shall be called the
Governor: And of him I may say, almost, as I said in another place of a
Captain General, that such a Governor, as many in their Discourses, and some
in their Writings describe, is to be found in no Country unless it be in
Vtopia; or to be read of in any Books except Romances. He must, say they, have
an universal knowledge of Fortification and Gunnery, he must be very wise, of a
ready A no^ional description of him.
judgment, and a great memory, he should be affable and courteous; yet severe,
eloquent, vigilant, sober, temperate, religious, loyal above measure,
courageous, and indefatigable. This seems to be enough, but there must be more,
he must be an old experienced Captain, and one who has given good proof that
he can both take and defend fortified places. This is a very strange
qualification, for if a man be not admitted to be a Governor, unless he have
been one before, he shall never be one in his life. It needs therefore to be
restricted thus, he shall not be chosen to be Governor of a frontier Town, or
a Royal Fortification, unless he have formerly well defended some Fort or
Castle of lesser importance. The real qualifications he should have.


The truth is, much of the safety of the place depends on the Governor, and
therefore he should be no Novice in Military affairs; but for all that, he
should not be an old man, for age wastes that natural vigor which is required
in a man of his charge, and makes him unable for that fatigue which he is
obliged to undergo. As to his experience, I think it is enough if he have been
at two or three Sieges, and within one or two besieged places, provided he be
of a quick apprehension and judgment, for such a one will learn more at one
sight than others will do at twenty. He should understand the general rules of
Fortification and Gunnery, he should be of a jocund, and jovial humor; for
when Soldiers who are besieged look on their Governor, and see him sullen,
who perhaps naturally is so, they fancy he is conscious of some defects,
weakness, or danger, whereof they know nothing. He should be very courageous,
and though he be bound to save himself from all needless dangers, yet in
assaults he should not be shy to expose his person to the most eminent perils;
for his presence does exceedingly animate those who are hazzarding their lives
in that piece of service. If this be true, as I believe it is, then those are
mistaken, A Coward a had Governor.
who think a Coward a fit^ person to be a Governor, because his constant fear
will make him constantly vigilant, but to what purpose his vigilance, when two
or three hours Battery of Cannon shall terrify him to a surrender? An
opiniator our Governor should not be, but ready both to seek and follow the
advice of his Captains, Engineers, and Gunners; and yet of that judgment, that
he may of himself conclude the advice that is given him to be rational. It is
fitting he have two or three or more Engineers with him, for ordering
Retrenchments, Engineers and Gunners.
and inventing new Defenses, Engines and Machines, according to the emergencies
of the Siege. Good Gunners and Cannoneers he should have in the Fort, who have
skill to make Batteries, Counter-batteries, and sunk Batteries, and to dismount
the Enemies Ordnance. And if there be more Regiments than one in the Garrison,
it were fit the Colonels, Lieutenant Colonels and Majors, were men of good
understanding and experience, that if either the Governor, or any of them
chance to dye (which frequently falls out) those who succeed to them by their
antiquity or priority of place, may be endued with those qualifications that
are suitable to their trust and charge.

Being satisfied with the qualifications of the Governor, and those who are to
assist him, let us in the next place take a view of those duties he owes, and
is bound to perform in the time of a Siege. Before the danger be near, he
Duties of a Governor.
should destroy all the Suburbs (for those are the Cutthroats of Fortresses)
all Mills, Houses of pleasure, Trees, Yards, Gardens, Barns, Enclosures,
Hedges, or any thing else, under, or by which he conceives an Enemy may be
sheltered, or make his Approaches more easy. And this he should do betimes,
that before an Enemies arrival all within two hundred paces of the
Counterscarp, may be an Esplanad; for truly when the besieging Army advances
near the Town, I To make all plain without the Fort.
know not what good it is, or can do, to burn houses, which indeed is quickly
done, but the Walls of those Houses standing, gives as good and as easy
shelter, though not so good an accommodation, as the Houses did. Next, the
Governor is to divide all his men into several Posts, allowing so many to the
To divide it in several Posts.
defense of each, according to the strength or weakness of the place, changing
nightly if he can, for fear of Treachery: withal, he should keep a strong
Reserve constantly in the Marketplace, to make use of as he shall think fit to
give direction. At the beginning of the Siege he is to discharge all private
Parleys To discharge private Parleys.
and Discourses with those who are without; some discharge all Songs and
Whistlings, the striking of Clocks, and ringing of Bells, that thereby no
secret signs or advertizements formerly agreed on, may be given. He is bound To
spare the Soldiers from unnecessary toil.
to spare his Soldiers from toil and fatigue as much as possibly he may; and
it is well if he can order the matter so that they may watch one day, work the
second, and rest the third.

If the Governor have Horse in his Garrison, when the Enemy advances toward
it, he may send them out, with foot behind to sustain them, to make Sallies.
some light skirmishes, and to bring back with them Prisoners, if they can. But
before the Approaches be advanced, so long as an Enemy is fresh, and in great
Bodies, Sallies do him small or no hurt, and the loss of one man of the
Besieged does the Governor more hurt and prejudice, than the loss of ten can
do the Besieger. Sallies are necessary then, when they are undertaken to When
necessary.
hinder the making, or the finishing of a Battery; or if made, to ruin it, or
to hinder the progress of a Zap, or to nail Ordnance or Mortars. Sallies should
be resolutely made, and the Retreat from them orderly: In the time of them, the
Ordnance from the Bastions of the Town should play lustily upon the Approaches
where the Salliers are not, and over all the Approaches upon the Fields, to
hinder succourse to come from the leaguer or quarters; and feints made at other
Ports of the Town, as if the Besiegers were to Sally out of them likewise.
Those who Sally, will not do well to amuse themselves with taking many To take
few Prisoners a^ Sallies.
Prisoners, one or two may serve their turn, to bring to the Governor to give
him intelligence; and those they take should be but common Soldiers, for they
will be more apt to tell what they know than others of better quality; nor is
it to be imagined, that those will be taken in the Approaches, who are upon the
Generals Secrets, unless it be very accidentally. What Prisoners you carry into
a besieged place, you must resolve to entertain them (for back you must not
send them) and guard them, that they escape not, this will be both burthensom
and troublesome to you, and to allow them no maintenance is inhumanity: And this
was the Governor of Brisac's fault, for which he was like to pay dear, as you
may hear in the next Chapter. If by a Sally the Besiegers be beat out of a
Battery, the Pieces of Ordnance and Mortars that are in it, should be
immediately cloyed and nailed; What is to be done in the time of a Sally.
or if the Sallyers have some time to put Powder under the platform, or a train
with a burning match to the Powder Chamber, which is ordinarily beside the
Appareill, it may much endanger and endammage the Besiegers, when they return
to repossess their Battery. But a careful Enemy having Reserves to attend all
accidents, many times pursues the Sallyers so furiously in their Retreat, that
the Besieged are forced to shut their Gates against their own people; therefore
it were not amiss to have Ladders at the Counterscarp, whereby they may descend
to the Ditch, if it be dry, and so get into the Casemates; but these are for
most part left out in our latest Fortifications, I know not for what reason; or
if there be Water in the Moats, in that case little Boats may receive those
Soldiers that cannot enter at the Sally Port. In all, or any of these Sallies,
the Governor ought not to hazard his person, or offer to stir out of his A
Governor not to sally.
Fort, let the pretense be never so specious or plausible. I know many gallant
men have done it, to their irrecoverable loss.

When a Governor perceives where an Enemy intends to batter, or to lodge,
whether it be in Curtain or Bulwark, he is obliged immediately to begin a
Retrenchment behind the place aimed at; but for all that, ^e is to dispute that
A Retrenchment,
Curtain or Bulwark, or any part of them to the uttermost; he must defend it to
extremity, by Sallies, Counter-batteries, by sinking Cannon to destroy the
Galleries, and by Counter-mines to blow up those who lodge in the breaches; and
if he must quit it, he is to do it by inches. But all this while the Governor
is busy working at his Retrenchment, that when he is forced to part with that
for which he has fought so well, he may retire his men to his Countermure,
where the Besiegers shall have a new work to begin. A Retrenchment What it is.
is a new line, as regularly drawn, and fortified with Flanks, as the
convenience of the place may permit: It is made up of stone, earth, rubbish,
boards, balks and planks, feather-beds, woollen or straw sacks, dung, or what
can be had, whereof store should be provided before hand. If there be ground
enough for it between the Rampart and the Town it is well; if not, as many
Houses, owe them who will, must be pulled down, as may serve the turn. The
Ancients used Called a Countermure.
these Retrenchments frequently, and called them Countermures: The Germans call
them Absueid, that is, a cutting off; because by it they cut off the rest of
the Fort from that part the Enemy has taken. Many times they are made in a
very short time, and so they may in a Town where no serviceable Creature is
exempted from work, young nor old, man nor woman, except whom childhood or old
age, or sickness excuses. Yet, I think, that which Monluc writes concerning a
Retrenchment is very strange: He says, he was in Henry Great celerity.
the Second of France his time, with the Count of Brisac, at the Siege of a
Castle in Piedmont, called Courteville, where by a continued Battery of twelve
hundred shot of Cannon in the space of twenty four hours, the Wall was so beat
down that the French went to storm, which when they did, they saw opposite to
them a Countermure as strong as the Wall, made up in the time of the Battery.
Yet Monluc by his own relation, took longer time himself to make a Retrenchment
at Sienna, where he had a great deal of more hands to work than can be imagined
could be got in any Castle of Piedmont.

But if after all this care, diligence, and noble behavior of the Governor
What to be done at a storm.
and his Garrison, the Besiegers shall give a general storm to the Fort, the
Governor and all his Soldiery having made preparation beforehand for a
gallant resistance, he and they are to carry themselves so manfully in the
Assault that the Enemy may be beat off; but if that cannot be, he and his
Garrison may either dye like men, or if they be taken Prisoners, they may
outlive their misfortune with honor and reputation.

Next to that of a Captain General, there is not a more ticklish charge in the
whole Military employment, or that requires more caution in accepting, than
this of a Governor; for on his good and happy, or bad or misfortunate
deportment Private capitulation between a Prince and a Governor of a Fort.
depends the Prince his service, his own reputation, the welfare or ruin of
the place, or perhaps the whole Country where the Fortress is situated: and
therefore a person of honor should be shy to engage in it; or if the obedience
he owes to the absolute command of his Prince, or his General, force him to
accept it, he should do it on conditions secretly agreed on, to which few or
none but the Prince of his General should be privy. The conditions may be
supposed to be such as these which follow.

If the place be well fortified, after either the ancient or later way of
Fortification, The supposed conditions of i^.
and well provided with men, and all those other necessary things formerly
mentioned, the Governor may oblige himself, so long as his Ammunition and
Victuals hold out, to maintain it to the last drop of his blood, without any
other conditions. But if there be any defect in these or any of these, then the
private conditions should be; First, How long he shall be bound to hold out.
First. Second. Third.
Secondly, If he shall reject all summons and all proffers, till the Enemy has
fully formed his Siege, and invested the Fort. Thirdly, If he shall hearken to
no agreement, till the Enemy make his Approaches, and begin to make Batteries;
for you are to observe, the Governor is to expect worse conditions after the
Cannon has played than before. Fourthly, If he shall endure the Battery,
Fourth.
Zap and Mine, and all this to give time for the Prince or his General to
gather forces for the relief of the Fort. Fifthly, If the Governor shall be
Fifth.
obliged to hold out one storm, and then capitulate, or more than one; for you
are still to imagine, that the nearer the Enemy draws to him, the worse
conditions will be offered him. Sixthly, How soon he may expect a succourse
after Sixth.
the Siege is formed, that accordingly he may take his measures, and to save
Men and Munition, may protract and gain time by counterfeited Parleys
Counterfeit parleys.
(a thing excellently well practiced by Sir James Ramsay at the Siege of Hanaw,
1636 and -37.) in seeming to accept some offered conditions, but to require
others which he knows will not be granted; but he must still be sure not to
treat in earnest, till some days after the expiration of the time of the
promised relief agreed on in the private capitulation between the Prince or his
General, and the Governor. Seventhly, If the promised succourse come not at
the Seventh.
appointed time, as being hindered by those insurmountable difficulties which
could not be foreseen; whether then the Governor may not accept of Articles,
and by giving over the Fort, save his Masters Artillery, Arms, Ammunitions and
Victuals? and if this cannot be granted him, whether he may not by the loss of
some of these, or all of these, save the lives of his Garrison, by the best
accord he can make? And lastly, The Prince or his General should exactly Eighth.
condescend and agree with the Governor what Dumb Intelligence shall be given
by signs by either party, that both may understand how all these foregoing
transactions will be, or will not be performed, and what tokens shall be given
in the day time and what in the night; as suppose so many shot of great Dumb
Intelligence.
Guns either in the day time or the night, shall signify such a thing; a great
smoke made at such a place in the day time shall intimate such and such a
matter; three, four or five shot of Cannon made at such an hour of the night,
or a Lanthorn with many lights let down so many times in the night time from a
high Steeple shall denote the wants within the Fort, or perhaps the number of
weeks and days the Governor is able to hold out; one, two, or three Fires made
at such a distance without, shall let the Governor know such and such things.
They should likewise agree concerning Intelligence to be sent in or out by word
of mouth or Letters: The last should be writ in Ciphers, a Copy whereof both
General and Governor should have: The first should be such language as the
Messenger himself should not understand the meaning or sense of it. In the
punctual observation of all these the General and Governor should be very wary
and attentive.

But in my Discourse of Intelligence, I told you how dangerous it is to trust
to any Intelligence, that by word of mouth may be revealed to an Enemy either
Letters dangerous.
by the Treachery, or the confession (pressed out by torture) of him who
carries it. That by Letters may be revealed by the carriers fear or falsehood,
and the Ciphers opened with a Key, or they may be betrayed by the Secretaries
who wrote them. Next, a great persons subscription may be counterfeited, in
which art some are very expert; neither is there any hurt in it, so they make
not a bad use of their skill, and a Prince or a Generals Seal may be taken from
some old Pass, and clapped to a new Paper. This was practiced in the time of
Francis the First, King of France, at the Siege of Saint Disier on the Marne,
where the Emperor Charles the Fifth was in person: Here the Count of Sancerr^
was cheated to a surrender of the place (which he had defended a long
Counterfeit^d Letters.
time with much honor and valor) by a Letter feigned to be sent from Claud
Duke of Guise, the French Kings Lieutenant General, whose subscription was
handsomely counterfeited, and his Seal taken from an old Paper, and put on the
Letter; all contrived by Granuell, President of the Emperors Council, who
gained, with much Gold, a Frenchman to carry this Letter in the soal of his
shoe, into the Town. This French fellow was as much Fool as Knave, who did not
reveal the whole matter to Sancerre, from whom he might likewise have received
Gold enough. But a trusty and faithful Messenger may be sent into, or out of a
A faithful and cunning Messenger may do much good in a Siege.
besieged place, and go straight to an Enemy, and seem to reveal all he knows,
and give up the Letters he carries, (which should contain no truth) and by that
means carry his Letter of importance safely as he is directed, seeming to do
the Enemy service; but here cunning should be added to fidelity; and men of
that Caliber are rare; yet the Rochellers met with one of them who adventured
to cheat a no less person than Cardinal Richelieu, and did it. A Gentleman of
Anjou offered to the Duke of Soubise, to enter into Rochel (then besieged
Instance.
and reduced to the last extremity) and bring him certain news of the Towns
condition. He went straight to the Cardinal (with whom he had gained some
trust) and told him what he had undertaken: this great States man permitted him
to slip into the Town, provided he should show him his Letters at his return,
which he promised; having done his business in the City, he came back to the
Cardinal, and delivered him the Towns Letters, written purposely that this
Great Minister might read them, who took some pains to open and seal them again
handsomely, and bid the Gentleman carry them to Soubise; who went and delivered
to the Duke a hidden Letter, which told him the true condition of the City, and
that was, That it could not hold out above two days without succourse, or all
must dye for hunger.

If signs by fire, smoke, or shot of Cannon be not agreed on before the place
be invested, it will be very dangerous to do it afterward by Letters for these
may be intercepted, or betrayed. The last whereof befell two illu^strious
Brothers, both of them great Captains, those were Maurice and Henry, Princes of
Orange, both of them egregiously cheated by a Country Clown. Maurice entrusts
him with Letters to Justin of Nassaw, Governor of Breda, when it was besieged
round by Marquess Spinola; the fellow undertook to deliver the Letter, and
bring the Governors answer, and so he did, but not till Letters revealed to an
Enemy.
Spinola had read both, the first before he entered, and the second after he
came out of the Town, who thereby came to the knowledge of all their secrets;
the Rogue was well rewarded by both parties. But after Maurice his death, this
Bore resolves to serve his Brother, Prince Henry, in the same fashion, and to
that end seemed to be gained with much difficulty, and by much Gold, to carry
the Prince his last Letters to the Governor: Henry wrote to him, that it was
then purely impossible to raise the Siege, and desired him at midnight to
discharge three pieces of Ordnance, and that thereafter by several fires on the
great Steeple, he should let him know how many days his Victuals would hold
out. The Intelligencer went straight to Spinola, who having read the Letter,
and handsomely sealed it up, dispatched the faithful messenger to the
Governor, who at the prefixed time made his three shots, and by eleven signs
made by fire, let the Prince know he was able to subsist no longer than eleven
days; which Spinola did as punctually observe as the Prince of Orange did. In
the time of that same Siege, at a Sally, a German Soldier was taken by the
Count of Isemberg, who treated his Countryman so well, that the fellow
undertook to return to the Town, and come back to the Spanish Camp when the
Victuals of the besieged City grew scarce, which he did; and thereby Spinola
had likewise a fair help given him how to take his measures.

If all endeavors, and all hopes fail, and that inexorable necessity force the
To yield on Articles.
Governor to yield, let him do it on the most honorable and advantageous
terms he can; and let him be sure to have his Articles signed by him who
commands in chief; and if he can obtain it, let him get Hostages of quality
sent to some neighbor Garrison, to lie there till all conditions agreed on be
performed. Of Articles I shall speak in the next Chapter.

But if there be small, or no hopes of succors, it will not be fit for a
Governor Obstinacy in defending Forts hurtful,
to bring things to the last extremity, or stand out, where he cannot probably
hope to resist; for that exposes his men to Butchery, a thing very
unacceptable to God, and prejudicial to his Masters service. It is needless to
illustrate this with examples, story is full of them, and we have seen the
practice of it in our own days. The Imperial Lieutenant General, Count Tili,
finding New Brandenburg (an inconsiderable Town) obstinately defended by Major
General Kniphausen, and his Suedish Garrison, did at the storm forbid all
quarter (though he was known to be merciful enough) and after he had carried
the Town by Assault, he told the Governor who was then Prisoner, That he could
not use him worse than send him to his Master, the King of Sueden, who, he
thought, was obliged in Justice to hang him, for losing him so many gallant
men, by his vanity and arrogant resistance. And truly, I think, to put a few
Especially those of small importance.
men in an obscure place, or a Castle of a mean Fortification, and command them
to stand out against a well appointed Army, or that which ordinarily passes
under the name of an Army Royal, is to send them directly to the Shambles; for
what General will suffer himself to be so affronted, and not revenge it? When
the French King, Francis the First, marched into Italy with Instances.
a mighty Army, the Governor of a little ill fortified Castle in Piedmont,
called Volane, made a Sally, and killed and plundered some French Baggagemen:
The Castle is summoned, and refusing to yield on honest conditions, it is
invested, and forced to render on mercy, whereof they found but little in that
severe Constable Anne de Montmorancy, who caused the poor Governor, and his
Garrison, to be hanged every mothers son. Another Castle held out against
Charles the Fifth, when he retired to Italy, out of Provence, but being forced
to yield, the Garrison received the like usage, every man of it being forced to
end his life on a Gallows.

Yet sometimes the condition of the War, and the circumstances of it require,
Yet sometimes Ratio Belli requires it.
that a Governor and his Garrison should rather fight to death, than accept of
any agreement, and this is when time must be given for gathering or joining of
forces; or in a Retreat, to give a stop to an Enemies furious pursuit; and this
Ratio Belli in such cases, has Ratio Physica in the belly of it, for it is
nothing else but Amputation, by cutting one member off to save the whole Body.

On the other hand, to give over a fortified place without a Noble, and To give
over with small, or no resistance, punishable with death.
Souldier-like resistance, is a crime which comes near to that of Treason; for
it is indeed Tradere urbem in potestatem Hostis, To betray the Town into the
power of the Enemy. And as it was with the Ancients, so it is yet punishable
with shameful death. Monluc tells us in his Commentaries, that Don Arbre, a
Spanish Colonel, caused a Captain to be hanged at the Bridge Instances.
of Asturia, a Town in Piedmont, without Process or hearing him, for giving
over a Castle without an Assault; and he says, he knew the like severity used
to others for crimes of that nature. In the year 1632. Gustavus Adolphus took a
Town in Bavaria called Reene, in two days time, and left a Colonel to be
Governor there, who was besieged shortly after, and kept out the Town eight
days: But because the King his Master thought he had given it over too soon, he
caused his head to be struck from his Shoulders. In the year 1636. Jane
Deverth, and some other Imperial and Spanish Generals, destroyed a great deal
of Picardy, and burnt many Villages; at that time the Governor of Chastelet
having abundance of all things requisite to hold out a Siege, basely gave it
over, and though he saved himself by flight, yet was he by the French Kings
command, hanged in essigi^. Corvey, a very strong place, was also cowardly
given over to the Spaniards, who put a Garrison into it, the Governor whereof
delivered it back to the French sooner than he needed; for which, so soon as he
came to the first Town of Artois, where there was a Garrison, he was commanded
to alight from his Horse, kneel at the Port, and without other Process, had his
Head struck off by the hand of a Hangman. I remember that in the year 1637. the
Suedish Felt-Marshal Banier garrisoned the strong Castle of Luneburg, which
Castle they called Kalkberg, and appointed one Colonel Stammer to be Governor
of it, who not long after yielded it to the Duke of Luneburg without
resistance; pretending for his vindication to a Court of War, that his
Conscience would not permit him to occasion so much blood to be shed, as he
knew would be spilt, if he offered to defend the Castle: But the Court made no
scruple of Conscience to pass a sentence of Death upon him; which by Banier's
command, was executed at St^tin, by cutting off his Head, as finding the
Colonels Conscience dangerously and ridiculously misled by an erroneous
Judgment.

Having discoursed thus far of the Defense of Towns and Forts, I shall tell my
Reader, that some are pleased upon this subject to start a question, which is
this, Whether all places which Princes and States intend to maintain with A
Question started,
Garrisons, should be fortified a-la-Modern, that is, according to the Modern
Art of Fortification, with Curtains, Gorges, Faces, and Flanks of Bulwarks,
Fausse brays, Ditches, Counterscarps, and Outworks? Or if a place fortified a
l'antique, or the ancient manner, may without prejudice be kept and defended,
as it is? There be reasons pro and con. But some judicious persons, who have
observed the practice of our Modern Wars in Europe these sixty years bypast;
especially in the long German War, where many Forts were taken and re-taken,
where many places only fortified in the ancient way, remained inexpugnable,
notwithstanding obstinate Sieges formed against them, having in them but small
Garrisons of Soldiers, assisted by stout and resolute Inhabitants; whereas
other places of great importance, fortified with all the new inventions of Art,
have either suddenly been taken by force, or soon brought to surrender on
Articles. I say, they doubt not Answered.
to averr, That a Town which has a strong Stone Wall, (observe here, that the
hardest Stone is soonest breach'd) with Towers at a convenient distance one
from another, with dry and deep Ditches; a good and firm Counterscarp, without
any Outworks (wherein men are irrecoverably lost, to the great prejudice of
the Fort) this Town, defended by a resolute and indifferently well experienced
Governor, seconded by stout and valiant Soldiers and Burgesses, though not
very numerous, may make as good and as long, if not a stouter and longer
resistance, than a Town fortified a-la-modern, c^teris paribus, that is, the
one being provided as well as the other, with Meat, Money, Munition, Arms and
Artillery. It is true, those Round Towers built on the Wall, in the ancient
manner, cannot be well Flanked; but to that it is answered, that they do much
hurt in Approaches, and are not battered down, but with a vast expense of
Powder and Bullet; as also, that the Faces of the Modern Bulwarks, which take
up much more than the third part of the whole Fortification, have no other
Defenses but from the second Flanks, and those are not very considerable.

CHAP. XXVI. Of Prisoners, Parleys, Treaties, and of Articles, in our Modern
Wars.
IN those Battles, Retreats, Sieges and Defense of Towns, whereof we have
spoken in the four preceding Chapters; there have been, no doubt, many
Prisoners, many Parleys and Treaties made, and many Articles signed, and
therefore it is fit to speak something of them. In the twenty third Chapter of
my Discourses of the Roman Art of War, I have shown you the manner of them
among the Ancients; between which, and that used in the Modern War, we shall
not find very essential differences. And first we shall speak of Prisoners.

Imprisonment is one of those seven external afflictions, which learned men
Imprisonment.
say follow the humane nature, and may befall every particular man, how great
soever he be. Emperors and Kings, yea, our Blessed Savior, as he was Man, was
not exempted from it. Men are made Prisoners, for crimes, for debts, and by
chance of War; and it is of these I named last, whereof I now discourse. How
those should demean or comfort themselves, I leave to the directions of the
Divine or Moral Philosopher; only I shall say this, and perhaps may averr it to
be true, That if Soldiers would accustom themselves to be sometimes alone,
and learn to enjoy themselves without other company, and have those meditations
they ought to have of their own mortal and uncertain condition, they would
endure Imprisonment with greater patience, than those can, who when they are at
liberty, cannot live without society and company; for he who can live
pleasantly and contentedly alone, will find a Prison easy enough, if no other
affliction be added to it.

We may divide all Prisoners of War into two Classes, of those who are taken
Prisoners of War, Divided into two Classes.
without any previous Treaty, and those who have Articles. The first Class we
may sub-divide into those who have quarter verbally promised them, and those
who submit to the mercy of the Victor. Of all these, and each of these, I shall
say one word in general, that though quarter be promised by inferior Officers
or Soldiers, or that the vanquished hoping for mercy, yield without any such
promise, he who commands in chief (provided he be on the place) may put all
those Prisoners to the Sword; for quarter given by the Inferior signifies
nothing till it be confirmed by him who commands on the place, and then the
Prisoners have quarter. That chief Commander may order them all to be killed,
without any imputation of breach of Faith or Justice, as not being tied by any
promise his inferior has made; and this he may do by the Law of War, and that
is grounded on the law and custom of Nations; and if you will believe Cyrus,
and the Ahtenians, it is grounded on the Law of Nature, by which Prisoners of
War may be used as the Victor pleases. And Grotius says, In Captivos quicquam
impune fieri, and Captivi Jure Belli occidi possunt. What a General may do with
Prisoners of War.
Suppose still, that no quarter has been promised by him who commands in chief
on the place. But though, I say, a General may do this by the Law of War, yet
he cannot do it without the imputation of horrible cruelty and inhumanity,
except in some cases. And though Jure Belli they may be killed, yet without
invincible reasons, to kill men in cold blood is not the part of a man; for
they cast up their account, that the bitterness of death is past, and therefore
they should not be put to death, unless he who inflicts it, can produce as good
a warrant for it, as he could who hewed the King of the Amalekites in pieces,
after Saul had given him quarter. The Heathen Tacitus could say, Trucidare
deditos saevum; It is cruelty to kill those who submit. Yet you will Cruelty to
kill Prisoners in cold blood.
see anon that Christian Prisoners of War have been put to death in cold blood
by Christian Princes and Generals, without any other Authority for their so
doing, than what the Law of War gave them.

But after Quarter is confirmed or granted by the General, the question is,
Whether upon the emergency of three several accidents, they may not be put to
the Sword? The first is, if an Enemy rally after a Battle is won, and make,
Whether Prisoners may not be killed after Quarter given them by the General, In
three cases.
or offer to make a fierce onset, the victorious Army not being so strong to
oppose the charge and guard the Prisoners, from whom also danger is to be
expected; This was Henry the fifth of Englands case at Agencourt, where, for
the same reasons, 6000 French Prisoners by his order were in an instant put to
the Sword.

Froissard passionately relates to us the sad fate of about one thousand French
men, who were taken Prisoners, and had fair quarter given them by John King of
Portugal, in a battle that he fought with one of his own name, King of Castile:
the story was briefly this, The King of Castile having a just pretense to the
Crown of Portugal, (to which in hatred of the Castillans, the Portugueses had
advanced a Bastard) invades Portugal with a great Army, in which were many
French Auxiliaries: The Portuguese King being reinforced with a considerable
number of English Archers, resolves to fight. The French would needs have the
point, which was given them with much indignation by the Castillans, who lag'd
behind them at a very great distance. These French valiantly fighting, are
routed, and most of the thousand I spoke of, are taken; thereafter the
Castillans advanced with a resolution to fight; the Portuguese seeing he was to
fight a new Battle, commanded under pain of Death, every man to kill his
Prisoner, which was instantly performed with much pity and compassion, and not
without the sad tears of those who massacred them.

The second case is, when an Army is retiring, and a powerful Enemy fiercely
pursuing, it will be dangerous to leave your Prisoners behind you, and forward
you can hardly bring them. And the third is, When you are reduced to great
penury and want of meat, whether you had not better kill your Prisoners than
let them starve, for if you maintain them, they insensibly cut your throat by
eating your bread. All these three cases Grotius comprehends in these words, Si
Captivorum multitudo oneri aut periculo sit; If, says he, the multitude of
your Prisoners be dangerous or burdensome, in these cases he advises rather
to dismiss them, than kill them. I think he speaks like a good Christian; but I
am afraid, that they who lead Armies will think by such mercies they will prove
cruel to themselves, and treacherous to their Prince; and when in any of these
cases they are put to death, often their numbers occasion their destruction,
which in other cases the same G^otius would have to be the cause of their
safety.

But the Prince or Generals promise of fair quarter admits ^a salvo, for
notorious To whom Quarter ought not to be given.
Thieves, Robbers, Murderers, such as have deserted their service and run over
to the Enemy, or have broke their Oath of fidelity, ought not to be
comprehended in this promise, nor can it save them from the stroke of Justice:
Indeed if they get Articles signed for their lives, these Articles should be
religiously observed, for faith should be kept to the worst of men. Neither can
the promise of Quarter secure Rebels from that death Rebellion deserves; for
nothing can save them but the mercy of the Sovereign Prince or State, against
whom the crime is committed: Yet my humble opinion should be, That when What to
be done with Rebels.
Rebellion is come to that growth, that she is not ashamed to take her mask
off, and that the success of Rebels has clothed them with usurped Authority,
Princes and States should rather suffer Quarter (though without Articles) to be
kept to those of them who are taken Prisoners, than provoke them to shed the
blood of loyal persons on Scaffolds, as has been done too often; for it is not
to be doubted, but Rebels will both by their Paper and leaden Bullets,
vindicate themselves, and maintain their Authority to be lawful, and roar out
these distinctions, which yet make our Ears tingle, of the Prince his virtual
and personal power, of his legal and personal capacity.

Having told you, who has power to give Quarter, and having spoken of
Prisoners who yield on discretion.
Prisoners who yield upon promise of Quarter, let us speak next of those who
submit to the Victors discretion, and have no promise of Quarter, who certainly
may be put to the edge of the Sword, without any imputation of breach of Faith
or promise, yet not without the imputation of cruel inhumanity. They do not
indeed transgress against the Laws of War nor Nations, who shed* their blood;
but they sin against humane nature, which commiserates frailty, and against the
Laws of Christ. The Duke of Alva, and his Son Don Frederick* Inhumanity to kill
them.
broke no faith nor promise to the Garrison and Inhabitants of Harlem and
Narden in Holland, who had submitted to their mercy, when they beheaded, hanged
and butchered to death many thousands of them: but that horrible action Duke of
Alva, and his son.
of theirs has left an eternal stain of inhumane cruelty on their names, as it
will do on all those who imitate their bloody example. The Duke of Burgundy,
Charles the Warlike, Besieged and Battered Granson, a Town belonging to Charles
Duke of Burgundy.
the Switsers, the Garrison consisting of 800 men, yielded to his mercy, which
was such, as that he put them all to the Sword: But here vengeance pursued him
close, for within a very few days, he was shamefully beaten by the Switzers,
who were but a handful of men in comparison of his numerous Army. Commonly
three reasons are given for putting those to death who yield on discretion;
Reasons given for it.
First, Obstinacy in holding out: Secondly, To terrify others: Thirdly, To use
Legem Talionis, when the Prince or General of the other party has formerly
used the like severity. To the first, to hold out gallantly, and resolutely, so
long as there are any hopes of a Relief, is not a crime in it self, but if
accidentally a Garrison have provoked the Besieger to revenge, it will be
Answer to the first reason.
more gallantly done to refuse all Parley, discharge all Quarter, and in the
fury put all to the Sword, than to kill them in cold blood; yet it is
frequently done. But Torstenson the Sweedish Felt-Marshal did generously, when
he resolved to put a Danish Garrison of 600 men to the Sword, who were in a
Sconce of the Duchy of Holstein, he refused all Parley and Treaty, and in the
Storm killed them every man. Yet this action of his smelled too rank of
revenge, for it was thought, all this blood was shed, because a Sweedish
Admiral called Flemyng was killed with a Cannon Bullet out of that Sconce. The
second reason to kill men ad terrorem, to terrify others, has no show of
reason in it; for why should To the second.
men be terrified from doing their duty? Shall a Governor yield his Fort for
fear, the Besiegers may kill him, if he yield it not? when he deserves to be
hanged by his own Prince, if he should yield it for any such reason. To the
third reason, it is answered, That by the Law of Nature in justice and equity,
To the third.
Talio can only be used against the person or persons who committed the crime,
and therefore it is a trangression against the Law of Nature, and a high
injustice to put a Garrison to the Sword, which either does yield, or would
yield to mercy, only because the Prince or General of the other party did so;
for none of this Garrison now to be butchered were partakers of that crime. But
this lex talionis is pretended too often for killing men after they have got
Articles, and that is worst of all, whereof I shall speak hereafter: But other
reasons may Other reasons alleged and answered.
be given for this killing of those who submit to discretion, which the Germans
call genad and ungenad, that is, mercy or no mercy, as when the Prisoners are
too numerous, a powerful Enemy expected, or the Soldiers are apt to mutiny, if
they get not the spoil. To the last I say, lives and the blood of men are no
spoil nor booty; to the other two, better have refused (as I said before) all
Treaty and Parley: Yet this was the case of San Joseph and 700 Italian
Soldiers at Smerwick in Ireland, who yielded themselves to the mercy of the
Lord Gray, Deputy of that Kingdom; the Officers had their lives spared, all the
Irish were hanged, and the Italians put to the edge of the Sword* and when this
was told to Queen Elizabeth, that heroic Princess, who detested the killing of
those who yielded, she was exceedingly displeased, nor would she accept of any
excuses or allegations.

I have told you in another place, how Prisoners of War were used by the
Ancients, let us take a view, what usage many of them have met with in our
Modern Wars: The Mexicans or Tenustitans used to sacrifice their Prisoners to
their Idols, or to the Sun. The Cannibals, to fat them, kill them and eat
Horrible cruelties.
them. A Parthian King took Valerian a Roman Emperor, on whose neck that
barbarous Prince ordinarily set his foot when he mounted his Horse, and at
length did fley him quick. Tamberlan used Bajazet the great Turk ill enough,
yet did he suffer him to be his own Bourrea^. Mahomet the Great, took some of
Scanderbegs Captains, and fley'd them quick, and in that ^o^^ent he kept them
fifteen days alive; the like cruelty he used to a poor King of Cara^annia: He
put also to death all who had any relation to the Imperial families of
Constantinople and Trapesund. But it were well, if these cruelties had been
only exercised by Heathens and Infidels, but it is pity so many Christians have
taken license to themselves to deal mercilesly with their Prisoners, even those
who profess the same faith in Christ, who gave no warrant to his followers to
mask cruelty with that Law or Custom of Nations, whereof Cyrus spoke to his
Captains, and the Althenian Ambassadors to the Melitans. Heathens killed
sometimes those who had got quarter, so have Christians done too often. In the
Civil Wars of France, it was practiced many times by the parties of both
persuasions to put Man, Woman and Child to the Sword, or lead them out to some
River and drown them. We read of a Protestant Colonel, A devilish act.
who for his sport forced all his Prisoners (except one) to leap from the top
of a high Steeple; certainly this mirth of his was mixed with much mischief. In
these Wars, though Commanders in chief might (though not without cruelty) put
Prisoners to death, to whom their inferiors had promised Quarter; yet I wonder,
how others below them, and of a mean condition, usurped that same power, and
were never either punished, reproved or reprehended for it. At the Battle of
Dreux, Saint Andrew Marshal of France, had Quarter given him by a Gentleman,
who mounted him on the croup of his Horse, having no other to give him; but one
Banbigni pretending the Marshal had once wronged him at Court, shot him through
the head, for which barbarous act he was never punished by the Admiral of
France, who commanded the Quarter basely broke.
Protestant Army, the Prince of Conde being made Prisoner at the same Battle.
More generous was Prince Portian, who though he had received many real injuries
from Monmorancy Constable of France, yet when he saw him Prisoner at that same
Battle of Dreux, he gave him his hand, and offered him all the service he could
do him. The Prince of Conde had fair Quarter given him at the Battle of Jarnac,
but was thereafter inhumanly shot through the head by a private Gentleman, nor
was ever the Murderer called in question for it. But these may seem but
peccadilloes to the cruelties which are related by Historians, of some of which
I shall give you a touch.

In a Sea Battle fought about the year 1253. between the Venetians and
Genueses, Merciless inhumanities.
(with the last whereof some of the Emperor of Greece his Ships were joined)
the Venetian fleet was routed, all the Prisoners who fell to the Genoways share
were put to death, every Mothers Son; but the Greeks pretended they would deal
more mercifully with their Captives, and I will tell you how they exercised it:
They put out both their eyes, set them a shore, and so sent them to look for
their fortunes; so true is it what Truth it self has told us, That the mercies
of the wicked are cruel. As Charles of Burgundy Besieged Nancy the Lorreiners
endeavored to enter the Town, which some performed, but one Cifron a prime
Gentleman was taken, and had quarter given him, but the Duke against all Law
and Equity would have him hanged: the Gentleman desired to speak privately with
the Duke before his death, intending to reveal to him the horrid Treason
plotted against him by his Favorite the Count Campobacchio; but that obstinate
Prince would not hear him, and so the poor Gentleman was hanged; upon which
followed the loss of the Dukes Army, honor and life: The pretended reason he
gave for hanging Cifron was, It was (as he said) a capital crime to offer to
enter into a Town that was Invested and Besieged by a Prince, and against which
he had made use of Ordnance, a thing in those days sometimes practiced by the
Italians and Spaniards, but now deservedly out of fashion. Charles of Anjou,
Brother to the French King Louis A King and an Archduke Prisoners of War,
beheaded.
the Saint, did worse than all this; for having taken the title of King of
Naples and Sicily, by the donation of Pope Martin, it happened that he took
Conradin, the true proprietary of these Kingdoms, prisoner, and with him
Frederick Archduke of Austria, and beheaded them both publicly on a Scaffold,
and with them a considerable number of the Nobility of those Kingdoms, who were
all Prisoners of War; an action so much the more execrable, that it was
committed by a Christian King, and by the instigation of a Pope, who assumed to
himself the title of Head of the Church. This cruel King had a Son, who was
called Charles the Halting, a Prince of a sweet disposition, who had like to
have paid dear for his Fathers sin, he was taken at a Sea Fight by Roger de
Lorra, that famous Admiral of Arrag^n, and in Si^^ly condemned to dye in that
same manner as the other two Princes had done; but the sentence of death being
brought to him on a Friday morning, his answer was, He was well contented to die
on that day on which his Savior suffered the death of the Cross* which being
reported to the Religious Queen Constance (who was then Regent in Sicily for
her Husband Peter King of Arragon) she said, That for his sake who dyed that
day for all Believers, Charles should live, and so saved him: But it was not in
her power to hinder the revengeful Sicilians to sacrifice on a Scaffold the
heads of two hundred French Gentlemen (all taken with Prince Charles*) to
appease How revenged.
the Ghosts of the murdered Conradin and Frederick. This they thought was Lex
Talionis, though indeed it was nothing like it. Take one of a later date, When
A detestable act of a Count of Nassaw.
Count Lodowick of Nassaw, (otherwise a brave and a worthy Gentleman) had
de^eated and killed the Count of Arembergh, at Wirschot in the Province of
Groninghen, he took many Spaniards Prisoners, whom he hanged every Mothers Son*
a most disavowable act. The Duke of Alva (that severe Governor of the
Netherlands) did not at all challenge him for his cruelty, much less that he
had done any thing against the Law of War or Nations; but looking on it as an
indignity done to the Spanish Nation, since Lodowick had used the men of no
other Country with so much severity, he revenged it (as most wise men of those
times thought) by putting to death shortly after (under the pretext of justice)
great numbers of the Dutch; In one day he beheaded on the Sandhil of Bruxels
eighteen Lords and Gentlemen of quality, the next day he caused six or seven
prime men to be tortured to death, and a few days after that, caused the Earls
of Egmond and Horn to be beheaded: publicly on a Scaffold at Bruxels: This
had nothing of Lex Talionis in it, none of these Lords or* Gentlemen having
been accessory to that Action of Count Lodowick.

But was there ever Turk more merciless to men, who had Quarter promised them,
than an Italian, of whom I am now to tell you? When the Imperialists Besieged
Florence, Volterri revolted from the Florentines, who sent one Ferrucci to
reduce it to obedience, he entered the Castle (which held out for Florence) and
by it the City, where he committed extreme cruelties, killed many Soldiers,
and took fourteen Spaniards to whom Quarter was promised: but when they thought
themselves secure, the merciless Ferrucci (alleging, Unspeakable cruelty of an
Italian to his Prisoners.
that some of their Country men had once taken him, and given him a very spare
Diet) threw them all into a dark Dungeon, where he famished the poor wretches
to death, and then hanged their Carcasses about the Walls. What do you think of
this Lex Talionis? May not a man say (without wrong to charity) that this
Italian, if it had been in his power, would have tortured these poor men's Souls
as well as their Bodies; nor did he keep any agreement made to the poor
Citizens, but hanged some, and plund^red all, and spared neither Church nor
Cloister. The same Ferrucci being summoned shortly after to deliver up the Town
to Maramaldo one of the Imperial Generals, against the Law of Arms, he hanged
the Trumpeter; this action sounded loud for revenge, which quickly overtook
him, for being thereafter beaten by the Imperialists, he is taken Prisoner, and
brought to that same Maramaldo, who, after Revenged by the like.
outrageous Language, caused him to be disarmed, and then killed him with his
own hand; an ignoble act of Maramaldo, but too good a death for Ferrucci. But
before I go out of Italy, hear another barbarous usage of a Prisoner in that
same Rencounter, a Florentine Gentleman, one Amico d'Arsoli, was taken
Prisoner, fair Quarter was given him, and he had his ransom paid, but by A
barbarous usage of ^ Prisoner.
the wrong hand; for one Martio Colonna bought him from him who had taken him,
purposely to kill him, and poor Amico was killed, and by Martio's own hand: a
very unmartial act, and all because Amico had fairly killed a Cousin of Marcio,
one Stephano Colonna; nor had Lex Talionis place here neither. The Italions
then need not to expostulate with the Turks either for cruelty, or inobservance
of Quarter given to Prisoners. But let us in the next place see how a a
Spaniard behaved himself (and he was a person of no mean qualility) in keeping
the Quarter that was given to Prisoners of War.

When Philip the Second, King of Spain; had taken Possession of the Kingdom of
Portugal, his Admiral the Marquess of Santa Crux, at a Sea Battle near the
Terceras, defeated a French Fleet: Here was taken Philip Strozzi, a Florentine,
Santa Crux his inhumanity to French Prisoners.
who was sent as General of the forces ordained by Catherine de Medici, Queen
Mother of France, to assist the Prior of Crato; with Strozzi were three hundred
more taken, and had fair quarter promised them: Strozzi was pitifully wounded,
and laid down before Santa Crux; but neither the quarter promised him, nor the
sad condition of a brave Gentleman, nor the consideration of the instability of
humane affairs, could move Santa Crux to pity him, but gave a barbarous order
to throw him immediately overboard. Nor did his cruelty stop there, for by a
formal Sentence he beheaded fourscore Gentlemen of the Prisoners; all the rest
of three hundred, that were above seventeen years of age, he hanged; those that
were under that age he condemned to the Galleys. An unparalled act of Justice.

I have said before, that quarter, unless promised by Articles, should not be
given to Fugitives. But here a question arises, If an Officer or a common A
question.
Soldier be taken, and be not able to maintain himself in Prison, and no care
is had by his Superiors either to exchange, ransom, or maintain him, if he be
forced to take service under the Enemy, and be re-taken, whether he should be
used as a Fugitive or not? Here, I suppose, a distinction will be Answered.
necessary. If he be the natural subject of the Prince or State that makes the
War, he may not serve their Enemy on any pretense; and if he do it, he is
liable to punishment as a Traitor; but if he serve him only as a mercenary, it
seems disputable: for the Grecians and Romans punished such of their own as
served the Enemy, with death; but not their Auxiliaries, unless they had run
over from them to the Enemy: but that is not the question, for all Runaways
deserve death; but these I speak of are not such. Yet there was a valiant
Knight Capuz Muden, who had done Charles the Fifth great services, but Severity.
was none of his Subjects; he was taken by the French in Piedmont, and having
often, and in vain solicited for his exchange or ransom, he took service
under the French King, and after that was taken by the Imperialists in Artois;
and notwithstanding all his defenses, had his Head cut off by the Emperors
command. When that Major General Kniphausen, whom I mentioned in the last
Chapter, was Prisoner with Count Tili, he wrote to the King of Sueden, (whose
subject he was not) and desired to know, (since he could neither maintain nor
ransom himself) if he might take employment under the Emperor; the King told
all those who were with him, That the Major General asked him the question,
Whether he might lawfully be a Knave or not? Intimating thereby, that he might
not for all his Imprisonment* break his Military Oath. But for all that, I have
known thousands take service in that manner, and never challenged for it when
they have been re-taken: Inexorable necessity dispensing often with
transgressions of that kind.

To make those Prisoners who have not taken Arms, but live in amity with
Injustice in making some Prisoners.
both parties, only because they are suspected to favor one party more than
the other, has little of the Law of Arms in it, and less of that of
Conscience. Herein the famous Count of Mansfeld is inexcusable, for putting
Guards on the Earl of East-Friezeland, when he had quartered his Army in his
County. So was the Suedish Felt-Marshal Banier for sending one of the Dukes of
Saxon-Lauenburg and the Lord Arnheim Prisoners to Sueden: Neither can the late
King of Sueden be well excused for seizing on the persons of the Duke and
Duchess of Courland.

The securing of the Duchess as well as her Husband the Duke, minds me of a
question, Whether Women should be made Prisoners of War? it is certain, Whether
Women should be Prisoners of War, if taken.
in ancient and later times too, they were taken, and ransomed, or exchanged,
or made slaves; yet it would seem, since Nature has generally exempted that
Sex from making War, they cannot properly be made Prisoners of War. The
Mahometans notwithstanding make Slaves of them. And, I suppose, in our late
Wars, they were not ordinarily made Prisoners, rather because the custom of it
is worn out, than that it is abrogated by any Law. It is not yet 130 years
since some French Captains under Francis the First took some Spanish Ladies
Prisoners at Perpignan, and would have put them to ransom; but that generous
King gave a sum of money to those who had taken them, and sent them home to
their Husbands, without ransom; Now it is not like he would have bought them
from his own Officers, if he had not thought they had some right to them by the
Law of War. The great Cyrus did well in preserving the honor and chastity of
the fair Panthea, taken Prisoner in the War, but Some instances of it.
he had done better to have sent her home to her Husband Abradates. Alexander
did well to use Darius his Mother, Wife and Daughters honorably; but he had
done better to have sent them home to the Persian King, either for, or without
ransom. Selimus, the First, as barbarous and cruel a Tyrant as he was known to
be, showed more generosity in this point than both of them; for the noise of
the Turks Cannon having rather frighted the Persian Horses, than chased the
Sophi Isa^ael out of the Calderan Plains, his Horsemen took a number of noble
Persian Ladies Prisoners, whom the Great Turk sent home to their Husbands
without ransom, and without any violence done to their persons or honors.

But Prisoners of War having got fair quarter promised them, and honestly
Slavery remitted by Christians,
kept, What shall be done with them? Assuredly, they must be either enslaved,
exchanged or ransomed. As to the first, we are to know, that after the great
Constantine suffered the Christian Faith to be preached without interruption,
over most of the then known World, men remitted much of the severity of the Law
of War and N^tions to Prisoners: And Slavery (which makes men differ but little
from beasts) wo^^ piece and piece out of fashion; yet long after Christianity
shone over the World ^^ Prisoners of War were made Slaves: for there be some
Canons of the Church extant, that forbid men to counsel Slaves to desert their
Masters. But by tract of time all Nations, as it had been by an universal
consent, left off to make their Prisoners Slaves, or to sell them as such,
because they were then better instructed in the Laws of Charity than to abstain
from killing miserable Captives, only out of respect of gain to themselves, or
at least to seem to be less cruel. But three hundred years after the Great
Constantine's death, when Mahometanism had spread its darkness over the East,
slavery was Brought back by Mahomet.
brought back to the World; and yet if you will consider right, you will find
this slavery and bondage of Christians is not confined to those Countries only,
where Mahomet is adored; for there are thousands of Christian Slaves to be
found in the Galleys belonging to the most Christian and Catholic Kings, the
Great Duke of Tuscany, the Venetians, the Genoways, the Pope, and the Great
Retained yet by some Christians.
Master of Malta. And may we not say, That many thousands of his Majesty's
Subjects, after quarter given, were made perfect Slaves, and upon that account
sold and sent to remote Plantations? The Great Gustavus Adolphus did, I think,
something very like this, when he sent three thousand Croatians, commonly
called Carabats, (who had quarter given them for life at several places in
Germany) by Sea to Sueden, there to work at his Iron and Copper Mines.

Among Christians then, Prisoners of War being exempted from Slavery, they are
to be kept till they be either exchanged or ransomed, or set at liberty by the
Victor gratis; this sometimes falls out, but seldom. Sometimes they are set at
liberty conditionally, as, If you do such a thing, enjoy your liberty; if not,
Liberty granted to Prisoners conditionally.
return to Prison: and the Prisoner is obliged to do either the one or the
other. It was the case of some Scottish Lords, whom Henry the Eighth, of
England, detained Prisoners. He permitted them to return to Scotland, and if
they could procure the Marriage of his Son, Prince Edward, with the Infant
Queen of Scots, then they were to have their liberty; if not, they were to
return: they failing in the first, some of them honestly performed the second.
He that takes a Prisoner may search him, and all he lays hold on is his own;
but if the Prisoner has reserved something hidden, that his Taker knows not
of, he may make use of it to maintain himself, or to help to pay his ransom;
for he who took him has no right to it: for Lawyers say, Qui nescit, nequit
possidere. The exchange of Prisoners of equal quality is ordinary over all the
World; if there By Exchange.
be some, but no considerable disparity, some Money ballanceth the matter. The
Ransom of a Prisoner belongs to him who took him, unless he be a person of
very eminent quality, and then the Prince, the State, or their General seizes
on him, giving some gratuity to those who took him. The price of the Ransom
uses to be estimated according to his pleasure who keeps the Prisoner; By
Ransom.
but because many times they are extravagant in their demands, an agreement is
frequently made between the two parties who make the War, of a certain price to
be paid by Officers, and Common Soldiers for their Ransomes A general
agreement for Ransomes ordinary.
according to their quality, and this seldom exceeds one Months pay, for any
under the degree of a Colonel: and this is exceeding comfortable to Prisoners,
when they know how much themselves or their Friends have to pay for their
liberty.

But here is a question, When a Prisoner agrees for his ransom, and dies A
Question concerning ransom.
before it be paid, whether the Heir be obliged to pay it? If he dye out of
Prison, there is no doubt but the Heir is bound to pay it; but if he dye in
Prison, Grotius says, his Heir is not obliged to pay it, because the Prisoner
had not that for which he contracted; and that was his liberty: But if the
bargain be made, that the Prisoner ows the ransom, immediately after the
contract is made, the same Grotius says, His Heir ought to pay it, because the
Captive Answered.
was not to be looked on after the finishing of the agreement, as a Prisoner
but as a Pledge for his Ransom. But I can tell Grotius, that the Corpse of many
dead Prisoners are Ransomed. There is another question, If a Prisoner Parol,
Another.
and engage to get such a person of the adverse party set at liberty, and on
that condition is set free himself; if the Prisoner agreed on, dye before the
other can procure his liberty, whether in that case the Prisoner contracting be
obliged to return to Prison? Grotius says no, unless it have been particularly
so agreed Answered.
on: yet he says, he is bound to do something like the equivalent, and that is
to pay his own Ransom.

I should now speak of those Prisoners, who have Articles for life, it may be
Cloths and Monys, or any thing else they carry about with them, and sometimes
as much of their goods as they can carry on their backs: but before I enter on
it, it will be fit to know what poor inferior Officers and Commanders have to
Parley, Treat, and to Grant, Sign and Seal Articles.

First, it will be granted, that none have power to Treat or Sign Articles Of
the power, inferior Commanders have to grant Articles.
but those who command in chief on the place, whether it be in Town or Field.
Princes or their Generals cannot be every where, and therefore must recommend
the leading of Wings or Parts of their Armies to subordinate Commanders, what
ever title they may have, be it Lieutenant or Major General, Colonel or
Brigadeer Generals, they Treat and Grant Conditions and Articles to Enemies in
the Field, or to Enemies within Towns, because the emergency or necessity of
dispatch will not suffer them to advise with the Prince or State whom they
serve; and therefore Articles granted by them, are to be as inviolably observed
as if they had been Signed by the Prince himself. But if either a General or
any under him make a transaction with an Enemy against the known Constitutions
and public Laws of the Prince or State whom they serve, then they deserve
Punishment, and the Prince and State are not obliged to performance; and if so,
they ought not, nor can they in justice retain what they have gained by that
Capitulation, whether it be Towns, Forts, Lands, Money or Prisoners, but are
obliged if they disapprove the Agreement, to put all in statu quo prius.
Grotius maintains that a General What a General may do.
has not power to dispose of Lands, Territories, Inheritances, and Offices and
dignities (except they be military) without the Prince his express Warrant: and
there is no doubt but this assertion is grounded on just reason, and yet that
Prince of Orange, General for the Emperor, who totally routed the French in
the Kingdom of Naples, disposed of the inheritances of most of those who were
of the French Faction, to his Captains; and not only so, but distributed the
chief Offices of the Crown among them: and though his Master Charles the Fifth,
did much dislike of the Prince his encroaching on his Prerogative; yet that
wise Prince ratified all that Orange had done, as knowing how dangerous it is
for Sovereigns not to approve of what their Generals transact in their names.
For if that be not done, who either dare, can, or will make any Capitulation
with a General, whose agreement, be it never so authentic and solemn may be
called in question and revoked by the Prince he serves.

What a Captain General of an Army may do in things of this nature, the What
^ubaltern officers do
like power have those who are subordinate to him, when they command apart, and
are upon the head of some Wing or Brigades of the Army at a distance from the
General, and at such a distance, that his assent and approbation cannot be got
so soon as the present necessity or convenience of the affair requires; as
suppose a Major General or Colonel is sent three or four miles before the Army
(this is no great distance) to force a Pass, which those within it offer to
give over, provided they be secured by Articles to march away in safety, it is
not time to send to the General, (suppose he have an Enemy in his Rear) for his
assent, the Major General or Colonel may do it, which the General is bound to
ratify, Should be ratified by a General.
and so it is in a hundred cases more. Nay further, If that Subordinate or
Inferior Officer grant an agreement to an Enemy, contrary to the private
instructions he has from his Prince or General; yet if he have done nothing
which did exceed the limits of his office and function, the Prince and General
are obliged to ratify it: Indeed they may punish him for his transgression, to
which the party with whom he capitulated, did contribute nothing, and therefore
must not suffer for his Trespass. As suppose a Major General has a little Town
yielded to him by accord, whereby he permits the Garrison to march to a place
of greater importance, which the Prince and his General intend to besiege, and
have privately forbid the Major General to make any such agreement, they may
punish him for his presumption, but are bound either to suffer the Garrison to
enjoy their Articles, or at worst to go back to the place where they were. Let
us sum up all that has been said in this particular, in one instance of
Hannibal and Maharbal, and it will quadrate very fitly with the subject we now
speak of; the story is this:

After the Romans werebeat at the lake Thrasimenus, Hannibal sent Maharbal
Maharbal's agreement with 6000 Romans,
to pursue the Victory, seven or eight miles from the place of Battle, (at or
near which Hannibal stayed;) Maharbal finds six thousand Romans in a Body,
ready to accept of liberty, if granted them to return to Rome, otherwise to
sell their lives at a dear rate. The Carthaginian thought it not fit to hazard
the loss of numbers of his own men on so strong and so desperate a party, and
therefore agrees with them, that they should deliver their Arms, and then have
liberty to go home. Hannibal will not ratify the agreement, but makes
Unworthily broke by Hannibal.
all the six thousand Romans Prisoners, and loads them with Irons; telling
them, Maharbal had no power, without his consent, who commanded in chief, to
grant them any immunity. The worst act ever Hannibal did. If Maharbal had no
power to grant those Romans their liberty, he had no power to grant them their
lives; and so Hannibal with that same Justice might have put them all to the
Sword. But first, Maharbal commanded in chief in that place where he
capitulated; next, he did nothing that exceeded the bounds of his Office, being
a great Commander in the Carthaginian Army; thirdly, he was at such a distance
from Hannibal, that he had no time to send for his assent, and do his errand,
which was to pursue the flying Romans. And therefore the Historian wrongs not
Hannibal, when he says, Punica religione servata fides est ab Annibale:
Hannibal kept promise with a Punical Faith. Indeed, if Hannibal had been on the
place he had said right; and this demonstrates what I said before, that any
quarter given in the field where a General is, signifies nothing till it be
confirmed by him; and observe, that Articles and Agreements made by word of
mouth (as this of Maharbal's was) bind as strongly as those made in writing;
for Promises and Parolls of Princes and Captains should be sacredly kept.

Grotius acknowledges, that Maharbal's agreement should not have been
infringed by Hannibal; and yet in that same Chapter affirms, That Masanissa,
King of Numidia, a Friend and Ally of the Romans had not power to grant the
fair Sophonisbe her life. I am not at all of Grotius his judgment: For first,
So was that of Masanissa to Sophonisbe, by Scipio.
Masanissa acted by Scipio's Commission; secondly, he was far from Scipio;
thirdly, he commanded in chief where he then was; fourthly, Sophonisbe was not
by any former public Law exempted from pardon; fifthly, if Masanissa had
private instructions to take her life, Scipio might have punished him, but
Sophonisbe should not have suffered for his transgression, but should either
have enjoyed her life, or been sent back with all her people, to the Castle
where she was taken. And assuredly, Masanissa had power to grant her life, and
marry her too, as he did; but he preferred the Roman friendship to the love of
his Beautiful Wife, and so sent her a Cup of Poison, as the last token of his
affection.

This that I have said, may be accommodated and applied to James Duke of Duke
Hamilton's death, Murder.
Hamilton's case, who had Articles granted to him, and all that were with him
for life; which, because Lambert avouched he had given, the pretended
Parliament of England did not deny it, but said, with Hannibal, that Lambert
being subalterne had not power to give such conditions; but he had power, for
he exceeded not the limits of his Office, and function of a Major General; he
commanded in chief on the place where he capitulated; and we never heard that
Cromwell did charge him with the transgression of any of his private
instructions at that time; and Cromwell was so far from Lambert then, that he
could not possibly send to him for his assent; and if Lambert's superiors
thought it not fit to approve of what he had done, then in Justice (which was a
great Stranger in their Courts) they should have set the Duke, and all that
were with him at liberty, and then have taken their hazard of all the mischief
could befall them: All which concludes that the death of that unfortunate Lord
was plain Murder.

Of this stamp was that agreement made by those who took Count Montgomery,
Count de Montgomery's little better.
who had killed Henry the Second, of France, at Tilting, sore against his will:
He had done very signal services to the Protestants, in the time of the Civil
Wars, and at length was besieged in the Castle of Domfron, which he maintained
gallantly, resolving to dye with his Sword in his hand; but being at length
deserted by most of those that were with him, he accepted of conditions, which
were, That his Life should be safe, and he should only be Prisoner a few days,
and then have his liberty. But the Queen Mother, Catherine de Medici,
pretending that those Lords who had besieged the Castle, had no power to grant
any such conditions, caused him to be brought to Paris, where his Head was
publicly cut off in the Greve, not without a previous torture. At that same
time, his Son Lorges yielded Carentan upon Articles, but had been likewise sent
to Paris, there to partake of his Fathers fate, if he had not been dexterously
shifted out of the way, and suffered to escape, by a near Kinsman of his own.

Many Parleys and Treaties are without any Cessation of Arms. That at Munster,
which produced the Peace in the year 1648. lasted six years, and yet the War in
Germany was as hot and fierce as ever. And so it was in England in the
Cessations of Arms, and Parleys.
time of the Treaty of Vxbridge. But if there be a cessation of Arms, which you
may call a Truce, during the time of it, acts of hostility cease, yet Armies
may retire, Soldiers may be levied, Fortifications may be helped, unless by
Articles all or any of these be forbid. If this Truce, or Cessation be broke by
one party, the other may lawfully run to Arms, without any new denunciation of
the War; or he may not do it, as he pleases, or thinks convenient for the
present posture of his affairs. Commonly at Sieges, in time of Parley and
Cessation, all works above or under ground are forbidden.

But when Besieged Towns, Castles and Camps are necessitated to Towns and Forts
surpised in time of Treaty.
come to a Parley, though there be a cessation of Arms, let neither the
Besieger nor the Besieged trust to it, but stand on their guard, for many times
the Besieged, contrary to agreement, Sally, to destroy the Approaches, to shift
away their Horsemen, or some of them for Intelligence; and oftener do the
Besiegers take the advantage of a Parley, and without his order or knowledge
who commands in chief, fall on the Besieged place, whose Garrison then
over-wearied with former fatigue, is secure, and so soon overmaster'd: For the
desire of booty, whereof the Treaty robs the Soldiers, stirs them up to take
their advantage of those, who thinking themselves safe by a Cessation, make
little or no resistance. And though the Besieger who commands in chief, may
pretend it was done without his knowledge, yet he keeps what he has got as his
lawful gain, without any thought of restitution. Thus was Therouen, and
Monmorancy, Marshal of France, in it, taken by the Instances.
Imperialists in time of Parley and Cessation. Thus Coqueville at Saint Valery
was surpised in the time of Treaty, by the Marshal de Cosse his Forces. Thus
the strong Castle of Fontenay kept by the French Protestants in the year 1574.
in the time of Treaty was stormed by the Duke of Montpensier, at the breaches
of the Wall, and though it was defended at that time, yet it was forced to
surrender, for fear of a second Assault, on mean conditions. And thus was
Maestricht stormed in the year 1579. by the Duke of Parma's Army, where most of
the Soldiers and Inhabitants, in time of Parley, were put to the Sword, after
they had defended themselves bravely for the space of four months. Nor can I
fancy there can be better ways found out to prevent such ^ays to prevent it.
mischiefs at such occasions, than to keep strict Guards, to discharge all
private Parleys, to suffer neither Officers nor Soldiers of the two parties to
speak together, be the pretense of the conference what it will, and to oblige
the one party to stay within the Walls, and the other within the Approaches,
not only till the Treaty be finished, and the Articles signed, but even till
the evacuation of the place; for Homo Homini Lupus; One Man is a Wolf to
another.

Much more generous would it be to give fair conditions to those who are
Articles of^times ill observed.
reduced to extremities, than to take such unjustifiable advantages against
them. So did Serriou to the hunger-starved Inhabitants of Sancerre in France.
And truly, I think, Marquess Spinola left a noble testimony to the World of his
Heroic Spirit, when he gave very advantageous conditions to the Governor of
Breda in the year 1628, when he knew well enough (as I observed in another
place) that there was no relief to be expected from without, and not above
three days Victuals within.

When Articles are signed, I suppose, there is not any man of what persuasion
soever, but will say they should be religiously observed, and inviolably kept,
neither is it in the power of any, either Prince or State, to break them
without perfidy and violation of Faith, the very Cutthroats of humane society.
The Turks who were accustomed to keep no Treaties, but to kill all or most who
yielded on Articl^s, have learned of late to keep their Promises, as finding
the breach of them was prejudicial to themselves, because it forced the
Defendants to stand out to the last drop of their blood. It were to be wished
that many Christians had not proved perfect Turks in this. Caesar Borgia, Duke
of Valentinois, after Articles Instances.
of an accord signed, strangled some principal Lords of the noble family of the
Vrsines, and put many others to death. Nor did Leo the tenth, Bishop of Rome
enslave himself to his promise made solemnly to the Dukes of Vrbino and
Ferrara: The Bloody Tenet, No Faith to be kept to Heretics, could not excuse
this fedifragy, being it was done to Roman Catholics. In the year 1632. we
shall hear of Faith broke by both Protestants and Papists: The Imperialists
forced a Suedish Garrison in the Town of Sultsbach to yield the place on
conditions signed, some whereof were basely broke: Not long after the Suedish
King besieges it, and makes it render upon Articles; notwithstanding which,
when the Governor was marched a good way out of it, he was shot dead, and with
him some other officers; the Soldiers all plundered, and forced to take
service: You may be sure Lex Talionis was pretended here, but in vain, for the
fedifragy of the first could not excuse the foul breach of the second. The
famous Bernard, Duke of Weymar, had almost done in passion such a disavowable
act. The case was this: Brisac being reduced to the utmost extremity, the Noble
Duke (though he knew all their wants) gave Major General Reinach honorable
conditions: But after the Garrison was marc^'d out, he came to know that of
thirty of his Soldiers who were Prisoners within the City, eight dyed for
hunger, which the other twenty two did eat, and then were starved to death for
want of meat. This so enraged the Duke, that he resolved to put that Monster of
a Governor, and the four hundred Soldiers, or rather Skeletons, that came out
with him, to the edge of the Sword; and here you may be sure unjust Revenge put
on the mask of Lex Talionis. This disavowable action of the Governor of Brisac
should be a Caveat to all Goververnours not to bring many Prisoners into
besieged places, for those reasons I mentioned in my Discourse of Sieges. But
if the Duke had done as he intended, he had been as guilty of perfidy, as
Reinach was of inhumanity. And therefore the Great Commanders of his Army
represented to him the ugly face of fedifragy in its lively colors, which did
fully divert him from an action unworthy of so brave and so renowned a Prince.

Treaties should be made, Promises given, and Capitulations signed, without
Articles should not be ambiguous.
equivocation or mental reservation, they should be clear, sincere, and candid,
without ambiguity; for if any of that be made use of, it will be so far from
excusing breach of Faith, that it will make it look with the uglier face; as
when something is foysted into an Article, which may carry a double meaning,
^he Victor makes himself Interpreter of the genuine sense; and if he be wicked,
under pretense of the breach of one branch of an Article, he assumes to himself
power to break all. I have given some Instances of the practice of this among
the Heathen, nor has the light of the Gospel deterred men of later times from
actions of so base an alloy. In the year 1633. Great Gloggaw in Two unworthy
actions.
Silesia, yields to Wallenstein, who signed Articles for them to march to the
next Suedish Army; but without the Town, a quarrel is picked for the breach of
an Article, the Garrison surrounded, and forced to declare for the Emperor.
And if you will peruse Ireton's Treaty with the Town of Limerick in Ireland,
1651. you will find it of the same stamp, or worse; after he was master of the
place, under pretext of some breach of the Garrison, he broke all agreements,
and hanged the Mayor, and several others to bear him company.

But after such sad stories of the bad observation of Capitulations, let me
refresh you with the relation of a merry, but a true Treaty, which was very
punctually observed. When Spinola had retired himself from the Lower Palatinate
A pretty story, and yet a true one.
to Brabant, he left Don Corduba to finish the War in that distressed Country:
This Spanish General marched to a little Town called Ogerheim, out of which all
the Inhabitants had fled for fear, except twenty four; these discharged some
Falconets upon the Spanish Fore-Troops, and thereafter un^ over the Walls,
where they were lowest; only the Town-Shepherd, who was called Hans Warsch,
(for he deserves to have his name recorded) stayed. A Trumpeter is sent to
summon the place, (the Spaniards not knowing its solitary condition) with whom
Hans capitulated, That himself and his Family should enjoy their Lives, Goods,
and free liberty of their Religion; to which the Trumpeter readily
condescended, and then Hans opened one of the Ports: This Agreement was
ratified, and faithfully kept by Don Corduba.

A Prisoner of War may be examined, and both hired and threatened to tell all A
Soldier no Spy.
he knows; but if he will not, he should rather be cherished than punished: for
a Soldier is not to be used as a Spy; the last you may put to the Rack, but
not the first, with any Justice; yet the contrary has been practiced. In the
Civil Wars of France, I find, that a Soldier, after he had got quarter, was
tortured, by pouring in Water at his mouth, till his belly grew as great as an
Ox head, and yet dyed without revealing any thing he knew. A Captain Inhumanity.
who had escaped out of Sancerre, and was looking for assistance to that
hungerstarved Town, was taken, and tormented with the blows of Cudgels on the
Belly, till he told all he knew, or all they would have him to tell, and then
they hanged him for his pains.

The fear of bad quarter, of hard and cruel usage, of the breach of Treaties
Fear of bad quarter.
and Articles, has made many resolve to take no quarter at all, and to choose
to dye fighting: Whether these be accessory to their own death, whether this be
not self desertion, or whether it be diffidence of the Almighties power, shall
not be the subject of this Discourse. But I shall say that Self-preservation is
a Law imprinted in the hearts of all men by Nature, and when with Honor and
Reputation, a Soldier, either of high or low degree, may have fair quarter, he
both may, and should accept of it, both to preserve himself for his masters
service, and his own future fortune, and that without the least aspersion of
Cowardice. That which is commonly reported of the Emperors Crabats, and the
King of Sweden's Finlanders, that none of them would either give or take
quarter, is a mere speculation; for I have known them both give and take it
very contentedly. Philopaemon may stand as a Beacon to all Soldiers, whether
they be Pagans, Philopaemon.
Infidels, or Christians, not to presume, or yet be confident never to be
Prisoners: Of a mean Gentleman, he came by his valor and conduct to be Praetor
and General of the Achaans seven or eight times: Dining one day with some of
his Friends, he heard them much commend one of his acquaintance for an
excellent good Soldier: How can he (said Philopaemon) be a good Soldier, who
delivered once himself Prisoner. But this great Captain (who had now arrived
with much Honor to the age of seventy years) did not foresee his fate, which
the very next day (while he made good the Retreat of some Ach^an Gentlemen from
the Messenians) delivered him Prisoner to his mortal Enemies, who having
brought him to Messene, cast him into a deep Prison, and not long after
presented him with a Cup of deadly Poison, which (after he was assured of the
safety of his Friend Licortas) he cheerfully drank off, and immediately gave up
the Ghost.

CHAP. XXVII. Of our Modern Military Punishments, and of Rewards.
THe Law is a Dumb Judge, and a Judge is a Speaking Law. In vain it is to make
Laws, unless Judges look to their execution, for that is the life of the Law. I
have spoke in another place of the Military Punishments and Rewards of the
Ancients, I have likewise spoke of our Modern Military Laws; where observe,
that most of them threaten Punishment, few or none promise Reward; the first is
due to Transgressors, the second is ex beneplacito, because all men are bound
to do their duty; yet Princes and States have rewarded Virtue of late times, as
well as the Ancients did. I shall speak of Punishments, and then of Rewards.

Though Princes and States have their several Laws of War, yet all agree
Punishment of Capital crimes, Treason,
that Treason against the Prince, in betraying either his Forts, Forces, or
Munitions, should be punished with an ignominious Death, but the crime should
be thoroughly examined by the Judge Marshal, and Court of War, whereof I have
formerly spoke. Mutiny against Command, or Superior Mutiny,
Officers is punishable by Death: If it cannot be compesc'd without force,
either all, or most of the Army are to be called together, to cut the Mutineers
in pieces. But if a Mutiny be quieted without blood (in doing whereof both
Courage and Prudence are requisite) then ordinarily the ringleaders are to
dye, and the rest are eitheir all pardoned, or all to run the Gatloupe, or the
tenth man of them is to suffer death; which custom is borrowed from the
Ancient Romans. If Officers run away from the Mutineers, and leave them
mutinying, the Law of War orders them to dye, unless they can make it appear,
that either they had killed some of the Mutineers, or had been wounded
themselves by them: But it is not to be denied, that too many of them are more
ready to give a rise and beginning to a Mutiny, than to put an end to it. The
Death of a Mutineer should be ignominious, and therefore it should be hanging,
or breaking on a Wheel. All crimes that are Capital by the Civil Law, Many more.
are so also by Martial Law, as Wilful Murder, Robbery, Theft, Incest, Sodomy,
and others, needless to be rehearsed. But Martial Law makes many crimes
Capital, which the Civil and Municipal Law does not; Such are, to desert the
Colors, to Sleep on Sentinel, to be drunk on a Watch, to draw a Sword or
strike at a Superior; many times these are pardoned, and very often they are
punished with Death, when a General thinks Justice more convenient than Mercy.
To be absent from a Watch, by some Military Laws is Capital, but seldom put in
execution: Yet I find in the Reign of Henry the Second, of France, that one
Granvill^n, a German Severe Justice.
Colonel, in a Court of War condemned an Ensign bearer to be hanged for playing
at Dice in his Lodging, when the Company was on Watch; and he put the Sentence
in execution. The crime of Cowardice is by the Law of ^a^, Cowardice.
Capital; but should be well examined by the Auditor, and the matter made clear
in a Court of War, before Sentence be past, because it, and Treason, taints the
Blood of the parties. To run away in time of service, either in the Field, or
from the Assaults of Towns, Forts and Outworks, brings Death upon the guilty;
or that which to generous Spirits is worse than death, that is, to have their
Swords broke over their Heads by the hand of the Hangman, and so turned out of
the Army; and this I have known more frequently practiced, than death
inflicted; but the Instances I could give are too fresh, and therefore I shall
tell you only of one about a hundred years ago. At the Siege of Dinan, Gaspar
Coligni, that famous Admiral of France, commanded some Ensign-bearers to run
with their Colors to the Assault of the breach; they did not go, pretending
the place was too dangerous for the Kings Colors, for they might chance to be
taken by the Enemy; for which the Admiral caused all their Swords to be broke
over their Heads by a Hangman, in view An ignominious punishment.
of his whole Army. It will be about two or three and thirty years since
Leopold Archduke of Austria, and his Lieutenant General Piccolomini, caused a
Regiment of Horse to be cut in pieces, and all the Officers to be hanged in the
place, wherever they could be apprehended, without any Process or Sentence of
a Court of War, because it was well known, that the whole Regiment had run An
exemplary and deserved punishment.
away in a full body, without fighting, at the second Battle of Leipsick, where
the Suedish Felt-marshal Torstenson gained the Victory over the Imperialists. I
have spoke in the last Chapter of the punishment due to those Governors who
give over Forts sooner than they need, and gave you some instances; but now I
shall tell you, that by some Articles of War, the whole Garrison is liable to
punishment, which is, to be Pioneers to the rest of the Army. I dare say A
severe Law.
nothing against the Justice of this Law, but, I think, if the Garrison disobey
the Governor, and do not march out at his command, (he pretending the Prince
or Generals order for what he does) all of it may undergo the censure and
punishment of Mutiny: But many Laws are made ad terrorem, which do but little
good.

I think, the Turkish Punishments not imitable by those who profess the name
Inhumane punishments.
of Christ; such as are, roasting at slow fires, flaying quick, and gaunching;
the manner of this last is, to throw the condemned person from the top of a
Tower or a high Wall, the place where he is to fall, being all beset with Iron
pricks; and the wretch is happy if his Head, Breast, or Belly fall on one of
them, for thereby he may be soon dispatched; but if a Leg, Arm or Thigh catch
hold, he must hang till extremity of pain, hunger, thirst, and the fowls of the
air, put an end to his miserable life. The Muscovites for a Military Punishment
can whip to death, and that is cruel enough. They and other Christians can
impale condemned persons on wooden Stakes and Spits, which in some
extraordinary cases is also practiced in Germany; and I have heard, that
Hang-men can so artificially do it, that the woeful Delinquent will sometimes
live three days in unspeakable torture. When Mahomet the Great, saw a Valley in
Valachia beset with these Stakes and Wheels, on which some thousands of Men and
Women lay executed, it is said that he much commended the Vayvod or Prince of
that Country for a good Justitiary; so near did the one of their tempers, both
barbarous and cruel, resemble the other.

The fairest and justest way of Punishment is by Courts of War, if the case do
not require a present animadversion: And that Court is to judge, and give
Sentence according to the Military Laws of the Prince or State, in whose
service the Army is. When the Sentence is pronounced, the General may either
Generals may pardon.
pardon the offender, or delay the execution, or alter the manner of his death.
The most honorable death for a Delinquent Soldier is accounted Beheading; the
next to that is Shooting, (which commonly is called Harquebusiering) if he be a
Horseman, with Pistols; if a Foot Soldier, with Muskets. But the Punishments
of several Crimes are left by Martial Law, to the arbitrament of a Court of
War; and some of these, aggravated by circumstances, are made Capital, though
in themselves they be not such; of which, demurring to give present obedience,
if an Enemy be conceived to be near, is one; and this falls frequently out.

Military Punishments, which reach not to Death, are the Strappado, hanging
Ordinary punishments.
up by the Thumbs, so that only the Delinquents Toes can touch the ground;
laying Muskets on their Shoulders, more or fewer, for a longer or shorter time,
according to the quality of the fault; to be kept in Prison so many days or
weeks with Irons on them; and sometimes to be fed only with Bread and Water in
Prison. Observe here, that without a Sentence of a Court A necessary
observation.
of War, no Superior Commander, be who he will, can keep an Inferior Officer
or Common Soldier longer in Prison than the imprisoned party calls for a
hearing. There is also riding the Wooden Horse, on which sometimes the Offender
has his hands tied behind his back, and sometimes Muskets, or other weights
tied to his feet: As likewise to be turned out of the Army by the Hangman, to
have their Ears cut off by the Hangman, to be whipped by the Hangman, to have
their Swords broke by the Hangman. I have known some who thought, that
Soldiers who are whipped at Gatloupe, should be turned out of the Army; which
is a gross mistake, for they are appointed to be whipped by their Comerades,
that they may be kept in the Army, for after an Officer or Soldier is put in a
Hang-mans hand, he should serve no longer in any Army. Gustavus Adolphus, King
of Sweden, first began it, in imitation The original and derivation of Gatloup.
belike of the custom the Roman Centurions had to whip their Soldiers. It is
a German word, Gaslauf, and comes from Gas, or Gat, which signifies a Street;
and Lauffen, or Louppen, which is, to run; because he who is to be whipped, is
to run through a Street, between two rows of Soldiers. The Provost Marshal is
to furnish Rods, and to give the Delinquent the first lash; but if there be
neither Provost nor Lieutenant, nor Servant of his (who is called Stokknecht)
then the Drummers give the Rods.

But there are several cases which require present Punishments to be inflicted
In what cases Officers may strike, wound, or kill.
by Officers and Commanders, without committing the Delinquents to Prison, or
calling them before a Court of War; as in point of obstinacy, either in not
doing the thing that is commanded, or not doing it in that manner that the
Officer would have it done; the giving undutiful language in presence of a
Superior; speaking after silence is commanded; standing still after one is
commanded to march or go: In any of these, and many other cases, a Sergeant may
make use of his Halbert, and a Commissionated Officer of his Battoon, if the
party offending be either an Inferior Officer, or a Common Soldier. Nay,
there be some cases wherein Officers may cut, wound, yea, kill, as in a Mutiny;
whereof I have spoke already: In case Soldiers be Plundering, and will not
forbear, when commanded; in case two be brawling and fighting together, and
will not leave off: But killing should be used by no Officer, but where the
service of the Prince, or the Vindication of Just Authority make it necessary.
And therefore to kill Soldiers when they straggle on a march, unless they
refuse to obey, and return to their Companies, I think is a crime in any
Commander or Officer, except in a Marshal or Rumour-master. And here I must
acquaint my Reader with some nice distinctions that some make of Superiors
beating their Inferiors.

As first, that none under a Colonel may kill, nay, nor thrust with the point,
Some nice Questions. First.
or strike with the edge of a Sword, only they may strike with the broad side
of it; but in some of these cases, which I have mentioned, especially Mutiny,
both Commissioned and Uncommission'd Officers may strike with the edge, thrust
with the point, yea, kill with their Swords; and if they do it not, they may be
quostion'd upon their lives. Secondly, say some, A Sergeant should Second.
beat with nothing but his Halbert; and so say I too, if he have it by him
(which he is not always bound to have;) but if not, he both may and ought to do
it with his Sword, when emergencies require it. Thirdly, they will tell you, a
Corporal Third.
must only beat with a Musket-rest, if he serve to foot, (for Corporals of
Horse, they grant, may beat with their Swords,) but Musket-rests are now out of
fashion, and when they were used, if a Corporal broke one of them in beating a
Soldier, who should pay for it, the Corporal or the Soldier, is a hard
question: He may therefore beat with his Sword, for none under an Ensign-bearer
should be permitted to carry a Battoon; an abuse too much suffered. But
fourthly, many Intelligent Commanders have averred, that none Fourth.
but a Major may strike with a Battoon, as also that he may beat with it any
Officer under a Captain, that is, both Lieutenants and Ensigns, which they say
is no affront to them, provided the Major immediately throw away his Battoon,
and draw his Sword. Truly, there is no new custom but appears strange and
bizarre at first, till it become common, and then it does not seem strange at
all. I find by my Lord Carbousen's testimony that this was the ordinary
Military custom in France, in the latter end of the Reign of Henry the Great,
not much more than threescore years ago. But that whereat I wonder is, that a
Battoon at that time, and yet, was not more odious to any people under the Sun
than to the French Nation. But mark the reason that is given for this custom,
Because a Major (says Louis de Montgomery) carried always a Staff three foot
and a half, or four foot long, to measure the length of the Soldiers huts, and
with that he might strike, and with no other. A strange reason, I know no
precedent for this custom, except that perhaps Drapers and Tailors may beat
their Journey-men and Apprentices with those Else or Yards, wherewith they
measure their Cloth. But now those whom the French call Marshals of Quarters,
and we Quarter Masters, measure out to the Soldiers their proportion of ground
for their huts, and ought to have a measure for it, may they therefore beat
with it? I trow not. And why a Major should be permitted to strike with a
Battoon more than a Lieutenant Colonel, or a Colonel; or in France, more than a
Captain (who often commands the Major) is more than I can divine. The Custom
is a great deal better to strike at Lieutenants and Ensigns, with Swords, if
necessity force their Superiors, (as sometimes it may) to strike at them at
all. Fifthly, I have heard some very Fifth.
Philosophically discourse, and argue, That if a Superior Commander draws his
Sword against his Inferior, the Inferior is obliged to retire seven steps
back; but if the Superior pursue beyond that limit, the Inferior may draw in
his Defense. But this Argument is near in kin to some of those that are used
for resistance of the Lawful and Civil Authority, and is an Usher of Rebellion:
It casts all Order, Discipline and Command in a Chaos of Confusion: At best, it
is but the contemplation of some Speculative brain; for who can tell whether
the Inferior has gone back those seven steps, or not? Who reckoned them?
Witnesses will not agree in the measure. It is true, it is neither fit nor
handsome, that the Superior should pursue his Inferior, if he pay him that
respect as to retire from him; but if that Superior will pursue, it is
permitted (and if I mistake not, commanded,) that the Inferior fly, but not at
all resist. But this is too ticklish a theme for Military Discourses. Though
there may be other punishments, yet, I suppose, I have spoke of most. And now I
shall desire all of my profession; of what quality soever they be, to
proportionate their punishments to the crime; and to take good heed (as they
will answer it one day to the great Judge) they do not revenge their private
quarrels and grudges under the cloak of public Justice. It is true, Military
persons may say, That this warning of mine concerns them no more than it does
those who officiate both in Church and State, and neither indeed does it.

I come now to our Military Rewards, which I may rank in three Classes, Several
kinds of Rewards.
those are, Advancement in Military charges, Titles of Honor, and recompenses
or gratuities of Lands, or Money. The first and the third are, in my opinion,
common to both Commanders and common Soldiers; for a Musketeer advanced to a
Corporals place, and getting ten or twenty Shillings of Benevolence, has his
preferment and his gratuity, as well as that Commander who is advanced to be a
Lieutenant General, and gets a Donative of 20000 l. Sterling. But Titles of
Honor are only given to deserving Commissioned Officers, and to none below
them. Among those Titles I reckon that to be one, to be made a Gentleman, and
this is in opposition of what is commonly said, That all Soldiers are
Gentlemen. I knew when the late Emperor, Ferdinand the Third, made Major
General Sperreuter (who had done great services in the Wars) a Gentleman by
Patent, because he was none by birth, and gave him a Coat of Arms. Most of all
Titles of Honor, as Dukes, Marquesses, Earls, Barons, and Knights, have been
given for services in the Wars; notwithstanding which, Princes neither can, nor
will be restricted to confer Honors on others of their Subjects, who both have
deserved or may deserve Honor as well as Swordmen: But herein I will not
offer to play the Herald. The time was never, is not, nor can in reason be
Princes cannot reward all who have served them.
ever expected to be, that Kings can gratify all who have served them Loyally.
The late Emperor, in our own time, conferred both Riches and Honor on many;
yet where one who had served him, was rewarded, two hundred were not. Queen
Christina of Sweden, was so profuse in bestowing both Honors and Lands on
those who had done her service in the German War, that she was thought to have
made a prostitution of the first, and to have disposed of the second, even to
the sensible diminution of the Revenues of the Crown; and yet not one Officer
of a hundred that had served her, tasted of her liberality. His Majesty now
reigning, has honored and enriched many, but it is not possible for him to
reward all; yet those who have not got, should not envy those on whom he has
conferred his Princely Favors and Rewards.

The ancient custom of praising and commending those who have done any
particular kind of Military service, continues yet; for every General does
something like it, but they have not that power over the Treasury, that the
Roman Consuls had in the Fields. Our late Politicians can tell us, That their
Forefathers were so wise, as not to entrust both the Sword and the Purse to
one person, and yet Soldiers were never better paid, nor the Prince his
service better done, than when he who commanded the Arms, commanded the Purse
likewise. But when a General cannot reward of himself, he should not fail to
acquaint his Master Generals should make Gentlemen's services known.
with the names of the persons who have done him services, with a specification
what those were. Marshal Monluc had done great things to Henry the Second, when
he was but Colonel, under the Count of Brisac, Marshal of France: The Noble
Earl did represent those services so handsomely to the French King, that Monluc
was made Gentleman of the Bedchamber, and Governor of Saint Abbe in Savoy.
Upon this subject, he has these expressions in the Second Book of the first
Tome of his Commentaries: It is an unspeakable grief to a Monluc his sense of
it.
Gentleman, who has liberally exposed his life in several actions, when both
himself and his services are concealed from the Prince, upon whom all the
Lives, Honors, and Fortunes of his Servants do depend; there is no theft, says
he, nor robbery comparable to that which is made of a man's Honor: And yet many
Generals make no Conscience to commit that theft, and that Robbery. Thus far
Monluc. And since he dyed, Experience has has confirmed the truth of his
Observation, Generals loving too well to take both the praise and benefit of
all that is done well to themselves, and with a great deal of dexterity, they
lay the miscarriage of all their own actions at other men's doors. The Suedish
Felt-Marshals, Banier and Torstenson, in our own time, were none of those
Generals, for they rewarded Officers and Soldiers themselves, as well as they
could; and when they could not help them, they generously recommended them to
the Administrators of Sweden, in the Queens minority, with a grateful
remembrance of their services.

Knighthood, in former times, was a peculiar and honorable reward of
Knighthood.
Military men, and that which is conferred in the Field, in time of action, is
assuredly the most honorable. But Sovereign Princes have thought it fit,
either when they were infested with War, or other grievous calamities, or after
some glorious Victory, to unite and tie some of their Great Captains and
Chieftains in a fraternity, and to confer on them, with splendid and
magnificent Ceremonies, a peculiar Order of Knighthood, thereby to inflame both
them and others, to Virtuous and Valorous actions: The oldest, and most Several
orders of it.
Honorable, is that of the Garter, instituted by Edward the Third, of England,
under the Patrociny of Saint George; as that of the Thistle of Scotland was
under Saint Andrew. John of Valois, King of France, instituted the order of the
Star, under the protection of Saint Owen, say the French; as one of his
Successors, Louis the Eleventh, instituted that of Saint Michael. In the
minority of Henry the Sixth, of England, when the War was hot between that
Kingdom and France, Philip le Bou, Duke of Burgundy, instituted the Noble Order
of the Golden Fleece, under the protection of Saint Andrew. The King of Denmark
makes Knights of the Elephant, and the Duke of Savoy those of the Annunciation.
Christina, Queen of Sueden, instituted a new Order of Knighthood, which she
would have called the Order of the Amaranth; which, they say, never withers,
and accordingly she appointed the Device to be semper idem. The Knights of the
Teutonick, or Dutch Order, those of St. John of Jerusalem, called afterward
Hospitallers, Knights of the Rhodes, and now of Malta; as also those of the
Sepulcher, or Knights Templars, were, and some yet are very Martial Knights,
whose renowned Actions are, and ever Religious Orders of Knighthood.
will be on the Records of Fame. But there were likewise Religious Orders, for
they vowed Chastity, Poverty, and Obedience: And from Religion have come most
of the Spanish Orders of Knighthood. Sanctius, the third of that name, King of
Castile, for the more vigorous prosecution of the War against the Infidels,
instituted the Order of Calatrava, in the Kingdom of Toledo: The Master of
which Order is a person of great Riches and Power. His Son Alphonse the Ninth
(in the time of his dangerons War with the Moors) instituted the Order of Saint
James, which has since come to that height of power, that the Master of it is
one of the greatest Subjects of Spain: But Ferdinand, the first Catholic King,
made himself and his Successors (with the help of the Pope) Masters of these
Orders. One of the Kings of Portugal, when he had Wars with both the Saracens
of Africa and Spain, instituted the Order of the Knights of Jesus Christ. About
the year 1570. the Queen of Navarre caused 12 Jane d'Albret.
great Medals of Gold to be coined, which she distributed among 12 of the most
eminent Chieftains of the Reformed Religion, as tokens of their fraternity, to
incite them to Constancy, Valor, and Perseverance, in the Cause against the
Roman Catholics. Upon one side of the Medal were these words: Assured Peace,
Entire Victory, or Honest Death. On the Reverse was the Queens own name, with
that of her Son, the Prince of Bearne, who was afterward. Henry the Fourth,
the Great, King of France and Navarre.

War drains the Treasures of Princes and States so dry, that for most part they
are not able to pay the Wages and Arrears of those who serve them, much less
reward them. The Roman Oak, Olive, and Laurel Crowns, are out of fashion long
ago, nor would they signify any thing, but rather be ridiculous, unless they
were given with all the Wages due to the party, who is to be honored with one
of those Crowns, as the Romans were accustomed to do. I have observed in
another place, how in many parts of Christendom, Officers, above the quality
of private Captains, many times are reduced to beggary; to obviate which, since
Princes and States cannot forbear War, or will not live in Peace, it would be a
great work of Charity in them, and would much redound to their Honor Works of
Charity.
and Fame, to build some Hospitals, and endue them with some small Revenue, in
which those Commanders who are lame, old, and poor, might get a morsel of
Bread; which would be an exceeding great relief to those distressed Gentlemen,
and much encourage younger people to engage in a fresh War; for alas, though
written Testimonies, signed and sealed by the Prince or his General, may be of
good use to young and lusty Gallants, who have their Health, and some Money in
their Purses, to look for new Fortunes; yet Passes (though never so favorable)
to poor old men, are, upon the matter, nothing else Passes.
but fair Commissions to beg.

CHAP. XXVIII. The Comparison made by Justus Lipsius of the Ancient and Modern
Militia, examined.
IT is one of the Curses that followed Adam's fall, and I think was inherent in
Discontent follows humane nature.
him before his fall, that as he was not, so none of his Posterity can be
content with his present condition. The longing desire we have to enjoy that we
want, robs us of the content we may have of what we possess. Hence it is, that
old men cry up those customs that were used when they were Boys, vilifying the
present, and magnifying the bypast times. Neither is this fastidium, or
loathing of present things, the concomitant of age only, for young men, who are
in their strength, are tainted with it. Some are displeased with the Government
of the State, others hugely dissatisfied with that of the Church, because none
of them are cast in those moulds, which they fancy to be better than the
present ones; and though perhaps they cannot pretend to have seen better in
their own times, yet they have heard or read of those which they conceive were
so absolutely good, that nothing can be added to their perfection. Others like
only of those Governments which have their birth, rise, growth, and perfection
in their own giddy brains.

But to come nearer our purpose, few Soldiers are satisfied with their own
Country Militia; for if they have been abroad in the World, at their return
home, they cry up the Arms, the Art, and the Discipline of Foreigners; nor can
they find any thing at home can please them. And though their occasions have
never invited them to take a view of strange places, yet their Books afford
them matter enough, to prefer those Arms, those Exercises, those Guards, those
Figures of Battles, that Discipline of War they never saw, to all those they
may daily see. Of this disease of Discontent, I think, Justus Lipsius has been
Justus Lipsius an admirer of the Roman Militia.
irrecoverably sick, and though he did not compile a Military Systeme of his
own, as Machiavelli did; yet I may compare these two in this, that both of them
were Speculative Soldiers. Lipsius is so far disgusted with the Milice of his
own time, (which truly, being about eighty or ninety years ago, was an
excellent one) which he might have seen and observed, better than his Writings
shows he did; and is so much in love with the old Roman Militia, (which he
never saw but by contemplation) that in the comparison he makes of the two, in
the last Chapter of his Commentary on Polybius, he is not ashamed to prefer the
Ancient Art of War to the Modern one, in all its dimensions.

As I conceive, he was so Rational as to think no man would deny the Modern He
compares it with the Modern Art of War,
Milice to want its imperfections; so, I suppose, none will be so void of
Reason, as to grant to him, that the Roman one was absolutely perfect. He has
read it sure in the best of Authors, That nothing below the Sun is perfect. And
I would have it observed, that though the Title of the Comparison be, Of the
Ancient and Modern Militia, yet all along in the Comparison it self he mentions
only the Roman, as if that had been the only Ancient one, whereas he knew the
Grecian was more Ancient than it, the Judaick older than the Grecian, and the
Egyptian older than all the three. My purpose then being neither to derogate
from the excellent worth of the Roman, nor to vilipend the Modern Art of War, I
hope, without any offense to the ashes of the Learned Lipsius I may take a view
of his Comparison, wherein he speaks of all the five essential In five points.
points of War, and in them all gives the pre-eminence to the Roman; let us
hear his Reasons.

The first point is Election or Levy, of which he avers very magisterially
First, in Election or Levy.
that the Roman was the best, and which now, says he, cannot be imitated,
except perhaps in some Republics, and among those, he says, the Commonwealth
of Venice is so far from imitating the Romans, that she restrains her Citizens
from the Exercise of Arms at Land, permitting them only to serve in her Naval
Militia. In answer to this, I think Lipsius deals very rudely with Monarchs
(himself being a subject of one of them) who, by his assertion, neither have
the best way of Levy, nor can imitate the best way; for he plainly says, the
Roman Levy is the best, and cannot be imitated but by some Republics, and not
by all of them neither. In the next place I say, that though Princes do not
bring all their Subjects together in Arms every year, and out of them enrol
some to be Soldiers, as the Romans did, yet it may satisfy Lipsius, if they
do the equivalent; and that is, to order the matter so, that the^r Subjects on
a Frontier be ready in an instant to withstand an invasion, till the Prince
with a greater force comes to repel it: Or if Princes intend to invade others,
then by their several Municipal Laws, they make in a short time such a Levy as
serves their turn; witness the Commission of Array in England, the raising of
all between sixteen and sixty in Scotland; out of which an Election is quickly
made. But Lipsius might have remembered the seven Legions which were appointed
by Francis the First to be perpetually maintained, and in readiness, in France,
in imitation of the Romans: Of which, notwithstanding Marshal Monluc writes,
that France in its Wars found no advantage. So little did that great Captain
care for imitating the Roman Levy; and if it be true, that Credendum Artifici
in sua art, we should in a matter that belongs to War, sooner trust Monluc,
perpetually versed in Arms, than Lipsius, mewed up most part of his life in a
Cell. And if Lipsius be offended with the beat of Drum and sound of Trumpet for
our Modern Levies, he should have remembered, that Rome had likewise her sudden
and tumultuary Levies. And if he mislike that Princes and States should give
such trust to so great numbers of Strangers as ordinarily they Levy, and keep
in Pay, he should remember that the Romans trusted their Allies as much, if not
more; and after the name of Allies was obliterated, Auxiliaries of strange
Nations had the same trust. In the days of our Fathers, and our own too, the
Estates of Venice, and the United Provinces, the Emperor, the Kings of France
and Spain, of Denmark and Sweden, have done great feats by the Levies and
maintenance of Strangers.

The second part of the Comparison consists in the Order kept in their Armies:
Secondly, in Order.
Here he cries out, O, ille bonus in re Romana! O, how good it was in the Roman
Milice! But that is not enough, he adds, See the Centurions, the
Ensign-bearers, and the Options; here, says he, nothing is wanting, nothing
redounding. Yes, by your favor, Lipsius, I have shown in my Discourses of the
Roman Milice, there was much wanting. But here our Author speaks not one word
of, or against the Order of the Modern Militia, and therefore I need not speak
one word for it, yet he seems to detract from it, by crying up the other so
much. When he speaks of Officers, he seems to say the Romans had enough of
them, and we too many: But if this last be true, as perhaps it is, I affirm the
Romans had too few; for to speak of their Foot, I know not what to make of
their Centurions, Sub-Centurions, or Options; but Caporals, Lancespesates, and
Bringers-up, as I told you in another place. Nor do I find their Cavalry
commanded by any Officers in chief under a Consul or a Legate, for the
Decurions were not subordinate one to another, nor had any of them a greater
command than our Corporals or Brigadeers of Horse. All these I look on as
Defects, nor has Lipsius proved the contrary. In our Modern Militia there is
an order that our Colonels shall be with their Regiments and Brigades, and not
stand in an heap together, as Lipsius makes his Roman Tribunes to be in time of
Battle, all at the Eagle of the first Legion, waiting on the Consul, as his
Lackies, or at best, as his Adjutants: And this, I conceive, was another defect
in the Roman Militia, whereof our Modern one cannot be accused.

Thirdly, He compares the Ancient and Modern Arms, and truly I shall easily
Thirdly, in Arms.
grant that Defensive Arms were more used in Lipsius his time, than they are
now, and that they were better in more ancient times, than in either his time,
or ours. But that will not satisfy him, for he will have the Roman Weapons, or
Defensive Arms, to be preferred to ours. He acknowledges the Pike to be an
useful Weapon, The Pike.
but not so good as those Arms the Romans had, and for this he cites the
authority of Polybius; of which I can say no more than I have done in my view
of that Authors comparison of the Grecian Phalange and the Roman Legion,
whereof I shall repeat nothing in this place. Lipsius says, A Bow is a more The
Bow*
useful Engine of War than an Harquebuss: I shall not add any thing here to
what I have spoke of the neglect of the Bow; but though I think well of it, I
dare not for all that, attribute so much to the strength of an Arrow, shot by
the strongest Arm, and most experienced Archer that ever lived, as to a Bullet
shot out of a Harquebuss; and yet Lipsius attributes full as much, and offers
to prove it by several instances taken out of Authors: I pray have the patience
to hear them. Plutarch in the life of Crassus says, That the Parthian Arrows
pierced and killed through the strongest Armor that was ever forged on an
Pretty stories of Arrows and Archers.
Anvil; and Agathias tells our Author, That Arrows shot by a certain Goth,
killed men through both a Target and a Corslet. I think this was much, but if
you think it not so, then hear what follows, If the Arrows shot by that
dreadful Goth fell on Stones or on Rocks, they split and broke them in pieces.
If this be true, I wonder why the Goths did not rather batter the Walls of
Besieged Towns with Bow and Arrow than with the Ram. But take another story
along with you, Pr^copius speaks universally of the Archers of his time, that
their Arrows could not be resisted by either Target or Corslet, nor by both. To
all this I answer, first, If what these Authors say be true, then the Ancients
made all their Defensive Arms in vain; for join the reports of several Authors
together, you may make this conclusion, That no Headpiece, no Target, no Back
nor Breast, could resist Arrows, Stones, nay, nor Swords. Secondly I say, If
Arrows could not be resisted with well tempered Iron or Steel, then it is
purely impossible to make Armor Musket-proof; and yet that this may be done,
and was done in his own time, Lipsius knew very well, and this, I conceive is
argumentum ad homine^. Thirdly, I say, our Author should have been Lipsius too
credulous.
ashamed to be so credulous as to believe all he read in Historians, who, no
doubt, had these tales told them in their own days at the corner of a Chimney,
by some Thrasonical Soldiers, who either said, they did these feats
themselves, or avouch'd they saw them done by others.

Lipsius prefers the Sling (particularly that which is tied to a Battoon) to
our Hand-guns, or Bombards, as he calls them. The Stones or Lead cast by those
Battoon-slings, did likewise (as our Author avers) break through Corslets,
Targets, and all manner of Armor: And here he cries loud, Nego, Nego, The
Battoonsling.
Bombardis his nostris majorem vim esse posse, fortasse nec tantum: I deny, I
deny, says he, that Hand-guns can have a greater force, perhaps not so great;
he adds, excipio Musquetta qua vocant: I except, says he, those Guns which they
call Muskets. This is all like the rest of the stuff before. But yet he goes a
greater length, and tells us gravely, That the Leaden Bullets thrown out of
these Battoon-slings, An uncouth tale.
were cast with such violent force that they melted by the way; and to let us
see he is in good earnest, he offers to prove it by the Authority of both
Philosophers and Poets, as well as Historians. To the first, I say, if Seneca
(for he is the Philosopher cited) had lived in Lipsius his time he would have
altered his opinion, when he saw (which Lipsius might have seen ten thousand
times if he had pleased) Bullets shot with an incomparable greater force than
can be attributed to the Arm of Man, that is, by force of Fire (the violentest
Agent that nature has, which melts any Lead; when he saw, I say, those Bullets
batter, break, wound and kill, without being melted. The reason given by Seneca
and Lipsius Reasons for it confuted.
for the melting, is that the swift motion extenuates the air, that exten^ated
air becomes fire, and that fire melts the Lead. What foppery is this? Is there
any motion swifter than that of a Bullet, shot from a Gun, and yet that motion
(whose efficient cause is fire) melts not the Lead. It is strange, that Lipsius
should have believed that which he read more than that which he saw. His next
Authority is from Poets, and he cites four of them, that so he might convince
us who are unbelievers, with the testimony of many Witnesses. But our Author
knows what is permitted to Poets, and what ^aith we owe them. Hear one of them.

Non se^us exarsit, quam cum balearica plumbum Ovid.

Funda jacit, volat illud, and incandescit eundo;
Et quos non habuit, sub nubibus invenit ignes.
This is so pretty a story, that I think my self obliged to give you it in
English,

It burns, as does a piece of Lead that is cast
Out of a Sling, it melts, it flies so salt;
For when it does below the Welkine soar,
It finds those Fires which it had not before.
Lipsius laughs and scoffs at an Italian Writer, whom he names not, for saying,
That he believed the strongest Arm that ever was, could not throw a stone above
forty paces, that could do any hurt. I am not of that Italian's opinion, and
yet I do not believe with Lipsius, that a Slinger could hit a mark with a
Vegetius his authority
Stone six hundred real foot. He cites for this the Authority of Vegetius, in
the twenty third Chapter of his Second Book, where he says, That Sheaves of
Corn or Grass were set up for the Bow-men and Slingers at six hundred foot
distance, as marks, which they hit often. I believe an Arrow may do it, but
that a Battoon-slinger can do so much, I say in our Authors own words, Nego,
Nego. But I must tell you, in this citation of Vegetius, Lipsius plays fast and
Very questionaole in this point.
loose; he knows the first part of Vegetius his assertion is very questionable,
and that is concerning Bow-men, who, he says, were exercised by the Ancient
Romans; for we find (as in another place I have observed) in other Authors,
that till the time of the Emperors, none of the Romans handled a Bow, or any
of their Allies either; nor can I find they were used by any who served for
them or with them, till after the Hannibalick War: And if Vegetius has erred
in the first part of his assertion, (as I believe Lipsius knew he did) why
would the same Lipsius offer to impose on our Faith, as to make us believe that
Battoon-slingers threw lumps of Lead, and did mischief with them at the
distance of six hundred foot, especially when the Lead they cast, was of one
pound weight, as the same Vegetius says they were? But let us suppose all to be
true that Lipsius reports of the six hundred foot, yet it is most certain that
Musk^teers are able to wound, break, bruise, and kill, before these
Battoonslingers come within distance to cast either Stones or pieces of Lead.

After this, Lipsius tells us very stoutly, That the noise of the Modern Cannon
Lipsius's small esteem of Artillery.
and Muskets terrifies none but Birds. He speaks this like a Philosopher, and
one that sat constantly in a Cell, and never either smelt Powder, or heard a
Bullet fly. He avers, the Romans would not at all have troubled themselves with
G^ns; but who will take Lipsius his word for that, when he reads in several
Histories that they were appalled, frightened, and chased out of the Field with
Arms and Weapons not so terrible by half. And lastly, he shows himself so much
an Admirer of a Sling, that he does not at all wonder that David killed Goliath
with one of them. Nor shall I wonder either, if Lipsius can assure me that the
Giants Helmet did not cover his forehead; but if it did, (as probably it did)
and that his Headpiece was proportionable to the Coat of Mail he had on his
Body, (as probably it was) then I shall say, David could David a good Slinger.
not kill him with Pebble-stones cast out of a Sling, without a Miracle; for
the Stone that could pierce such a Headpiece, required a greater force than
David, and twenty of the strongest Israelites were Masters of; and, no doubt,
it was assisted from above.

Upon this whole business of Arms, I think it was well for Lipsius, that he was
taken up with more grave Studies, that could allow him no time to read
Romances; for if the Authors of those had but declared all the acts of
Knighterrantry to have been done by the Ancient Romans, Lipsius had undoubtedly
believed them all to be true stories. Let us hear what he says more, He finds
our Modern Artillery good for nothing but for battering the Walls of Towns and
Forts; for in Battle, says he, any rising ground, little Bank, or Breastwork,
being quickly cast up, eludes all the hurt Artillery can do. He is so far in
the right, that these helps (whereof he speaks) are very good, if the General
Lipsius his mistake.
who uses them stand still, and only endeavors to keep his ground; but in day
of Battle unless he advances, he shall not win the Field; and if he advances,
he must quit those shelters; and the suddener and quicker his march is, the
less hurt he* shall receive from the Enemies Ordnance. But I think it is very
fair, that Lipsius is so modest, that he does not prefer the Ancient Catapults
and Balists to the Modern Artillery, and I wonder much he did it hot.

In the fourth place he brings Embattelling or Marshalling Armies on the
Fourthly, Embattelling.
Stage, and according to his custom, prefers the Roman, yet does not tell us
wherein the Modern is deficient; and this is not so fair dealing as might have
been expected from such a man as Lipsius. But I am only to trace him in his own
steps, and that which he says on this subject amounts to this: He first says,
he will let us see the Velites fight, and retire; in whose room he marshals the
Hastati, they being weary, go back; to them succeed the Principes, who not
prevailing, retire; then the Triarii, who are, says he, the Veterans and the
Chieftains, take the work in hand, and they cannot but prosper: yet he who
wrote this, cannot but know for all this, that both the Roman Velites, their
Hastati, Principes and Triarii, have been beat out of the Field oftener than
once. All these things have been already sufficiently spoke of. But I wonder
who could tell Lipsius that Modern Generals have not their Reserves, as well as
the Romans had; sure in his own time, if he had but inquired after it, he might
have learned that the Duke of Alva, and Prince of Parma, divided their Armies
into Van, Battle, and Rear; and what were the Roman three fold Batallions but
the same; and since Lipsius his time, if great Captains, for good reasons, have
thought they could do their business better with one Reserve than with two; I
suppose, Lipsius, if he were alive, might acquiesce to it, and not examine
their reasons why they do not tie themselves to the Roman method. But the Jest
is, Lipsius will have a Retreat from one Body to the second, and from A
ridiculous mystery.
that to the third, to be a great secret; Magnum ar^^num, he calls it. This
might be a secret to him, and those of his profession, but to no Soldiers; and
yet he has the vanity to desire all Generals ( Duces he calls them) to
consider well of his secret; but I suppose, few of them need thank him for
revealing such secrets. In the next place, he cries up the Roman manner of
Embattelling, for placing, says he, their Cavalry on the Wings or Horns, that
their Foot should not be surrounded, nor their Battle out-wing'd. What folly
was this in him, Lipsius his inadvertency.
to appropriate that to the Romans, which was an ordinary custom with other
Ancients, it may be, before Rome was a City. And it is strange he did not know
that it was the custom of all Armies; since the downfall of the Roman Empire.
But I must come nearer him, and say, That this was a defect very often in the
Roman Militia, to marshal their Armies so that it could not save them from
being surrounded by a numerous Enemy, in regard they drew up so many Bodies one
behind another; and those Bodies were marshalled so deep in File, that their
Armies could not (especially Consular Armies) have a large Front; the best
means in a Champaign, (where there are no advantages of Hills, Rivers, Ditches,
or Marshes to be expected) to save an Army from being out-wing'd. When Lipsius
wrote this, it seems he forgot that at Cannae, the Roman Horse did so little
hinder the Foot to be surrounded, that the not Defects in the Roman manner of
Embattelling.
adverting to it, lost them the day; for Asarubal having beaten Aenilius on the
Right Wing, fell on the Rear of the Legions, while they fought in Front with
Hannibal his Foot* and routed them. And if Lipsius distrust Livy in this
relation, let him look on the first Book of his own Polybius, and there he will
find, That Xantippus the Lacedaemonian, with an Army of Carthaginians, (who had
been often beaten and baffled before) and a few Mercenary Laconians, routed the
Roman Army (where the Con^ul Regulus was taken) only by outwinging it, and
falling on the Rear of their Infantry, by which (says the Author) cogebatur
fact^ conversione, cum iis dimicare; He was forced by facing to the Rear to
fight with them, that is, with the Carthaginians.

Fifthly, and lastly, he compares the Ancient (suppose still Roman) and Modern
Fifthly, in Discipline, which he divides into three.
Militia in their Discipline. And this he divides into three parts, Duties,
Exercises, and Laws. I shall trace him in all the three. And first, he
subdivides Duties into three; these are, Private Services to Officers, Watches,
and Public First, Duties, subdivided, Private servi^^^*
Works. As to the first, he says, Private Services to Superiors a ither
ceased, or are voluntary. He is right, they are voluntary; yet no Soldier now
will refuse to do any honest service to his Captain, or any Officer either
above or under him; and Lipsius knows the Roman Soldiers were no Slaves, and
why should Christian Soldiers be Slaves? As to the second part of Duties,
which is Watch and Guard, he confesses, there is some show of Watches,
them in the Modern Militia not to be contemned; for so I interpret his words,
which are, aliqua, nec improba, apud nos species. But he adds, Credo tamen
aliqua meliora ac tutiora olim fuisse: But I believe, says he, that of old some
things in Watches were better and surer: yet I am not obliged to make his
belief the ground of my faith, to believe any such thing. And though he tells
us not wherein our Modern Guards are defective, yet he seems to hint at the
Tessera, or Word, at the stations before Ports, at the Rounds, and at the
division of the Vigils. To all which I answer thus: The Modern Words or Signs
(when it is needful) are given and received with as much secrecy and caution,
and with a great deal of less trouble than the Ancient Tessera was. Our Rounds
in the Rounds.
night, and visiting the Guards in the day time, are as frequent and as
orderly; and the neglect of either them or the Guards, as severely punished as
among either the Romans or the Grecians. But he says, one man standing now at a
Port is thought a sufficient Guard for it; truly, I say, he who thinks so is a
very insufficient Soldier; nor can I imagine that ever our Author saw in his
own Country (which in his time was the Stage of Mars) a Port guarded only with
a Sentinel. It has been his gross mistake, for that Sentinel which he took to
A gross mistake of Lipsius.
be the Guard, stood there to challenge Strangers, and upon occasion to call
out the Corporal or whole Watch, who were within a House builded and appointed
for them, commonly called a Court of Guard. As to the Vigils, we have sometimes
Double Sentinels, none whereof sleeps, none whereof sits; and if there is but
one Sentinel, yet he being visited not only by the Rounds, but frequently by
the Corporal or other Officers, will keep as good, if not better Watch, than
four Romans on one Post, whereof only one stood and watched the other three lay
and slept; and were visited only by the Circitors, and not at all by their own
Commanders. I know not what he means by the Division of the Vigils, for
certainly a Clock, a Passelunt, or a Sand-glass can divide the hours, and
measure the night, as well as a Roman Water-glass.

The third kind of Duties, which Soldiers are bound to pay, are Public
Public works.
Works; and here you may be sure he will prefer the Roman Soldiers for their
wonderful fatigue, to all our Modern Soldiery. And so he may, but I will not
suffer him to calumniate us, and charge us with more idleness and sloth than we
are guilty of: For first, he avers, That all public works are altogether
omitted; he says, Soldiers will not lay their hands to a Spade or to a
Mattock: They cry out, says he, It is a shame for a Soldier to meddle with
these, let others be employed for such services. It is true, such words have
been heard, but very soon compesced. And I verily believe, Lipsius had such an
animosity against the Modern Militia, that he never either conversed with
Modern Armies, or endeavored to learn their customs; otherwise he might have
seen the contrary of those things he wrote, even at that time when he wrote
them. It is a generally received Maxim, for any thing I know, in all our
Modern Armies, That a Soldier is bound to work any thing that can make for A
Soldier is obliged to work for his own safety.
his own Defense; and under that notion, he must not refuse to work in
Approaches before Towns, to make up Breaches, Retrenchments, and Counter-mures
within Towns, and to make Sconces, Redouts, and Bastions, for the Fortification
of Camps and Leaguers. If our Author had gone to Holland with the Duke of Alva,
he had seen his Soldiers work all these at the Sieges of Harlem and Leyden; or
nearer to his own Town of Louvaine, he might have seen the Prince of Parma's
men work laboriously at the Sieges of Gant, Antwerp, and many other places; or
if he had made a step with that Prince over to France, in his two marches
thither, he would have seen his Soldiers refuse none of those works I have
spoke of. Nay, I will tell him that, which will make him inexcusable, either
for Ignorance or Malice, when he wrote this. The Spanish Soldiers (and Lipsius
was the King of Spain's Subject) thought it a disgrace for them to suffer
Pioneers to work in the Approaches, they would Custom of Spanish Soldiers 80
year ago.
do it themselves, nor would they take Money for their work, for they said they
received the Kings pay for that, as well as for fighting; their custom was to
dig in the Approaches with a Helmet and Back-piece, but nothing on their
Breasts and Bellies, because when they bowed their Bodies to work, only their
Heads and Backs were in danger. But if a Prince or a General can ease his
Soldiers, by the assistance of Country people and Pioneers, will it not be
well done? Will they not be the more fit, and the more ready to fight? I
suppose they will. Did not Caesar's Legate, at the Siege of Marseilles, make
the Country Clowns cut down Trees, bring them to his Camp, and help him in many
other Drudgeries; let him read Caesar's Commentaries, and he will find he did
so.

Among those Public Works he reckons Encamping, and so he may justly Encamping.
do. And here he fiercely charge the men of the Modern Militia with the
neglect of both the parts of Encamping, those are, Castrametation and
Fortification; and he does it in a very few words, Aperte considemus, and sine
certo ordine; we sit down, says he, in our Camps open, and without any regular
order. I should think that he who wrote this, either was never in a Modern
Camp, or did not at all take heed to it. The several quarters are as orderly
divided Castrametation,
as ever they were with his Romans; for proving which I refer you to my
Discourse of Modern Castrametation; neither will you find so many defects in
it, as I have observed to be in the Roman, even as it is described by Polybius,
Terduzzi, Preissac, Steuechius, and by Lipsius himself. As to the Fortification
of the Camp, he says, we use none, except it be a Waggonburg, or Sconce of
Wagons, whereof I spoke formerly, and which he in barbarous Latin calls
Carrago. I shall here repeat something (for clearing this matter) of what I
spoke in another place. Our Modern Generals hold it to be exceeding
troublesome, Of the Fortification of the Camp*
and not at all necessary, to fortify their Camps every night, when no Enemy
is near them: And when one is near, if they resolve to fight, they stand all
night in a fighting posture; if they do not resolve to fight, they either
retire, or they fortify. If an Army be to stay for one night or two, Generals
choose some high or close piece of ground for Encamping, after the Grecian
custom; and where it is deficient, they help it by some artificial works, or
with such a Carrago as Lipsius speaks of. And I pray you, what necessity for
fortifying a Leaguer every night, where there is no danger? what good does it,
nay, how much hurt does it? To make Soldiers work the half of the night to
fortify that Camp (when you are in no danger) which you are to leave the next
day betimes. Is this any thing else but to give your Soldiers a needless
fatigue? Has Lipsius never read it, That the just man is merciful even to his
Beast? But in this Discourse our Author is very injurious to those great
Captains who were Both of them ordinary in Lipsius his time.
coetaneous with him, who were very expert in that point of War, and used it
more than has been practiced since. Let any peruse the Histories of his time,
they will find, that at all their Sieges (which were many and frequent) all
their Camps were excellently well fortified with a double Circumvallation, one
against the Besieged place, and another against those without who would attempt
to relieve it. If Lipsius had lived some years longer than I suppose he did, he
would have recanted, when he saw Spinola's Siege of Breda in the year 1625. for
there he might have seen stranger works than ever any he read of; and with
which Caesar's Circumvallations either when he besieged Alesia, or when he
offered to besiege Pompey's Army at Dirrachium, could not compare. For here at
Breda, the Spanish outward or exter^our Entrenchment against the Prince of
Orange and all Spinola his wonderful Circumvallations at Breda^
his Abettors, was of fifty two miles circumference, and the inner or interior
against the Town, of sixteen. In both which were reckoned (beside the
Fortification of some Villages, for securing Convoys) above three hundred and
sixty Forts, Batteries, Sconces and Redouts; so that he who writes the
particular History of that famous Siege, has reason to say, That there was
such a Labyrinth of Fortifications there, that none but those who saw them will
have faith enough to believe it.

Our Author tells us here, what a great benefit it was to the Romans, to have a
Camp to which they might retire after a Battle. But he might have learned, that
the great Captains of the Modern Militia propose to themselves no advantage by
these Retreats, justly fearing their Soldiers may retire before it be half
time, or before they get order for it. And if Lipsius had been pleased he might
have remembered that his own Romans made sometimes very bad use of A Retreat to
a Camp dangerous.
retiring to their Camp: As when they run to it from their Enemy in their
Mutiny against Appius Claudius, and at other times too; as I have observed in
my first Chapter of the Roman Art of War. Nay, some of their Consuls,
apprehending the danger of it, took away all possibility of retiring to the
Camp. Take a few Instances. One of the Fabii, a Dictator being to fight
Instances.
with the Samnites, cast down his Entrenchment, burnt his* Tents, fought, and
gained the Victory; as you may see it in Livy's Ninth Book. At Ciminia, another
Fabius caused his Drudges in the nightime to cast down his Ramparts and fill
up the Ditch, while he marshalled his Army, wherewith he marched out, and
fought next morning with Success. Cato the elder being to fight with the
Spaniards, led his Army in the nightime a great circuit, even behind the
Enemies Camp, and next morning did show his Soldiers where they were;
remonstrated to them what they had to do, and that there was an impossibility
to get back to their own Camp, but over the Be^^ies of their Enemies; they
^ought and got the Victory. These great Roman Captains, you see, were not of
Lipsius his Judgment. But further, the Roman Senate imputed the loss of Cannae
to the Retreat of their Army to the Camp, and accordingly punished all that
were taken in the Camp, for that Retreat. And besides that, take two other
Instances of the hurt their Retreats to their Camps were like to do: The Consul
Attilius, fighting against the Samnites, saw his Foot fly shamefully, he
instantly ordered some of his Cavalry to get between them and the Camp, and by
mere force drive them back; this was done by the Horse, and the Roman Foot
desperately turning head, gained the day; see Livy's Ninth Book. At that great
Battle which Lucius Scipio fought with Antiochus, the Left Wing of the Roman
Foot being indifferently well secured by a River, the Consul made his Left Wing
of Horse the weaker; which Antiochus perceiving, caused a brisk charge to be
given on the Horse, and routed them; and immediately fell on the left Flank of
the Foot, who not enduring it, fled toward the Camp; but the Tribune who was
left for the defense of it, issued with his Cohorts, and forced the flying
Legions to face about; which they doing, fought well, and gained the day. If
this Tribune had* let them enter the Camp, as he might, by Lipsius's consent,
have done; in all probability, the rest of the Legions had left the Field,
which, no doubt, had given Antiochus the Sovereignty of the greatest part of
Asia.

Lipsius has kept us long in the comparison of the first part of Discipline,
which consists of Duties; now he comes to the second part, which is composed
(as he will have it) of Trainings and Exercisings; these, he says, in the
Exercises.
Modern Discipline are wholly omitted and neglected. In answer to which, I say,
I have spoke of great and very great neglects in this point of the Military Art
in the later times: But I cannot, I dare not, I will not believe our Author,
that they were either neglected or omitted in his days, unless I give the lie
to all the Histories of those times, which witness, That Flanders and Holland,
the first for the King of Spain, the second for the Estates of the United
Provinces, were the Military Schools where most of the Youth of Europe did
learn all their Military Exercises.

Lastly, he makes the third part of the Discipline of War to consist in
Military Laws. And truly, if all be true he says, he needs make no comparison
in this point Military Laws.
between the Ancient and Modern Militia; for he avers we have no Laws at all,
or very few; or if any at all, they are made in vain, as being never put in
execution. Here he assumes to himself to speak what he pleases to the disgrace
of Christian Soldiers, and very little to his own reputation* Listen a little
to his words: Adeste mei Duces, date vestras Leges: Quid mussatis? An null^? An
paucae? Illa ipsae quae sunt, irrit^ and pro nullis: Profecto ita vivitur,
libido pro lege est, Jurisque locum sibi vindicat ensis. Furta quis hodie
punit? Imo, quis Raptus, and C^des? Stupra and Adulteria inter facinora
Militaria censentur, and quae poscant aliquam Coronam. Take it in English: Come
hither, says he, you Captains, and give me Pedantick Insolence.
your Military Laws, that I may examine them, and compare them with those of
the Romans: Why do you whisper? Have you none? Or have you but a few? Yea,
these few are made in vain, and signify nothing: you live so as if your Lust
were your Law, and that your Sword usurps the place of Justice. Who is it this
day that punishes The^ts? who is it that punishes Robberies, Rapes, and
Murders? Whoredoms and Adulteries are accounted Military gallantries, and
such as deserve the reward of some Crown. Assuredly, if all this be true, it
must be granted, Lipsius has reason enough to cry down the Modern Discipline.
But before you believe, that Armies either were in his time, or have been since
so Lawless and void of Discipline, I shall desire you to examine History, and
daily practice; and then I doubt not but you will find this Author of ours was
not always guided by exact truth in his assertions. Too many crimes have been,
and are committed daily in our Armies, and so it was among the Romans too. Too
many of them pass unpunished by the misunderstanding of great Commanders, and
the carelessness and neglect of Inferior Officers; and so it was among the
Romans too. Nor dare Lipsius say that all crimes were punished among them, Too
many crimes unpunished both now and of old.
no, even in their severest times. These faults mentioned by him, as Thefts,
Robberies, Murders, Whoredoms and Adulteries, are punished as severely now,
as when* Rome was in her growing condition, and then she was in her purest
times. Nor can Lipsius, or any for him, produce more severe Laws of War among
his Ancient Romans, than Military constitutions were in his time, and yet are
under most European Princes and States, as you may see in my Discourse of the
Modern Laws of War; nor were punishments more frequent in their Armies, or more
severe than in ours at this day, as you may likewise see in my discourse of
Punishments and Rewards. And indeed, those Mutinies which fell out in the
Spanish Armies, after the Duke of Parma's Death, and some before it, were
infamous and inexcusable; yet no worse, nor so bad by half, as many were among
the Romans; some whereof you may remember I have observed in another place.

Our Author, in the close of his Comparison joins with Vegetius, and cries To
deposite half pay is now ridiculous.
up the Roman custom, in causing the Roman Soldiers to deposite at their
Colors the half of their Pay, to be a stock to them after they had obtained
their Dimissions. I think indeed, the custom and institution was good and
commendable enough; but it is ridiculous to propose the imitation of it now,
when for most part, Princes and States detain (without the consent of the
Soldiers) The reason^
in their own hand, some the half, some the third part, and some two parts of
three of both Officers and Soldiers Wages; some Proviant-bread, and now and
then a bit of Cheese being deduced.

To conclude, upon the whole matter of this Comparison, Justus Lipsius has
shown himself a good Antiquary, well traveled abroad, but to be Peregrinus
domi, a great stranger at home. And so I take my leave of him.

CHAP. XXIX. Whether the profession of a Soldier be lawful.
WAR being the subject of my Military Discourses, and therein I being
necessitated to speak frequently of Soldiers; because without those, who
either truly have, or profess to have skill in Military affairs, War cannot be
managed, it will be fit to enquire, Whether the profession of a Soldier be
lawful; that is, Whether it have any warrant in either Divine or Humane Law, or
(which is the same) if it be against any of them. I do not here intend to
question the lawfulness of War; for having spoke something of that, I shall
take it for granted, that War grounded on justifiable causes, is lawful. Nor do
I make it a question, Whether Subjects that are able to bear Arms, are bound to
serve their Princes in the Wars, as Soldiers. But the Quaere shall be, Whether
it be lawful to make a trade of Soldiery; that is, to learn no other Art,
either Liberal or Mechanical, except to serve in the Wars for Pay, and thereby
to gain a livelihood. The affirmative whereof I maintain, my opinion being
grounded on the reasons mentioned in this following discourse. But first to
shun cavilling, I shall easily grant, that it were much more commendable to
learn some other Art, that when a lawful War is at an end, those who have
served in it, may work with their hands (as the Apostle says) and so get their
livelihood, than to rove from Country to Country to look for employment in
foreign Wars. And without all doubt, many of those who do so, cannot but be
subject to very uncharitable thoughts, and unlawful desires; for whereas not
only Christians, but all men, even as men, should desire and pray for Peace, as
the greatest Earthly blessing mortals can enjoy; those who know not how to get
a livelihood in time of Peace, long for War, and wish and pray for it; which
cannot be done without great sin both against God and Humane Society. But I
answer, all this is by accident, it is but the wickedness of the Soldier, not
the profession of Soldiery, that makes him pray for War; for pious and morally
honest Soldiers in time of Peace may put themselves in Domestic service, of
either Gentlemen or Country Farmers, and so earn their bread, till they have a
fair call to follow the Wars* But truly their condition for most part is very
deplorable, for when they become lame or so old that they can serve no longer
in the Wars, they are good for nothing but Hospitals; and because few of them
can get into any of these, the rest must be contented to beg, as Troops of them
do over all Christendom. In several great Towns of Germany I have seen
Captains begging alms, and at Bruxels and Antwerp I have known those who could
testify by their Passes, they had been Lieutenant-Colonels and Majors; much
more others of a lower degree begging Charity in the Streets.

But I find nothing that occurs to my memory, either in the Old or New
Testament, that discharges the profession of Soldiery, that is, to serve for
Pay in the Wars, whether these Soldiers have learned any other trade or not;
yea, on the contrary, there be several passages that confirm me in my opinion.
I shall not instance Abner, Joab, Amasa, Benajah, and others, who were mere
Proved to be lawful.
Soldiers, and managed the Wars of Saul, Ishbosheth, David and Solomon; for it
may be told me, these were Gentlemen, who had Estates, and needed learn no
other Trade: but I shall say, That Jephte had no Estate, having been banished
from his patrimony by his Brethren, because he was a Bastard: He, I say, knew
no other trade but Soldiery, and thereby maintained himself and his followers,
and in the Land of Tob he learned and practiced his Art of Soldiery, so
happily against the Enemies of Gods people (for so Deodati interprets it) that
his Contrymen by a solemn Embassy, invited him to be their Captain General
against the Ammonites, which he accepted, and wrought their deliverance. Here
have you a Soldier, who knew no other Art or profession but that of Soldiery,
approved of by the Lord, and elected by him and the people at Mispa, to fight
the Lords Battles against the Enemies of his people; and this very Soldier is
reckoned among the elect and faithful, by the Author of the Epistle to the
Hebrews, Chap. 2. v. 32. In the Gospel we read that the Soldiers asked the
Baptist what they should do to he saved: Be contented with your wages, said he,
and do violence to no man. Here he bids them not learn other trades, and I am
bound to believe, that most of those who asked him the question, if not all of
them, were Romans, who knew no other livelihood but to be Soldiers, and were
then quartered in Judea, to keep the Jews under the subjection of the Roman
Emperors; and whether this was a lawful employment or not, shall be spoke to
hereafter. The Apostle Paul moves the question, Who goes to War on his own
charges? meaning none is bound to do it. Hence it will follow, that a Soldier
may serve for wages; or if any will serve without wages, as some Volunteers do,
it is not forbidden them; however in these two places, nothing being spoke
against the profession of Soldiery, I may safely conclude, that the profession
of a Soldier, without any other trade, is allowed and authorized by those two
great Saints. Our blessed Lord bore witness, That the Centurion who said he was
not worthy that our Savior should come under his roof, had more Faith than he
had found in Israel; and I make no doubt, but if the profession of Soldiery
had been unlawful, he would have bid him learn some other Art wherewith to gain
his livelihood. The like may be said of that Centurion, who sent to Joppa for
St. Peter to come to Caesarea; for we find not that the Apostle, when he
instructed that Captain and his Friends of the means of their Salvation, gave
him either advice or command to learn any other trade than that of Soldiery;
and it may not only be probably conjectured, but asserted, that these two
Centurions had learned no other trade but that of Soldiery; as much may be
said of a third Centurion, who confessed our Savior to be the Son of God, even
when he saw him suffer on the Cross as a Man, who, as Church Histories mention,
dyed a Martyr for the Christian Faith.

These of whom I speak, who know no Art or way of livelihood but by the trade
of Soldiery, are ordinarily called, Soldiers of Fortune; though most of them
might rather be called the Sons of Misfortune. From what I have said, this
argument may be framed, that That Profession, Art, or Trade, that is neither
directly, indirectly, or consequentially condemned by any Divine Law or
Ordidinance, mentioned in Holy Scripture, is in it self lawful; but the
Profession or Art of Soldiery, without any relation to any other Art, is
neither directly, indirectly, nor consequentially discharged in Scripture:
Ergo, the profession of mere Soldiery is lawful. If it be objected here, That
the Apostle writing to the Corinthians, orders every man that would eat, to
work with his hands: I answer first, That the Corinthians being a people
conquered by the Romans, were not permitted to be Soldiers; and next, if the
command be general for all Nations, and in all Ages, then Soldiers are
included, for they work with their hands, and very often a bloody work. And if no
Divine Law be against this profession, as little can it be alleged, That any
positive Law of man has forbid it; and daily experience teaches us, That all
Princes and States make use of men who know no other trade but that of
Soldiery; which they could not do without sin, if that profession were
unlawful in it self. Nay, I have known the time, thirty years ago, when I
served in Germany, That Princes and States, though they bestowed Levy-shoney
very plentifully, could not get half so many of that profession as they
desired; and at this very time when I write this, those European Princes who
are hot in War with others, cannot get men enough of that trade; and yet I
shall easily grant, they get more than they pay well.

But Hugh de Grot, commonly called Grotius, a very learned and grave Author,
Grotius's opinion examined.
toward the end of the Twenty fifth Chapter of his Second Book De fare Belli
ac Pacis, is a heavy Enemy to the trade of Soldiery; for there he says, Nullum
vitae genus est improbius, quam eorum, qui sine causa respectu, mercede
conducti, militant: No kind of life (says he) is so godless as of those, who
without regard to the cause, fight for wages; and he subjoyns, Et quibus
ibifas, ubi plurima merces: And with whom it is a Rule, That War is most
lawful, where greatest Pay is to be got. For answer, What if I grant all this,
it will make just nothing against my assertion: The abuse of a thing cannot
make the thing unlawful; I shall confess it is so as he says, with very many
Soldiers, who have another false Maxim (which De Grot mentions not) and that
is, It is all one with them whom they serve, so they serve faithfully. These
are great faults in too many Soldiers, but all Soldiers not being guilty of
them, all should not be charged with them; nor should the profession suffer for
the fault of some of its professors. De Grot would have taken it unkindly, if I
should have argued thus with him, No such a Godless kind of life, as of those,
who without any regard to the justice of the cause, embrace the quarrels,
though never so unjust, of such Clients who are best able to reward them; for
though this be true enough in thesi, yet Grotius would have thought, that by
such an expression, I reflected on all Lawyers and Advocates, and their
profession too; for it is certain, that too many Lawyers do so, which Grotius
(who professed Law) knew but too well, and perhaps practiced it too much. And
as Grotius must confess, that it is a sin in an Advocate to plead for a Fee in
a Clients cause, which he knows to be unjust; so I shall acknowledge all
Soldiers to be sinners who fight in a cause which they know to be unjust. But
I must tell you, there is a great difference between Soldiers and Lawyers in
this case, for there be but few Advocates ^ho cannot discern between the
justice and unjustice of the cause they undertake to defend; whereas on the
other hand, there be but few, and very few Soldiers, who can discern between a
just and an unjust cause, for which they are to fight. I knew a person abroad,
who left an Honorable employment, in which he had gained much reputation, and
went to his own Country to commence a War against his Prince; for being
illiterate, he was not able to discern that he was fighting against Gods
Ordinances, when he suffered himself to be persuaded by some skilful and
learned men, that he was to fight for the cause of God.

That Soldier who serves or fights for any Prince or State, for wages, in a
cause he knows to be unjust, sins damnably, and stands in need of both a sudden
and serious repentance. But alas, how few of them can discern; and again, alas,
how few of them study to discern, and inform themselves of the Justice or
Unjustice of a cause! Besides, it is the sad fate of many of them, that being
engaged in a foreign Prince's service, even in a just cause; when that War is
at an end, the Prince begins a new War, and an unjust one, but will not permit
his Soldiers to leave his service, as being tied to him by their Military
Sacrament; yet I think, if foreign Soldiers knew the War to be unjust, in such
a case they should desert their employments, and suffer any thing that can be
done to them, before they draw their Swords, against their own Consciences and
Judgments, in an unjust quarrel.

Grotius tells us, that St. Austin says, Militare non est delictum, propter
praedam St. Austin^ defended.
militare est peccatum: To be a Soldier (says the Father) is no crime, but to
serve in the Wars for booty is a sin; and I shall say so too: Yet neither St.
Austin nor Grotius dare aver, but a Soldier, after the Victory, may take a
share of the booty: It was a common practice of Gods people, the Israelites;
and it is no where forbidden in Gods word: Austine's meaning then must be, to
fight merely for Booty, without any other motive, is a sin; and so I say too:
But observe that the Father says not, Militare propter mercedem est peccatum:
To fight for wages is a sin; for indeed i^ is no sin for a mere Soldier to
serve for wages, unless his Conscience tells him, he fights in an unjust cause;
but Grotius adds, Imo and propter stipendium militare pecca^um est, si id unice
and praecip^e spect^^ur* Yea, to fight for wages (says he) is a sin, if wages
be chiefly and only looked to. What if I grant him all this, it will not follow
that* the profession of pure and only Soldiery, without any other trade, is
unlawful. If some Soldiers serve only for wages, without any consideration of
the cause, all do not ^o: But what if the Soldier cannot know whether the
cause for which he fights, be just or unjust; nay, what if he conceive the
cause to be most just, when it is truly in it self most unjust, shall we not
presume, that in such a case, invincible Ignorance may plead an excuse with a
merciful God; assuredly it should prevail much* with the charity Christ has
commanded men to bear one to another. I am of the opinion, if De Grot had writ
thus when his Masters, the Estates of the S^v^n United Provinces, commenced
their War against the King of Spain, they would have given him but very sorry
thanks for such doctrine* for they stood then in great need of men, (as perhaps
they do this very day) and whether their quarrel with Philip the Second (who
undoubtedly was their Sovereign one way or other) was just or unjust, was
strongly debated among the wi^est Statesmen, Politicians, Divines, and Lawyers
in all Europe, and therefore could not be discerned by every dull and
block-headed Soldier; it was enough for them to believe what their Masters
said, That the cause was just; and therefore very lawful for them to serve for
wages: And if those Estates had not begun the War, till all those who served
them, whose only trade was Soldiery, had been satisfied in their Judgments
and Consciences concerning the justice of the War, I dare affirm they had never
been either Free or Sovereign Estates.

What Judgment shall we make of all the Civil Wars of Germany, France, and
Great Britain? certainly the cause of both parties could not be just; and yet,
no doubt, all or most of each party thought their own cause the most just, and
the only just cause; shall we therefore cast all, whose quarrel was most
unjust, into the ever-burning flames of Hell? God forbid: Ignorance was the
greatest sin of most of them; though it may be feared, many of the Leaders of
the faction sinned against Conscience and Judgment. The late King of Sueden,
Charles Gustavus, invaded Poland in the year 1655. examine the matter rightly,
it was a most perfect breach of the twenty six years Truce, concluded and sworn
in the year 1635. there being yet six years to run; but the poverty of the
Suedish Court, of the Grandees, and General persons, concurring with the
unlimited Ambition of that Martial King, trod upon all bonds of Equity, Law,
and Justice, and carried on that Invasion; and that Kings Manifesto (though the
poorest that ever was published) was so gilded over with seeming reasons for
the justification of his Arms, that thousands not piercing further than the
external pretenses, were fooled into a belief that the cause was just, and were
content to serve him for pay. What Court of Justice can condemn those Innocents
for sin; yet if De Grot presided in it, they would be condemned to the Gallows,
and perhaps worse, as fedifragous and perjured, Breakers of the Laws of
Nations, Robbers and Thieves.

It is question, Whether those Soldiers who made their address to John the
John the Baptist.
Baptist served in a just and lawful War or not? For my part, I think they did
not; yet they served their Master, the Roman Emperor, for pay, and thought the
cause just, which I am confident, justified their service in an ill cause;
otherwise the Baptist was obliged to tell them their quarrel was unjust, and if
they continued in that service, they sinned damnably; but he rather encouraged
them to serve still, and be content with their pay, and wrong no man. Grotius
would have handled them more roughly. That the cause wherein they served was
unjust and unlawful, I demonstrate thus: Whether Pompey and Cr^ssus made War in
the name of the Roman Senate, against the Jews, justly and lawfully, shall not
be the debate, though I think they did not; but whether that War was just or
not, Julius C^sar usurping the State, altered the case: for as he had no just
right to the Sovereignty of Rome; so he had as little to Judea: After his
death, the Senate and People of Rome resumes the Sovereignty; but kept it not
long, for it was soon taken from them by Octavius, Antony and Lepidus, and so
reduced to a Triumvirate: Antony and Octavius quickly robbed Lepidus of his
third, and so divided the Empire into two parts, each of them usurping the
Sovereignty of his own share, to which neither of them had either just title or
claim. While these two Brothers-in-law remained Friends, Antony gave the
Kingdom of Judea to Herod the Idumean, in whose Reign our Blessed Lord was
born. Herod's Title was very weak, for Antony himself had no just title to
Judea: and Qui non habet, non potest dare: He who has not cannot give. But
Antony is beaten, and kills himself, and Augustus remains the sole Usurper of
the whole Roman Empire: He by his usurped power confirms Herod in a Kingdom,
to which neither the one nor the other had a just title. Herod the Great dies,
and his Son Archelaus, by Augustus his permission, succeeds, who could have no
better title than his graceless Father had; upon his misdemeanors, Augustus
banishes him, and reduces the Kingdom of Judea to a Province, giving a
Tetrarchy to Herod Antipas, who beheaded the Baptist. All this power did
Augustus usurp, the true Sovereignty of all these Countries belonging not to
him, but to the Senate of Rome, if it belonged to the Romans at all. Augustus
dies, and leaves Tiberius his adopted* Son, to be Successor to his ill-got
Empire: Tiberius proves a Tyrant, ^troque modo, sine titulo, and exercitio; He
wanted a just claim, because he who gave it him, wanted one himself: But
Tiberius was wise enough to know, that Quomodo aliquid acquiritur, eodem modo
tenetur; By what means a thing is acquired, by those same means it is kept: And
therefore what his Predecessor had gained with his Sword, he resolves to
maintain with the same, and therefore kept Judea Garrisoned with Soldiers. In
the fifteenth year of his Cruel and Tyrannical Reign, about the time that Jesus
Christ began to Preach, and manifested himself to be the Messiah, did the Roman
Soldiers ask the Baptist, What they should do to be saved? But he neither bid
them forsake their trade of Soldiery, or keeping it, to learn another; nor did
he say to them, That though their profession of Soldiery was lawful, yet it
was not lawful for them to serve in an unjust cause, or under an Usurper and a
Tyrant, as Tiberius was: And truly this passage is very observable for my
purpose, for if it had been told those Soldiers, That they incurred the
hazard of eternal damnation by serving in an unjust War, they should presently
have laid down their Arms, though the Tyrant should have put them all to death
for it: So it seems to me, the Baptist thought invincible Ignorance excused
them, not knowing the cause to be unjust, But assuredly, if Tiberius had asked
him the question, What he should do? J^hn would have bid him resign the
Government over to the Senate, and be contented with his own proper goods, and
to do no more violence to any man. I believe none will offer to justify the
Invasions and bloody Ambition of the Emperor Maximianus, and yet the Th^ban
Legion, which was composed of Christians, served him faithfully in his Wars,
and refused none of his Commands, except to Sacrifice to Idols, and for that
all of them received the Crown of Martyrdom; either they thought it did not
concern them to examine the cause, or they thought it was just; which was
enough to save them from the injustice of it; we may observe h^re, That neither
our Savior, the Baptist, or any of their Apostles or Disciples ever seemed to
take notice of the Usurpation or Tyranny of either Augustus, Tiberius,
Caligula, Claudius, Nero, or D^mitian; in whose reign (if I mistake not) the
longest lived Apostle dyed: Our Savior, as Man not meddling with Secular
Powers, his Kingdom not being of this World, both himself and his Apostles
ever inculcating on all his followers and Disciples passive obedience to all
Superior Powers, even without exception of Tyrants.

Tiberius his title to the Roman Empire was no better than that of his
Predecessor, who gave him both the Empire and Title; but Augustus had no just
title to that Sovereignty which he had usurped, which is clear enough by the
History, and much more clear by a resolution he once took to restore the
Supreme power to the Senate and the People; but wavering in his thoughts, being
loath to wrong his Natural Conscience, by keeping that which did not belong to
him; and as loath to make himself a Subject, since he had been a Sovereign: He
called his two great Friends and Favorites, Agrippa and Mecoenas to his
Council, protesting he would do in that business as they would advise him:
Agrippa in a long Speech counseled him to do Justice, and resign his power;
but Mecoenas in as long an harang^e advised him to retain the Sovereignty for
the good of the people, preferring Monarchy to both A^isto^racy and Democracy;
the last Speech fitting the ambition of Augustus, prevailed with him, and made
him adhere to his usurpation, by which only he had power to devolve the
Succession of the Empire to Tiberius. Nor could this Tiberius pretend
prescription; for That, as Lawyers say, orders possession to be one hundred
years old, and all Augustus his Reign, even from the first time of his
Trinmvirate, consisted but of fifty six years. But I believe, Lawyers say also,
That in Soveraignties there is no prescription of time, but whenever the just
owner can, he may resume his power, which the Roman Senate knew very well; when
Ner^ fled out of the City, and deserted the Government, they made a Decree,
That the Monstrous Tyr^nt should be put to death m^re maj(...); that was, to be
well whipped, and then have his Head cut off. Now we must be very wary to aver,
That the Soldiers who were in Tiberius his pay, served in a just War, because
their Master was left Successor by Augustus his Testament, and had the Empire
confirmed to him, by the Votes of the Senate and People of Rome; for if that
made him a lawful Prince, and his Wars just, then the Armies which served in
Scotland, England and Ireland, under Richard Cromwell, the pretended Protector
of the three Nations, served in a just and lawful War, and under a just and
lawful Prince; for Richard had the Protectorship and Sovereignty left him by
his Father Oliver the Usurper, and had the supreme power* confirmed to him by
the greater, the more visible and governing party of the three Kingdoms: But
as no honest person will aver this, so the other of Teberius can be granted by
no judicious man. The Corollary of this discourse will be, first, That the
profession of pure Soldiery, though joined with no other trade, is lawful; as
also that a Soldier may serve in an unjust and unlawful War, and under an
unjust Master, provided he think the Cause and the War just and lawful, because
his Ignorance may excuse him. On the other hand, I think, if a Soldier know
the cause to be unjust, and the War not to be lawful; nay, if he doubt whether
it be just and lawful or not, if he continue to serve in it, he sins heinously,
for qui dubitat damnabitur, may hold true in this case.

But De Grot in the same place formerly cited, takes a liberty to himself to
Grotius impertinent.
render the Profession, the Trade, or the Art of a Soldier not only impious,
but most contemptible, detestable and despicable: Let us hear him in his own
language. Parum, quod suam vendunt necem (says Grotius) nisi and ali^r^m s^pe
Innocentium vend^rent; ^anto, Carnifice detestabiliores, quanto p^jus est, sin^
causa, quam ex causa occidere. Sicut Antisth^nes dicebat, Carnific^s Tyrannis
^ss^ Sanctiores, quod illi Nocentes, hi Innocents interficerent: It were no
matter, said he, if Soldiers sold only their own lives (or rather their own
deaths) but they sell also the lives of others, and often of Innocents; as much
are they more detestable than a Hangman, as it is worse to kill without a
cause, than with a cause. Antisthenes said, Hangmen were more religious than
Tyrants, because the first puts to death those who are guilty, the last those
who are innocent. This language, Monsieur de Grot, is indeed severe enough, but
multa dicis, pauca proba^: Indeed, I think few men would have fancied, that
such impertinencies could have dropped from the Pen of so learned and so wise a
man as Grotius was esteemed to be. For first, I shall answer, That it belongs
not to the profession of a Soldier, either to sell his own life, or the life
of another; much less to sell the life of an Innocent. It is a Soldiers
profession, to hazard his life (not sell it) in the Prince or States service,
with whom he has stipulated for wages; and when he is commanded by his
Superiors to fight, he is obliged to do it, as well as he can, against all
that are in Arms against him; and if he kill any of them, it is so far from
being his fault, that it is his duty; it is their own fault that are killed,
who would by fighting, defend an unjust cause: for it must be observed, that
both parties think they have Justice on their side, and yet but one of the
parties has it; nor does a Soldier in heat of fight, kill any innocent man,
because all his Enemies, and all in Arms against him, are represented to him as
guilty, and as such are seeking to take his life; and Nature teaches all men,
That it is better to kill than to be killed, because of two evils the least
evil it to be chosen. It were to be wished, that War might be ended, and an
Enemy overcome without killing; for a bloodless Victory is the most honorable:
But if that cannot be done, it is folly, nay, madness, to say that Soldiers
should not kill their Enemies. I confess, too many Soldiers are cruel in
putting to death those whom they might spare, as such who yield themselves
Prisoners, (and yet this many times in the heat and ardour of Battle cannot be
done without danger) or old people, Women, Children, in assaults and storms;
this is the Soldiers excess, this is their fault, this is their crime, (unless
they be commanded to do it, which seldom falls out;) but this should not
reflect on the profession of Soldiery, as Grotius makes it to do, since by the
Law of Arms, such peoples lives should be spared; the faults of some should not
be imputed to all, as Grotius does here, and therein he is most unjust. I ask,
If some Lawyers, by collusion with the contrary party, betray the cause of
their Clients; If some Physicians poison their Patients; and some Pastors of
Churches, by preaching Heresy and Schism, kill their Flocks? Must all Lawyers
be called Knaves and Cheats? all Physicians Poysoners? and all Ministers of the
Gospel Soul Murderers? God forbid. I confess, when Soldiers kill without
cause, they are more detestable than Hangmen, and deserve to be punished by the
hands of Hangmen; but Grotius was bound in reason to have limited his
expression, and not have extended it to all Soldiers, as his words bear; and
herein he is not only malicious, but ridiculous, in supposing that Soldiers
always kill without cause, and never with cause; for if this be true, all War
is unlawful, which Grotius durst never mutter, far less speak out; for in a
lawful War, Soldiers kill with cause, and when they do it without cause, they
are liable to punishment and censure. This unlimited and general expression of
Grotius, renders Moses, Joshuah, and all those famous Israelites, who destroyed
the Canaanites; Saul, Samuel, and others who put the Amalekites to the Sword;
David and his Worthies, who killed thousands and ten thousands of the
uncircumcised, and Joab who killed so many Isrrelites in Absalom's Rebellion,
and all those of the eleven Tribes who had well near extinguished the Tribe of
Benjamin: Grotius, I say, makes them all more detes^able than Hangmen. And what
is it to the purpose to tell us, Antisthenes said, That Tyrants are not so
pious as Hangmen, because the last puts only the guilty, the first the innocent
to death. What has that to do with the profession of a Soldier, of which De
Grot was speaking: As sure as all Tyrants are not Soldiers, as certain it is
that all Soldiers are not Tyrants. Besides, this great man supposes in his
comparison, that which is a manifest untruth, That Hangmen put none to death
but those who are guilty; certainly Grotius did know that most, if not all
those Innocents, against whom Tyrants have pronounced the Sentence of Death,
especially in the ten first Persecutions, were executed by the hands of bloody
and cruel Hang-men, whom De Grot with a strange and odd kind of Charity,
prefers before Soldiers. I doubt Grotius did not believe, that the Hangman
that beheaded Oldenbernevelt, at the Hague, with whom Grotius was Socius
Criminis, struck off the Head of a guilty man, for assuredly he thought him an
Innocent.

I am afraid De Grot wrote this (though it came not to light till six years
after) when he was Prisoner at Lovenstein, beside Gorcum; where he had
conceived a mortal hatred against Soldiers, perhaps because they guarded him
too severely. His comparing Soldiers to Hangmen may have proceeded from the
restless agitations of his troubled thoughts, which may have continually
represented to his fancy the Idaea or Image of one of those Officers of
Justice, who had cut off the Head of his Complice John Oldenbernevelt, Advocate
of Holland, and would have done as much to another of his Accomplices, Giles
Leidenberg, if he had not usurped the Hangmans Office, and cut his own Throat;
it being most certain, that Grotius himself might have run such a hazard, if
his kind Wife had not got him carried away in a Coffer, pretending it was full
of Books, and at that time sure he was obliged to Soldiers for neglecting to
search the Coffer.

The same great man Grotius, in the before-cited place goes further, and
Grotius uncharitable.
says, Non est inter Artificia, bellum, imo res est tam horrenda, ut eam, nisi
summa necessitas, aut vera charitas honestam ^fficere nequeat: War, says he, is
not to be reckoned among Artifices; nay, it is so horrible a thing that nothing
can make it honest but extreme necessity, or true Charity. Well, I shall be
content to take what he grants, and that is, That War sometimes is honest; and
if so, I think he must grant, that those who manage that honest War, and those
are Soldiers, may be sometimes honest, and therefore not more detestable than
Hangmen. Nor do I think any sober man, endued with any reasonable proportion of
solid Judgment, though he had never heard of the name of Jesus Christ, but
will readily grant, That War being the greatest scourge of mankind, should not
be begun till either our own extreme necessity, or the Love and Charity we owe
to our Neighbors force us to it; and herein do all the Moral Philosophers, and
the wise Rulers of the Ancient Heathens, fully agree with Christian Doctors.
But how shall that War, which either extreme necessity on our own part, or
Charity on our Neighbors, makes lawful, be managed but by Soldiers? And how
can Soldiers obtain the Victory, but by killing sometimes their Enemies? And
with what Credit, nay, with what Conscience, or with what comfort can Soldiers
kill their Enemies, if the very killing them, render Soldiers more detestable
than Hangmen? If Grotius had said, That those Soldiers who killed impotent old
Men, Women and Children, or Prisoners in cold blood (as too many do) are more
detestable than Hangmen, I should never have debated the matter with him, no
more than with reason he can contradict me, if I say, That those Advocates (and
Grotius was an Advocate) who betray the causes of their Clients, who take money
and wages from both parties; I add also, Those who undertake the patrociny of a
cause, which themselves know to be unjust and illegal, are more detestable than
the worst of those who hang men on a Gallows.

But what this great and learned man means, when he writes, Non est inter
Grotius unintelligible.
artificia Bellum, I do not very well know; if he means there are no artifices
in War, he makes a fool of himself, for what shall then become of all those
laudable and lawful Stratagems that are used in War, which he himself in his
Book De Jure Belli ac pacis, both mentions and commends: If he means War is not
an Art, he speaks palpably against Sense, Reason, and Experience; for the
management of War is an Art, and as a most noble, so a most necessary Art:
Machiavelli, Recorder of Florence, writes seven Books of the Art of War, and
yet in one of them denies War to be an Art. All Tacticks write of the Art of
War, the way to handle Arms, Sword, Dagger, Cannon, Musket, Pistol, Pike,
Partizan, or Halberd; or in more ancient times (before the Monk found out
Gunpowder) the way to handle the Roman Pila, Javelines, Darts, Arrows, Bows,
Slings, Stones, and other Missiles; do all prove there is Art in War. The
ordering Soldiers in Files, Ranks, Troops, Companies, Squadrons, Batallions,
Regiments, and Brigades; the marshalling and conduct of Armies, fighting of
Battles, besieging and attacking Towns, Castles, and defending them, do all
bear witness, that War is an Art, and more than an ordinary one: It cannot
therefore be, that so wise a man as Grotius could think that War is not an Art,
but positively to tell what he means by those words, is not in my power; and if
others can tell no better than I, we must be content to want the true sense of
them, till Grotius rise from the dead in the day of Judgment; and then, I
suppose, it will not be time to inquire after such follies.

Nicholas Machiavel in the Fourth Book of his Art of War (if I remember
Machiavelli answered.
right) is yet more severe to professed Soldiers than Hugo Grotius; for he
says, That no Prince or State should suffer those who profess to live by the
Art of War, to dwell under their Jurisdictions, or in their Dominions. This is
bad enough, but worse follows, for he adds, that no virtuous nor good man will
profess Soldiery to be their livelihood, or use War as an Art or Trade; and
those who do it, says he, must of necessity be false, fraudulent, treacherous
and violent. I have answered his Raveries in the first Chapter of my Military
Essays of the Modern Art of War: Here I shall only say, That it were a disgrace
for the Art of Soldiery to be commended by one, whose Political Rules
introduce Atheism, Tyranny, and Cruelty; and who sets up Casar Borgia, the
Bastard of Pope Alexander the Sixth, to be a Pattern for Princes; than whom the
Sun never looked on a person more abandoned to the contempt of a Deity, guilty
of Inhumanity, Treachery, Lechery, and barbarous Cruelty. Let either Christian
or all Morally honest men judge, whether this Author, this Atheist, this
Machiavel, should have been permitted to have lived within the Territories of
either Christian Prince or State.

Those who condemn the Profession or Art of Soldiery, smell rank of Anabaptism
and Quakery, both which Sects condemn all War as unlawful; for I conceive,
those who grant War to be sometimes both lawful and necessary, must of
necessity grant, that it is lawful for some to study the Art, how to manage
that War with the greatest advantage. Those who are fittest to study it are
those who have no other trade or livelihood, for that is the mean to make them
study it the more accurately; and when they have attained to some perfection in
it, why they may not make a Profession of it, and teach it to others for wages,
I know not: Do not all professors of Divinity, Medicine, Philosophy, teach
others their Arts and Sciences for wages? Yes assuredly; and why should it be
denied to a professed Soldier to teach his Art to others for wages, Musamihi
causas memora: What I speak of teaching others, I mean of all Military
Officers, who by their command and charges are obliged to teach their Art to
those under their command; and since Soldiery is a practical Art, Soldiers of
all kinds may serve in the Wars (provided the cause seem just to them) as well
as Chirurgions may cure men for wages, that are hurt or wounded in the Wars.
Histories tell us, and our experience and sense teach us, That Peace and War
are alternative, and there be but few Kingdoms in the World that have not felt
the smart of War, as long as they have enjoyed the fruits of Peace. May not I
then conclude, That the Art of Soldiery and the Profession of it for wages, is
as lawful, and as necessary too, as the profession of any of those Arts or
Sciences, which can neither be conveniently taught, or learned, but in the time
of Peace.

But to conclude, I avouch that St. Paul's opinion concerning this question St.
Paul's authority.
was the same with mine; and I have reason to think, That great Apostle's
authority will weigh more with men who profess the name of Christ, than either
Grotius or Machiavel: If I mistake not, that great Doctor of the Gentiles
thought the Art of Soldiery, considered a part, and distinguished from all
other Arts, either Liberal or Mechanical, very lawful, and therefore compared
not the professors of it to infamous people, such as Grotius knew Hangmen to
be. On the contrary, the Apostle proposes a pure Soldier, who waited only on
his own Art of War, as a fit example for his Son Timothy to follow: Read the
third and fourth verses of the second Chapter of his Second Epistle to Timothy,
you will find these words, Thou therefore endure hardness, at a good Soldier
of Jesus Christ. No man that Warreth, entangleth himself with the things of
this life, that he might please him who has hired him to be a Soldier. The
French Translation has it, the affairs of this life; the Italian, the doings
of this life; the German has it, no Warrior seeks another livelihood. This is
much, and more than I desire; for, I think, it were good for Soldiers to have
learned some oath Art, or Trade, than that of Soldiery only. Deodati expounds
these words [ in the doings of this life;] that is, says he, in such affairs,
such Art, or such Trades, as may hinder a Soldier in his duty of Soldiery. Be
that as it will, I avouch, That the Apostle in these words, pronounces the
pure Art of a mere Soldier, without any other Art or Trade, to be most lawful,
else he had made no apposite comparison between Timothy and a Soldier; which,
I presume, none who has read Paul's Epistles, and believes them to be endited
by the Holy Ghost, will be so impious as to fancy. By this Text, a Christian
man may very lawfully apply himself to the profession of pure Soldiery,
without learning any other Art or Trade. And I think also, that Timothy was
exhorted, if not commanded to apply himself only to the Ministry of the Gospel,
and to no other Art; yet if he had learned any other way of livelihood, before
Paul circumcised him, it would not have been forbid him: Paul himself, before
his conversion, had learned to be a Tentmaker, which he exercised for his
livelihood, when he preached the Gospel: Luke the Evangelist, before his
Baptism, was a Physician, which, no doubt, he practiced all the time he
accompanied St. Paul in his Voyages. But, I think, by this Text, men are forbid
to learn any other Art, after they are actual Ministers of the Gospel. And
therefore, I conceive, Churchmen are forbid to have plurality of Professions;
which perhaps they will be contented to hear with better will, than to have it
told them, That plurality of Benefices is forbidden the Clergy.

But because Grotius has made use of St. Austine's authority against me, in
St. Austin^'s authority.
this question which I have cleared, I shall presume to cite that same Father
in defense of my cause: It is true, I have read but few of his learned Books,
but the passage I mind to speak of, I have read, cited by a very worthy and
credible Author; and though he cites it for another purpose, yet finding it
makes very much for mine, I could not choose but make use of it: The words are
in one of his Books against the Manichees, and are these, Non est potest as
ni^i a Deo, ^ive ^nb^nte, sive sinente; Ergo vir justus, si forte sub Rege
etiam Sacrilego militat, recte potest, illo jubente, Bellare; quemadmodum enim
Regem facit reum Iniquit as imperandi, ita Innocentem Militem facit ordo
serviendi. English me this, Monsieur de Grot; but because you e^ther cannot or
will not, I both can and will: There is no power, says he, but from God, either
commanding or permitting it, therefore if sometimes a Righteous man serves as a
Soldier under a Sacrilegious King, he may lawfully fight when he is commanded;
for as the sin of commanding makes that King Guilty, so the obedience of
serving makes that Soldier Innocent. This is more than I have yet said, this
great and pious Divine seems to me to assert, That a Soldiers Art is not only
lawful, but that he is bound to fight when commanded, even in a cause, the
Justice whereof does not appear to him; yea, though the Injustice of it be made
apparent to him. But assuredly St. Austin meant to except those things which
are diametrically against the word and Will of God; for the rule holds firm and
perpetual, Better obey God than Man: In other matters, the Soldier is not so
strictly to examine the quarrel, the sin of commanding to fight in an unjust
cause, rendering the Soldiers obedience in fighting, blameless and innocent.
Hence it will follow, That a professed Soldier, who knows no other Art or
Trade, may lawfully make profession of his skill, and practice it in any part
of the World for wages, so he fight not for those who are professed Enemies of
the name of Christ, against those who profess it; for I do not at all doubt,
but Christian Soldiers, who make a profession of Soldiery, and have no other
way of livelihood but to fight for wages, may very lawfully serve either the
Sophi of Persia, or the great Mogul of India, against the Great Turk, because
though they be all three equally blasphemous adorers of the Alcoran; yet the
Wars of the first two may divert the Grand Signior from the Invasion of
Christendom.

Give me leave to take the help of another Doctor, and Father of the Christian
Tertu'lian's authority.
Church, and that is Tertullian, whom I find cited by many others, to prove
taking Arms against Sovereign power unlawful. The passage is in that
Apologetick which he wrote in vindication of the Primitive Christians,
persecuted by Heathen Emperors: I shall only cite the words that I conceive
make for my purpose; Cui Bello non prompti fuimus? cui Bello non idon^i, etiam
impares Copiis, qui nunc tam libenter trucidamur? To what War, says he, were we
not fit? to what War were we not ready, though fewer in number of forces, who
now are content willingly to be slain? In these words observe that professed
Christians were Soldiers, and fought willingly, and without constraint, (and
for pay too you may be sure) under the Banners of Heathen, yea, Persecuting
Emperors, without examining the Justice of the War, which ordinarily was very
often wanting with those Princes, who measured the equity of their cause by the
length of their Sword. I doubt not, but the War which the Tyrant Maximianus
made, was neither just nor lawful, yet the Theban Legion, consisting of six
thousand Christians, served faithfully in that War, and found no opposition in
their Consciences to that Military employment: But when that Pagan Emperor
commanded them to Sacrifice to his false Deities and Idols, then they flatly
refused obedience, knowing surely they were not obliged to disobey God, by
giving obedience to Man; and offered their Throats to be cut, and gave their
Bodies to be butchered to death by the rest of his Heathen Army. Julian the
Apostate, who with both force and fraud, endeavored to root out the Christian
Name and Religion, had thousands of Christians who served under him in his
Wars, who, I suppose, never examined the Justice of them; for if they had, they
would have found that even that very War he made against the Persians, (wherein
he dyed, as is said, blaspheming the name of the Son of God) was grounded only
on Ambition to enlarge the limits of the Roman Empire; and such a reason even
the moral Heathen, much less the Christians, did never acknowledge to be a just
or lawful cause of War. By virtue then of these passages and precedents,
Soldiers may make a profession of the Art of War, and may practice it, and
serve for Wages, though they neither know nor examine, whether the cause be
just or not. But I shall conclude this discourse, as they say Bellarmine did
one of his, but in another case, and say, It is most safe to trust to the
Justice and Equity of the cause, and to examine it well, before men engage in
it.

FINIS.
Books Printed for, and Sold by Richard Chiswell.
FOLIO.
SPeed's Maps and Geography of Great Britain and Ireland, and of Foreign Parts.
Dr. Cave's Lives of the Primitive Fathers, in 2. Vol. Dr. Cary's Chronological
Account of Ancient Time. Wanley's Wonders of the little World, or Hist. of Man.
Sir Tho. Herbert's Travels into Persia, etc. Holycak's large Dictionary, Latin
and English. Sir Rich. Baker's Chronicle of England. Wilson's Complete
Christian Dictionary. B. Wilkin's real Character, or Philosophical Language.
Pharmacopoeia Regalis Collegii Medicorum Londinensis. Judge Jones's Reports in
Common Law. Cave Tabulae Ecclesiasticorum Scriptorum. Hobbs's Leviathan. Lord
Bacon's Advancement of Learning. Sir Will. Dugdale's Baronage of England in two
Vol. Hooker's Ecclesiastical Polity. Winch's Book of Entries. Isaac Ambrose's
Works. Guillim's Display of Heraldry with large additions. Dr. Burnet's History
of the Reformation of the Church of England, in 2. Vol. -- Account of the
Confessions and Prayers of the Murderers of Esquire Thynn. Burlace's History
of the Irish Rebellion. Herodoti Historia Gr. Lat. cum variis Lect. Rushworth's
Historical Collections the 2d. Part in 2. vol. -- Large account of the Trial of
the Earl of Strafford, with all the circumstances relating thereunto. Bishop
Sanderson's Sermons, with his Life. Fowlis's History of Romish Conspir. Treas.
and Usurpat. Dalton's Office of Sheriffs with Additions. -- Office of a Justice
of Peace with additions. Keeble's Collection of Statutes. Lord Cook's Reports
in English. Sir Walter Raleigh's History of the World. Edmunds on Caesar's
Commentaries. Sir John Davis's Reports. Judge Yelverton's Reports. The Laws of
this Realm concerning Jesuits, Seminary Priests, Recusants, the Oaths of
Supremacy and Allegiance explained by diverse Judgments, and resolutions of the
Judges; with other Observations thereupon, by Will. Cawley Esquire;. William's
impartial consideration of the Speeches of the five Jesuits executed for
Treason. 1680. Josephus's Antiquities and Wars of the Jews with Fig.
QVARTO.
DR. Littleton's Dictionary, Latin and English. Bishop Nicholson on the Church
Catechism. The Complete Clerk: Precedents of all sorts. History of the late
Wars of New England. Dr. Outram de Sacrificiis. Bishop Taylor's Disswasive from
Popery. Spanhemii Dubia Evangelica, 2 Vol. Dr. Gibbs's Sermons. Parkeri
Disputationes de Deo. History of the future state of Europe. Dr. Fowler's
Defense of the Design of Christianity, against John Bunnyan. Dr. Sherlock's
Visitation-Sermon at Warrington. Dr. West's Assize Sermon at Dorchester 1671.
Lord Hollis's Relation of the Unjust Accusation of certain French Gentlemen
charged with a Robbery 1671. The Magistrates Authority asserted, in a Sermon,
By James Paston. Cole's Latin and English Dictionary. Mr. James Brome's two
Fast-Sermons. Dr. Jane's Fast-Sermon before the Commons. 1679. Mr. John James's
Visitation Sermon April. 9. 1671. Mr. John Cave's Fast-Sermon on 30. of Jan.
1679. -- Assize Sermon at Leicester July 31. 1679. Dr. Parker's Demonstration
of the Divine Authority* of the Law of Nature and the Christian Religion. Mr.
William's Sermon before the Lord Mayor 1679. -- History of the Powder Treason
with a vindication of the proceedings relating thereunto, from the Exceptions
made against it by the Catholic Apologist and others; and a Parallel betwixt
that and the present Popish Plot. Speculum Baxterianum, or Baxter against
Baxter. Mr. Hook's new Philosophical Collections. Dr. Burnet's Relation of the
Massacre of the Protestants in France. -- Conversion and Persecutions of Eve
Cohan a Jewess of Quality lately Baptized Christian. -- Letter written upon
Discov* of the late Popish Plot. -- Impiety of Popery being a second Letter
writ^en on the same occasion. -- Sermon before the Lord Mayor upon the Fast for
the Fire, 1680. -- Fast Sermon. before the House of Com. Dec. 22. 80. -- Sermon
on the 30. of January 1681. -- Sermon at the Election of the L. Mayor. 1681. --
Sermon at the Funeral of Mr. Houblon. 1682. -- Answer to the Animadversions on
his History of the Rights of Princes, 1682. -- Decree made at Rome 1679.
condemning some Opinions of the Jesuits and other Casuists. Published by Dr.
Burnet, with a Preface. -- A Letter giving a Relation of the present state of
the difference between the French K. and the Court of Rome. Bibliotheca
Norfolciana, sive Catalogus Libr. Manuscript. and impress. in omni Art and
Lingua, quos Hen. Dux Norfolciae Regiae Societati Londinensi pro scientia
naturali promovenda donavit.
OCTAVO.
ELborow's Rationale upon the English Service. Bishop Wilkin's Natural
Religion. Hardcastle's Christian Geography and Arithmetic. Dr. Ashton's
Apology for the Honors and Revenues of the Clergy. Lord Hollis's Vindication
of the Judicature of the House of Peers in the case of Skinner. -- Jurisdiction
of the H. of Peers in case of Appeals. -- Jurisdiction of the H. of Peers in
case of Impositions. -- Letters about the Bishops Votes in Capital Cases.
Duporti Versio Psalmorum Graeca. Dr. Grew's Idea of Philological History
continued on Roots. Spaniards Conspiracy against the State of Venice. Dr.
Brown's Religio Medici: with Digbies Observations. Dr. Salmon upon the London
Dispensatory. Brinsley's Posing of the Accidence. Several Tracts of Mr. Hales
of Eaton. Bishop Sanderson's Life. Dr. Tillotson's Rule of Faith. Dr. Simpson's
Chemical Anatomy of the Yorkshire Spaws; with a Discourse of the Original of
Hot Springs and other Fountains. -- His Hydrological Essays, with an Account of
the Allum-works at Whitby, and some Observations about the Jaundice. 1 s. 6. d.
Dr. Cox's Discourse of the Interest of the Patient, in reference to Physic and
Physicians. Organon Salutis: or an Instrument to cleanse the Stomach. With
diverse New Experiments of the Virtue of Tabaco and Coffee: with a Preface of
Sir Hen. Blunt. Dr. Cave's Primitive Christianity, in three Parts. A Discourse
of the Nature, Ends, and difference of the two Covenants, 1672. 2 s. Ignatius
Fuller's Sermons of Peace and Holiness. 1 s. 6 d. A free Conference touching
the present State of England, at home and abroad, in order to the designs of
France. 1 s. Mystery of Jesuitism, Third and Fourth Parts. Doctor Sanway's
Unreasonableness of the Romanists. Record of Urines. Doctor Ashton's Cases of
Scandal and Persecution. Cole's Latin and English Dictionary. The Trials of the
Regicides in 1660. Certain genuine Remains of the Lord Bacon in Arguments
Civil, Moral, Natural, etc. with a large account of all his Works, by Dr. Tho.
Tennison. Dr. Puller's Discourse of the Moderation of the Church of England.
Dr. Saywel's Original of all the Plots in Christendom. Sir John Munsons
discourse of Supreme Power and Common Right Dr. Henry Bagshaw's Discourses on
select Texts. Mr. Seller's Remarks relating to the State of the Church in the
three first Centuries. The Country-mans Physician; for the use of such as live
far from Cities or Market Towns. Dr. Burnet's account of the Life and Death of
the Earl of Rochester. -- Vindic. of the Ordinations of the Church of Engl. --
History of the Rights of Princes in the Disposing of Ecclesiastical Benefices
and Church Lands. -- Life of God in the Soul of man. Markam's Perfect Horseman.
Dr. Sherlock's Practical Disc. of Religious Assemblies. -- Defense of Dr.
Stillingfleet's Unreasonableness of Separation. -- A Vindication of the defense
of Dr. Stillingfleet in Answer to Mr. Baxter and Mr. Lob about Catholic
Communion. The History of the House of Estee, the Family of the Duchess of
York, Octavo. Sir Rob, Filmer's Patriarcha, or Natural Power of Kings. Mr. John
Cave's Gospel to the Romans. Dr. Outram's 20. Sermon. preached on several
occasions. Dr. Salmon's new London Dispensatory. Lawrence's interest of Ireland
in its trade and wealth stated.
DVODECIMO.
HOdder's Arithmetic. Grotius de Veritate Religionis Christianae. Bishop
Hacket's Christian Consolations. The Mothers Blessing. A Help to Discourse.
New-Englands Psalms. An Apology for a Treatise of Human Reason, written by M.
Clifford Esquire;. The Queen-like Closet, both parts.
VICESIMO QVARTO.
VAlentine's Devotions. Guide to Heaven. Pharmacopoeiae Collegli Londinensis
reformata.
Books lately Printed for Richard Chiswell.
AN Historical Relation of the Island of CEYLON in the East Indies: Together
with an Account of the detaining in Captivity the Author, and diverse other
Englishmen now living there, and of the Author's miraculous Escape:
Illustrated with fifteen Copper Figures, and an exact Map of the Island. By
Capt. Robert Knox, a Captive there near 20 years, Fol. Mr. Camfield's two
Discourses of Episcopal Confirmation, Octavo. Bishop Wilkin's Fifteen Sermons
never before extant. Mr. John Cave's two Sermons of the duty and benefit of
submission to the Will of God in Afflictions, Quar. Dr. Crawford's serious
expostulation with the Whiggs in Scotland, Quarto. A Letter giving a Relation
of the present state of the Difference between the French King and the Court of
Rome; to which is added, The Popes Brief to the Assembly of the Clergy, and
their Protestation. Published by Dr. Burnet. Alphonsus Borellus de motu
Animalium, in 2 Vol. Quarto. Dr. Salmon's Doron Medicum, or supplement to his
new London Dispensatory, Octavo. Sir James Turner's Pallas Armata, or Military
Essays of the Ancient, Grecian, Roman and Modern Art of War, Fol. Mr. Tanner's
Primordia: or the Rise and Growth of the first Church of God described, Octavo.
A Letter writ by the last Assembly General of the Clergy of France to the
Protestants, inviting them to return to their Communion; together with the
Methods proposed by them for their Conviction. Translated into English and
Examined by Dr. Gilb. Burnet, Octavo. Dr. Cave's Dissertation concerning the
Government of the Ancient Church by Bishops, Metropolitans, and Patriarchs:
more particularly concerning the ancient Power and Jurisdiction of the Bishops
of Rome, and the encroachments of that upon other Sees, especially
Constantinople, Octavo. -- His History of the Lives, Acts, Death, and Writings
of the most eminent Fathers of the Church that flourished in the fourth
Century: (being a Second Volumn) wherein amongst other things is an Account of
Arianism, and all other Sects of that Age. With an Introduction containing an
Historical account of the state of Paganism under the First Christian
Emperors, Folio.
Books in the Press.
DOctor John Lightfoot's Works in English, Fol. Mr. Selden's Janus Anglorum
Englished, with Notes: To which is added his Epinomis, concerning the Ancient
Government and Laws of this Kingdom never before extant. Also two other
Treatises written by the same Author: One of the Original of Ecclesiastical
Jurisdiction of Testaments; the other of the Disposition or Administration of
Intestates Goods; now the first time Published, Fol. Mezeray's History of
France, rendered into Engl. Fol. Gul. Ten-Rhyne Med. Doct. Dissertat. de
Arthritide, Mantyssa Schematica, and de Acupunctura. Item Orationes tres de
Chemiae ac Botaniae Antiquitate and Dignitate. De Physiognomia and de Monstris.
Cum Figuris and Authoris notis illustratae, Octavo. D. Spenceri Dissertationes
de Ratione Rituum Judaicorum, etc. Fol.
FINIS.

