Apologia Chyrurgica.

A VINDICATION Of the Noble Art of Chyrurgery, FROM The gross Abuses offered
thereunto by Mountebanks, Quacks, Barbers, Pretending Bone-setters, with other
Ignorant Undertakers.

WHEREIN Their Fraudulent Practices are plainly detected by several remarkable
Observations, their Fair Promises proved Fictions, their Administrations
pernicious, their Confident Pretenses injurious and destructive to the Welfare
of the People.

By DANIEL TVRNER, Practitioner in Chyrurgery.

K (...). IMPRIMATUR.

Datum in Comitiis Censoriis ex Aedibus Collegii nostri, Jan. 11. 1694. John
Lawson, President. Samuel Collins, Richard Torles, Edward Tyson, Martin Lister,
Censores.




LONDON Printed, and are to be Sold by J. Whitlock near Stationers' Hall, and
the Booksellers of London and Westminster. 1695.

TO THE Most Ingenious and Truly Learned Dr. EDWARD TYSON, One of the present
Censors of the College of Physicians, Fellow of the Royal Society, and
Physician to the Hospital of Bethlehem.
SIR,
IT IS the common Fate of Learned Men, that they are more than ordinarily
exposed to the importunity of such as are in want of their assistance; and though
it be Presumption in their Petitioners, it is in them however a generous
Condescension, that they incline to gratify the Requests of their needy
Supplicants.

I am ready to acknowledge my self little short of the same Arrogance, in that
I am become troublesome so soon as honored with your acquaintance.

The Great and Eminent seem indeed to be placed in a sublimer Sphere, not so
much that they might pity the Ignorant as to protect the Indigent.

Being conscious of my own insufficiency to withstand the Test of Critical
Censure, it was reasonable I should endeavor to find a Patron that might (in
some measure) secure me from the Obloquy of my Adversaries.

When I had considered upon whose friendship I might most happily rely, it was
the effect of my Ambition to single out Your Self, for one of the greatest and
most learned amongst others, whom I had thought on: to make which choice (Sir)
I was the rather encouraged, since you had so lately obliged me with a very
kind acceptance of some loose Papers I had by me, which upon your communicating
were by the Royal Society esteemed not unworthy, to be printed with their
Philosophical Transactions. After the experience of so much Civility on a first
or second conference, I had the less reason to dispute your Goodness upon the
occasion I have had of a farther correspondence.

The ensuing Discourse, which I am endeavoring to shelter under the Umbrage of
your Favor, was compiled about four years since, in which time it was mostly
in the custody of some particular Friends, who were not a little earnest with
me for its publication; though on other accounts I might have relied upon their
Judgments, yet with this I could not so readily comply, because as I had never
appeared in Print, I was the less capable to imagine the Difficulties and
Disadvantages I had to encounter: I did already foresee some, which put me upon
thinking, and was afraid to meet with others that should (when past recovery)
be attended with Repentance.

It Is true, I valued not the Resentments of malicious and deceitful Men, since
I doubted not but the more honest and judicious would espouse my Cause: But
when I reflected on the extreme Nicety of the Town, many wherein are fonder to
expose what they call Wit, by their Comments upon an Author's Language, prying
for Errata's, and searching out his Lapses, rather than regarding the
Usefu^ness of the Subject, or heeding whether it answers the End for which
'twas enterpriz'd. Of these men I had reason to be fearful, especially
perceiving that more learned Discourses were frequently attended with an
apologetick Entrance that might obviate their Censure.

Amongst other worthy Authors, I could do no less than take notice of the
almost too great Modesty of the late incomparable Mr. Boil, who when he had
written never so elaborately upon what he undertook, is notwithstanding
excusing himself, as if guilty of some Blemish or Imperfection. It should seem
by this his singular Humility he was as worthy of, as he could be willing to
procure a general Esteem and Admiration: And yet, according to the conclusion
of a Panegyric on the Curious De Graaf,

Quis Jove, major erat, magno quis major Homero,
Ille tamen Momum: Zoilon Alter habet.
However, if so great and famous Men have every where thought it Prudence to
arm themselves against the Zoilists of the Age, what abundant cause had I to
remain silent, and keep out of their reach?

A farther motive to induce me for some time to retard the impression, was,
That as I hoped there would not be wanting those, who would judge aright of my
Undertaking, so I as little questioned to find others ready enough to think me
more desirous to be reputed an Author, than by being so to serve the Public
Interest.

These (Sir) were the more material Impediments to my Consent, till on the
other hand I bethought my self how serviceable such a Discovery as this might
be at a time that seemed extraordinarily to require it; and finding those who
were perhaps better capacitated wholly negligent therein, I was the rather
prevailed with to lend my mean assistance toward the redressing so
universally-prejudicial an Aggrievance; so that in whatever I have exposed my
own Weakness, I shall think my self enough fortunate if the same be imputed to
my Zeal for the General Good, by using my utmost diligence to suppress all base
Pretenders to our most Noble Art, and vindicating the same from their Ignominy
and Reproach.

I have no reason to doubt but your self, at some times, in the variety of your
Practice, have remarked how easily many reputable People have been imposed on
by a Pretense to Physic, and how fatally deluded with a Promise of Recovery;
from whence, if I mistake not, there will be little room for a Surmise, whether
a Discourse of this tendency may be advantageous. However I may happen to be
aspersed, or whatever may be thought of the Discourse it self, I fear not to be
discommended for my choice of so fit a Person, by the benefit of whose
countenance both may be defended from the too rigid Censure of those who will
still be condemning all but their own Offspring, if it be but to show the Parts
which a more refined Education has conferred upon them above the rest of
Mankind.

I have here a fair opportunity (since I can say little for my self) to make a
modish Harangue upon your Accomplishments; but rather than trespass on your
Modesty, I shall omit to say any thing of that nature.

I am, I must confess, very much of opinion with the Noble Mackenzy, (in an
Epistle to Esquire Boil) with respect to Dedications, and do believe an Author
much more concerned to procure for his Patron him who has conspicuously
rendered himself truly worthy, than one so made by Flattery or Adulation.

Were I minded to speak to so large a Theme as your Merit would afford, I might
say much, I Am certain, before the greatest of your Opponents would accuse me as
a Sycophant. To prevent Reflection, I shall only take the liberty to give the
World my Wish, That we had been longer happy in your access to, or possession
of our Anatomical Chair. And, that your indefatigable Industry therein may be
imitated by your Successors, is the Desire of

SIR, Your much Obliged Servant, D. T.

TO THE READER.
THE Custom of Apologizing is grown so fashionable, and become so very common,
that we meet with it at some times in those Pieces where the Critic himself
has thought it superfluous. I must own, it seems to me not only savouring of a
becoming Modesty, but highly reasonable that an Author excuse himself, where he
foresees Objections will be raised against him.

He is now superlatively happy, who can either write or speak without a
Penitet, or at least a Pudet; and yet if no one would bestir himself on the
account of Censure, we must be ever liable to a much greater Mischief,
occasioned by our Silence.

I shall only mention, that the almost continual Avocations by Business, when
this Discourse was penned, gave me at some times so great interruption, as may
have rendered the same the more incoherent, and will, I hope, prevent an
Expectation of any thing studied or accurately curious, which was, as I may
say, stolen from the spare minutes of another's Service.

The Practice of Chyrurgery, in which I have been educated, gave me many
opportunities to inspect its Abuses; and though it was long before I could
resolve to publish my Remarks, yet knowing them to be exactly consentaneous to
the Truth, which some few can attest, I believed they might conduce to the
conviction at least of some of those who have too long suffered themselves to
be deluded by Fiction and fair Stories.

As I have endeavored to shun a useless redundancy of words, by abreviating
what seemed to run too far upon Speculation, so I have likewise labored to
avoid Contention, which was not enforced. However bold it may appear, I can
satisfy the Reader, that if he comes not prepossessed with some unreasonable
Prejudice, but will heartily and impartially suspend his Opinion, till he has
considerately weighed the whole, he will find little wanting toward the making
good my Assertions, of the necessity of a Reformation.

Amongst the particular Causes of the Contempt of Chyrurgeons, and that Art
which they profess, I have first of all exposed the Empirical Practitioner,
whom we call a Mountebank; you have here a view of the Origin of his Skill, by
which may be the better guessed how far he has contributed both to the
discredit of Chyrurgery, and the Peoples ruin.

Indeed the very sense of this man's Practice being built upon Tradition only,
and his so rashly experimenting his detestable Conclusions on Humane Bodies,
should methinks afford us the most plenary Intelligence, that his Claim to this
Privilege is altogether illegal, and that for this we ought to hold him as the
general Object of our Scorn and Aversion; to be much more fearful of him than
the supposed Poison he swallows down, that his more poisonous Antidote may be
thought salubrious.

You may find, after him, a plain description of the Libelling Quack, or
Practicing Pamphleteer, detecting some of the Frauds he makes use of to delude
the Unwary; how meanly he is qualified for the practice of Physic and Surgery,
as also with what detriment both to Purse and Person he is relied on.

Farther, you have an account of the Chyrurgick Barber, his great Injustice to
assume what he has no right to, his Presumption for intruding on the same,
contrary to those Laws that are in force against him, and lastly, his most
shameful Ignorance, notwithstanding which he will be tampering out of the reach
of his Reason, to the scandal of every legal Artist, and to the present
disesteem of the Art it self.

There is from hence a digression to give you a prospect of the Practice of a
Pretending Bonesetter, as well investigating his juggling contrivance to amuse
the People, and draw them into a great Opinion of him, as laying open the
falsity of his Predictions in point of Practice.

I have endeavored to inform you by some observable Instances, how extremely
ignorant this person shows himself, and how absurdly ridiculous, when the real
Practice of Bonesetting falls under his care, by which you may learn, that his
pretense to the same is but a knavish Contrivance to cheat men of their Money,
and (as it often happens) to spoil them of their Limbs.

Finally, amongst those who have scandalized the Practice both of Physic and
Chyrurgery, I have most truly uncharacterized our City Doctress, exposing her in
all her Qualifications and Endowments, how forward she is to promise, and how
capable to perform. By the method of her proceedings, you may gain a foresight
how serviceable she has been to rid her Country of some thousands of its
Inhabitants, and to bring the most contemptible Reflections on our Art, by the
burdensome encroachment she has made thereon.

These, with some more general Annotations on the Practices of others, are the
Contents of the ensuing Discourse, which if the Reader take the pains to
peruse, he will find neither delivered on a mere Report, nor represented from a
malicious Suggestion, but the Cases truly stated, as they happened in reality
to fall under my observation.

I have been so far from imposing any Misconstruction, as to endeavor with the
utmost caution, that no one Reflection or Remark of Consequence should escape
upon a bare Surmise or Supposition.

Now, considering the great and almost unspeakable Comforts we are blessd with,
in the most eminent Restorers of our Health, and Preservers of our Limbs and
Lives, I believe there is scarce any Nation so unfortunately miserable as ours
in their Bodily Disasters, and all upon the account of our most intolerable
sufferance of base Impositions on those honorable Professions; which adds to
our Affliction, How is it likely we should be secured from the fraudulent and
knavish practices of deceitful men, at a time when they are so much
countenanced, and even tempted by the small care taken to suppress their
disingenious and dangerous proceedings; or what other can we expect, than a
perpetual decay of Learning, from our great neglect to encourage and promote
the same; a want of able Practitioners, from the discouragements they are
subjected to, and the consequence hereof, viz. a Universal Damage accrewing to
the People, till Care be taken to inspect these matters, and remove out of the
way the Authors of our Calamities?

The painful Mr. Tho. Gale thought he had abundant reason for his Complaint,
That there were no less than Sixty Women who intermeddled in the Art of
Surgery; I doubt not but we have at this time as many score, who in one respect
or other will presume hereon, as well to the discredit of the Art, as to the
destruction of the Unwary; there are not many Streets in London without three
or four, nay, it is a Chance (and that a great one too) if the good Gentlewoman
of almost every House does not assume the liberty to tamper from C(...)r's
Directions.

Such indeed is the frail Judgment of many in Chyrurgick Affairs, that they
believe those men to have the least Knowledge therein, whose sole Right and
Propriety it is to practice in this worthy Art: The more eminent the Chyrurgeon
is, he must be attended (in their Opinion) with a Consequence of the greater
Tyrannizer; or, The more learned the Artist, the more fraudulent Oppressor. If
you consult any one of these, you are told, He will make a Cure, or, That you
must expect the Work of a Chyrurgeon. But if you advise with any Runnagade
Intruder, some practicing Old Wife, or strowling Empirick, some boasting Quack,
Barber, or Ignorant Undertaking Bonesetter, with the rest of this pernicious
Tribe, you are to look for honest dealing, fine promises, and fair stories.
After all, when you recover, which you are not to doubt under their management,
you purchase Health at a much easier rate, than when you expose your selves to
the Extortion of a bloody-minded Surgeon.

These are the frightful Bugbears that amuse the People to such a strange
degree of Folly and Indiscretion, that from a Relation of this nature, by some
infamous person, they will fly a mile or two, oftentimes a score, from a
Faithful Practitioner, to enter themselves under the most ordinary handling of
an Ignorant Undertaker. So that our present Case, as I conceive, will
reasonably bear a Prognostic of this nature, that we may easily see how
matters tend, when the most illiterate are advanced to a pre-eminence above the
Learned.

-- Didicisse sideliter arts, was heretofore accounted the most serviceable
Expense of Time in the whole course of Life, as well in respect of the
profundity of Knowledge, for which Men were formerly so highly reputed, as also
for that (on this account) they were looked on much better capacitated, and
more eminently qualified to counsel such as were in Affliction, and to succor
those in Distress; but it is now far otherwise, since not so much the solidity
of a Man's Understanding (which is his most worthy and honorable Endowment,
nay, his true and intrinsic Worth) renders him Taking with the Common People,
as his unjustly-assumed Confidence to declare himself what he is not, on the
most unwarrantable and unreasonable grounds imaginable. To be, and to pretend
to be, are much at one with them, till they experience the great difference at
the cost of their Limbs, and oftentimes at the hazard of Life it self.

Since therefore I have taken this opportunity to give a small Insight into
their dishonest Actions, I hope there will not be wanting some generous Spirit,
who may consummate the Design of our Good Intention, at least so far as to put
a Check to the extravagant Presumption of base men, and to put us (with all
Well-wishers to the Public) upon taking some such course as may secure us from
being endangered by them for the time to come.

There remains to my self however this Satisfaction, that I have used my
Endeavors to convince the most incredulous, and on that account have all-along
taken care, that the Verity of my own Sentiments and Opinions, with respect to
the Abuses put in practice by every of these persons, might be confirmed by the
most demonstrative Evidence taken from Observation of their own Proceedings.

I have been the less sollicitous to embellish or adorn my Discourse after the
manner of Rhetoricians, since I intend it not so much for the perusal of any
practical Author, neither to raise a Theo^ical Disputation on some novel
Hypothesis, as for the conviction of the People, who have and do still suffer
themselves to be imposed on.

Let me give the Reader this farther assurance, that I have in no wise been
persuaded, overruled, or guided by the Bait of a particular Interest, or other
sinister Advantage to my self; neither have the Sweets of a Revenge, thrust
forward by some inbred Malice for a supposed Wrong received, induced me to this
publication; but the deep sense I had upon me (for want of some such
information) how liable we are to suffer under the worst and most miserable
circumstances, from the Practice of Injudicious Men, and withal (which I must
needs say was a considerable motive) I was the more willing to appear in
public, out of the sincere Respect I am obliged to pay that truly worthy and
noble Art we call Chyrurgery, and no less to the Professors thereof; I mean
such of them as are qualified by a Legal Education to administer herein, whom I
was extremely troubled to see so ignominiously used by the Opprobrious
Reflections of many Ignorant yet Malevolent Detractors.

Proceed now in charity with a favorable Censure, and if thou meet'st with
those Errors which have escaped mine, or the examination of the Press, be
pleased to alter and amend the same; if they prove such as are not worthy
Correction, in kindness pass them by, and let them (with many other trivial
Corrigenda) be looked on as unavoidable Oversights, through the Weakness of the
Author's Judgment.

THE INTRODUCTION.
IT is one of the grand Axioms, or Epithets, given by Philosophers to (their
almost Deify'd) Nature, that She is Sui Conservatrix; and as generally believed
by others, that there is a natural Propensity in Humane Kind, to attempt the
speediest means of Self-preservation: But truly considering the degeneracy of
Humane Reason in some, from what it was of old, and their contradictory
Practice in the more eminent concerns of Life, we have just reason to dispute,
whether there be such an inherent Principle or not, that directs infallibly to
the Means of Restoration, when we are subjected to Bodily Infirmities.

Did not Ignorance, with her Darling Impudence, cast a mist before our Eyes,
and darken the Understanding, we might have hopes to see this Philosophical
Tenet indubitably verified: But whilst the ingenious Artist is exploded, and
the Artless Pretender mean while advanced; whilst the Rational and Methodical
Remedies of the former, are held contemptible, and the Empirical Preparations
of the latter, (though with the greatest detriment to those that use them) highly
extolled and embraced: I say, till Men can make a more clear distinction
betwixt one and the other, we may the less unreasonably suspect the Truth of
this applauded Notion; and as we have just cause to compassionate the hard fate
of the Vulgar, who are daily imposed on and deluded by the specious Pretenses
of the most Unskilful, too often to the hazard and forfeiture of their Lives;
so, I think, it may be accounted the most necessary piece of service we can do
them, to undermine the Foundation of these Infamous Impostors, to dissect their
pernicious Principles, and lay open the treachery and impiety of their Dealings.

Hereby the unprejudiced Reader may obtain a Prospect of the greatest Benefit
that can accrue from the best Performances of such a scandalous sort of People.

I conceive it no unpardonable Deviation, if we look back upon Antiquity, and
take a view of that sublime Respect which was formerly paid to the true and
faithful Practitioner of this noble Art.

Since it will be needless to spend our time in searching for its Original, I
shall only intimate by the way what is recorded by the Ancients, who are
differently opinion'd in the point of Invention.

Apollo is very early taken notice of for his profound Wisdom, particularly in
the divine Mystery of Healing, on which account there was a noble and rich
Sepulcher built after his decease, named by the Founders The Temple of Apollo.
Aesculapius is thought by some to be descended of Apollo, though Virgil seems
to think him first happy in the Discovery, and that he was for the same
dignified by the Epidauri with the Title of a God: as were also his two Sons
Podalirius and Machaon, whom Celsus does particularly mention as very eminent
for Chyrurgery, being carried from Crete to the Trojan Wars. But if what is
reported of the renowned Chiron be true, that he was Master to Aesculapius, I
think with more reason the precedence will be his. The same Celsus does farther
suppose Hippocrates to be the Parent of all Medicine, and delivers the
Chyrurgick Practice rather from him than any before him. Soranus says, 'twas
Apollo first invented Medicine, that Aesculapius enlarged, and that Hippocrates
finished ^he same, after whose death the Grecians erected ^n perpetual
remembrance of his honorable deeds, a most stately and fair Tomb, at Delphi,
near Parnassus, where they solemnized his Obsequies, and superscrib'd this
Epitaph:

Hippocrates of Thessalia, and by kind of the Country of Coos, lies buried in
this place: He was ^egotten of the Seed of the immortal god Phoebus, and has
left in the World many Books of Medicine, to put away Sickness, and to preserve
Health: what shall we need to say more of this worthy Man? there is no man's
cunning that can give him his condign Praise. In the succession after these,
there is mention made of Galen, Aetius, Paulus Aegineta, Avicen Albucasis,
Guido Cauliacus, Joannes Tagaltius, De Vigo, Lanfranc, with many others.

Farther, in the more ancient times, it is intimated by Dr. Willis, (in one of
his Prefatory Epistles) that before the Medicinal Art wa^ methodically
digested, when Physic was give^ at random, as it is now-adays by Empiricks an^
old Women, they held their experimental Recipe's (which had been tried, and
proved salutary) in so great esteem, that they were looked o^ as sacred
Monuments of Mercy, and diligently reserved in their consecrated Temples: but
i^ after-Ages, when their Understandings were more refined, and a more general
success attended the rational administrations of ingeniou^ Artists, it is
recorded, that the superstitiou^ Greeks were blinded with such a fervent zea^
as to Deifie their more eminent professed Chyrurgions, and adore them in the
number of their Gods.

The wisest of Men, from the beginning o^ the World to this latter Age, in
consideration that our Art has for its exercise the most n^ble of Subjects,
which is no other than the Divine Image of the Creator, considering lik^wise
the many Casualties that were still waiting, to subvert the Economy of Man's
corporal state, have, for these Reasons as well as others, reputed and
accounted Us the Hands of the Almighty.

But if we enquire what particular Persons they were that had this Homage
rendered them, we shall find them such as were legally constituted, for the
discharge of so great a Duty as lay incumbent on them. There were no such
Swarms of Pseudo-Medici and Chyrurgi, as now disturb the Town, and poison its
Inhabitants, admitted into their Reverend Societies. They paid not this Respect
to any, unless those who had been educated (ab incunabulis) by the most
diligent service under the greatest Masters; for they looked on Humane Life of
too high a concern to be tampered with by the barbarous H^nds of a rude and
ignorant sort of People. They found no reason in those days to prize and
overvalue the famous Italian or High-German Doctor, thereby to degrade and
despise the more worthy Physicians their fellow-Citizens; neither would they
confide in the most ridiculous absurd Predictions of the calculating
Piss-prophets that now molest us. For why? There was a communicative Knowledge
to each other, that the superstructure of these men's Ass-trologick Judgments,
was founded on their ^nsatiable desire of Gain, which they procure ^o
themselves out of the Spoils of the People.

We read not, till of late, of any inferior Mechanic so speedily advancing as
to commence presently Doctor of Physic, professed Chyrurgick Operator, yet
still a Mountebank. No, Petticoat Practitioners were formerly accounted
Oracles, or their Skill esteemed valuable in competition with the legal
Surgeons: They were endowed with greater Prudence than to run a mile or two
after an ignorant Butcher, to enquire whether the ingenious Artist had
performed his Duty: but in all times of their Calamities, and on all emergent
occasions, could safely ask Counsel, and confide in the true and genuine Sons
of Hippocrates and Aesculapius, expecting from the Endeavors of these men
(under God) the Restoration and Preservation of their Limbs and Lives.

If we would reflect now on the great and mighty illustration the Medicinal
Science has received in the present Age by many rare and admirable Inventions
of some modern and ingenious Spirits, we might suppose they have had great
reason to expect rather an augmentation than diminution of that Honor which
was given to their Predecessors; not only for the considerable Advantages they
have made by their Discoveries, in order to complete and perfect both Study and
Practice of Physic, but also for their great Industry, and the pains that it
has cost them to erect another Fabric on the Basis of solid Reason, whereby
they have adapted the most intricate, obscure, and conjectural Phenomenon of
the Ancients to plain, easy and practical Demonstrations.

We have had indeed such considerable and magnificent Contributions toward the
completing of this worthy Science, that the most voluminous of the Ancients,
nay, (if it may be pardonable to say so) the whole Body of Physic, as then
confusedly and darkly compiled, is a rude and indigested Chaos, comparatively
to one singular Invention of the Neotericks, whose sublime Speculations and
proficuous Experiments are elegantly descanted on by Dr. Charlton, in the
account he gives a Friend in France, of the considerable improvement of
Learning here in England, where he thus accosts him in some parts of his
Discourse.

In the College of Physicians in London, which (without offense to any thing
but their own Modesty) I may pronounce to be the most eminent Society of Men
for Learning, Judgment, and Industry that is now, or at any time has been in
the whole World. Here you may behold the House of Solomon; some there are who
constantly employ themselves in dissecting Animals of all kinds, as well living
as dead; and faithfully recording all Singularities that occur to their
observations, both in the several Species and Individuals; that so they may
come to know what is perfectly natural, what preternatural, what rare and
monstrous amongst the Parts of them, and also what resemblance there is betwixt
the conformation of the Parts in the Body of Man, and those in the Bodies of
other Animals, ordained by Nature to the same or like and equivalent uses.
Others there are who daily investigate Arguments to confirm and advance that
incomparable Invention of the Immortal Harvey, in his Circulation of the Blood,
and have already brought the Doctrine thereof to so high a degree of
perfection, that it is not only admitted and admired by all the Schools of
Europe, but the advancers of it also are able to solve most of the difficult
Phoenomena in Pathology, only by this Hypothesis; and frequently effect such
Cures by having respect thereunto, in their Intentions and Prescripts, as well
in chronick as acute Diseases, as would not be hoped from any other Groundwork
formerly laid. Indeed this singular transcendent Discovery has given more
light to the Materia Medica than all the laborious Trials, Inventions, and
Experiments that had been practiced in former Ages; I may say, that the whole
System of Anatomy, Physic, and Chyrurgery have hereby received such great
amendments and alterations, that the quondam Clouds of Ignorance seem wholly to
be dispersed. Here is no flying to occult causes for an explanation of seeming
Difficulties, (which was the Refuge of the Ancients) nor any other Asylum left
for the Unlearned; but the progress of each Distemper incident to Mankind, with
its various appearances in the beginning, augment, state, and declension, are
perspicuously said open and unfolded from an Aetyology built upon Inferences
gathered from this substantial and lasting Foundation. But to prosecute a
little farther the aforesaid Author, where he proceeds;

There are moreover amongst the Members of this Venerable Society, who pursuing
the hint given them some few years since, by Jacobus Mullerus, in an academical
exercise of the Nature of Animal and Voluntary Motion, have gone far toward
the explication of the Reasons and Manners of the motion of the Muscles, by the
Principles of Mechanics; an Enterprise of great difficulty, and long
desiderated, as leading us to understand the Geometry observed by the Creator
in the Fabric of the Microcosm, and the verification of Anatomical Assertions,
by Demonstrations Mathematical. There are others who have found out a more
commodious use of the Glands than all antecedent Anatomists ascribed to them;
with other considerable Discoveries that have been made, such as the Motion of
the Chylous Juice from the Stomach to the Receptaculum Chyli; the falsity of
that Opinion, that the Liver was the immediate instrument of Sanguification,
which is now found inservient to no other use than the sequestration of the
bilious Particles of the Blood, conveying the same into the Gall, to be thence
excluded into the Guts, the discovery of the Lymphatick Vessels, with many
others. Moreover, were we desirous to take a view of the considerable
Improvements that have been made by some learned Men of our own Country and
Profession, we need but take the trouble of perusing those elaborate Lectures
of Dr. Reed, Mr. Woodall, with many more, not forgetting to make particular
mention of those methodical and practical Observations of Mr. Sergeant Wiseman.

These, amongst others, are the Helps we have received from the unwearied
Labors of Men eminent in our Art, so that if the College of Physicians is
allowed metaphorically to be esteemed Solomon's House, I think we may pronounce
our Anatomick Theater in Surgeons Hall, to be a very splendid and glorious
apartment thereof; not so much for the curiosity of Structure, as for the
Streams of Eloquence and good Literature, flowing from those Fountains of True
Wisdom Dr. Brown and Dr. Tyson, whose candid and impartial Discoveries for the
support of what we all desire, viz. Health and its continuance, will never
sufficiently be compensated by this purblind Age.

Have we not then a just cause to stand amazed at the predominant Folly of
some, who will rather choose to trust their Bodies in the hands of Quacks and
other fraudulent Professors, than in those of the most judicious and skilful
Practitioners: and truly, if the learned Dr. Featly thought he had such great
reason to inveigh against the Sufferance of Laymen's imposing on the
Ministerial Function, who took on them (the most unlearned Mechanics) to
expound the Sacred Scriptures, to the disgrace and contempt of Divinity and
Episcopal Authority: Have not we, I say, as great occasion to dissent from, and
admire at the present toleration of those great Abuses, which by the most
illegal and ignorant Intruders are offered to the noble and divine Mystery of
Healing. I may truly justify the word Mystery, since it is so undeniably, to
those who by their most impure and nocuous conceptions thereof, their evil
Practices and oftentimes fatal Performances therein, have brought a general
Scandal on the most noble of all Arts, an Art which was delivered unto fallen
Man by the Almighty himself, and has been accounted the most excellent of all
others, by the wise and supreme Donor, as well as in the sight of Princes;
which made King Solomon advise us to give Honor to the Physician, since the
Highest Lord has created him for our Help and Health. The most wise Hebrecion
gives this Encomium of Medicine, That it proceeds from the Most High, and that
the ancient and most wise men of the Land have brought it forth; he that is
wise will not despise it.

What pity is it, and how justly do we complain, that this our honorable Art,
which in former times the most renowned Kings and Princes did not disdain to
dignifie, not only by their Contributions to render its Fame immortal, but also
by diligently practicing themselves therein, that it should now unworthily be
entrenched on, and degraded by the unjust Pretenses of the very Scum of the
Earth? This the vaunting Emperick, and couzening Quack, the confident Barber,
the fraudulent Bone-setter, and ignorant Old Woman; This all people, of
whatever Condition or Occupation, take on them to administer and intermeddle
withal: Nay, these men tell us so many Stories of their grand Achievements, of
the safe, certain, speedy, and infallible Remedies they have purchased by their
multiplied Experience, that it shall escape them hard if they possess us not
with a Belief, that we run the greatest hazard in the trusting our Distempers
to the management of any other (though infinitely more skilful) than
themselves; the meanest of their Medicines outvys all other Compositions for
their Virtues; and the most inferior of their Administrations must be reputed
a Panacea.

The great and only support of these men's Credit is built on such lying and
romantic Stories; and though the person that has once tried the best of their
Performances most commonly carries about him (perhaps to his Life's end) a
sufficient Remembrancer of their abominable Practice, yet for a more public
conviction, and that I may deter others from falling into their hands, I shall
use my weak Endeavors to display these notorious Cheats in their true and
proper colors, to divulge their wheedling Insinuations, and expose to the
naked Eye as well the weakness of their Judgmens as their Miscarriages in most,
if not all, their insolent Undertakings, that so the World may see we are as
willing to preserve them from, as to recover them out of Danger.

I am sensible, that for want of such a distinguishing Mark between Art and
Ignorance, there have been many well-meaning and deserving Persons, who have
shipwrack'd both their Health and Fortunes by their most dangerous encounters
with such, who as they value not their Reputation in the forfeit of their
Credit, so are they the less concerned at the loss of (what they never had) a
Good Name, if thereby they can accumulate their unjustly-acquir'd Gain; the
discharge of Conscience is to them of no concern, for if they heeded that, the
bare sense of their Guilt in a most gross Simplicity would fly in their Faces,
and debar them of those Privileges they now endeavor to engross unto
themselves.

If the confident declaration of a Man's own Skill to the World be of
sufficient force to engage the People to employ him, without an impartial
consideration whether there be any thing of Merit to render him acceptable; or
if his own positive Assertions of those great and mighty things he has
performed, without any thing of disquisition, be capable to constrain their
applause, we have the less reason so profoundly to admire how some Men have
gained such considerable ground amongst Rational Creatures.

With respect to the most welcome and easy admittance to the Trust and
Confidence reposed by incautelous People, in the extravagant boasting of
Emperical Quacksalvers; and in consideration that their Breach of Promise,
together with their unsuccessful Practice, have been but little available to
forewarn others how they rush into the same Mischiefs; these Reflections
should, in my opinion, encourage every man who respects the Miserable, to take
care that they be not deluded by the specious Pretenses of those who have
presumed to style themselves Metropolitan Physicians, the most infallible
Health-Restorers of the People, having gained their Knowledge by ten, twenty,
sometimes thirty years Industrious Study; when it is a Chance at the same time
if they ever looked on any other piece than Queen Elizabeth's Closet,
Culpepper's English Physician, and his Midwifry, Aristotle's Problems, or his
Masterpiece, with some other choice Cabinet of Physical Receipts. And on this
small stock of Knowledge, with a much greater provision of undaunted Impudence,
they account themselves deserving such sounding Titles, whereby they insinuate
themselves into the Peoples favor, and by degrees draw them into a persuasion,
that they are the only Men fitted for the cure of all Distempers, as well by
Internal Remedies as Topical Applications.

It is unlikely I should frame a more suitable description of these wonderful
Operators, than we have given us by an ancient Author, in his Office of a
Chyrurgeon, on which account I shall take the liberty to transcribe what is
most for our present purpose, in his own words.

It is requisite (says he) that this Artist be not only learned in the Theory,
but also that he be brought up under some cunning Man, which has good
Knowledge in the same Art; for otherwise it is not possible to come to the
exact and perfect knowledge thereof. If I should tell you of the ungracious
Witchcrafts, and of the mischievous Abuses and Misuses that have been in times
past, and yet in our days continually used, ye would a little marvel thereat:
But forasmuch as it has not only turned to the dishonor of God, but also to
the state of the Commonwealth, I have thought good to declare unto you part of
their wicked doings, that it may be unto you who profess this Art an Example,
to avoid the like wretched Deeds. These things I do not speak to you of
Hearsay, but of my own Knowledge.

In the Year One thousand Five hundred Sixty two, I did see in the two
Hospitals in London, St. Thomas 's and St. Bartholomew 's, to the number of
Three hundred and odd poor people, that were diseased of sore Legs, sore Arms,
Feet, and Hands, with other parts of the Body, so grievously infected, that One
hundred and twenty of them could never be recovered without loss of Leg or Arm,
a Foot or Hand, Fingers or Toes, or else their Limbs crooked, so that they were
either maimed or undone for ever. All these were brought to this Mischief by
Witches, by Women, and by Counterfeit Javils, that take upon them to use the
Art, not only robbing them of their Money, but of their Limbs and perpetual
Health. And I (says our Author) with some others, diligently Examining these
poor people how they came by their grievous Hurts, and who were their
Chyrurgions that looked unto them; they confessed that they were either
Witches, which did promise by Charms to make them whole, or else some Women
that were to cure them with Herbs, and suchlike things, or some Vagabond
Javil, that runs from one Country to another, promising unto them Health,
and deceiving them of their Money.

This Fault and Crime of the undoing of this People, were laid unto the
Chyrurgions, I will not say by part of those who were at that time Masters of
the same Hospitals; but it was said, that Carpenters, Women, Weavers, Cobblers,
and Tinkers did cure more People than the Chyrurgions themselves; but what
manner of Cures they did, I have already told you, such Cures as all the World
may wonder at; yea, I say, such Cures as makes the Devil in Hell to dance for
joy, to see the poor Members of Jesus Christ so miserably tormented. What shall
I say hereunto, but lament and pray unto our Lord Jesus, for his precious Blood
sake that was shed upon the Cross, to illuminate the Hearts of the Magistrates,
for amendment hereof; and that this Rabblement of Runnagates, with Witches,
Bawds, and the Devil's Southsayers, with Tinkers, Cobblers, and Sowgelders, and
all other the wicked Coherents of these same Devilish Sects, which do thus
abuse the Noble Art of Medicine, may be reformed and amended; and every one to
get their Living with Truth in the same Arts that they have been brought up in;
else to be grievously punished, as they be in other Countries, and as they have
been here in times past.

I think the Prince is bound in Conscience to punish those false and wicked
pernicious Deceivers, who do not only destroy the Limbs of Man, but his Life
also. Of this sort London is as well stored as the Country, for I believe there
be not so few therein as Threescore Women, who practice in the Art of Physic
and Surgery: Of these (some are called wise Women, or holy and good Women)
there are many sorts and sects, as some for sore Breasts, some for the Stone
and Strangury, some for Pain in the Teeth, others for Scald Heads, some famous
for sore Throats, others for sore Legs, with a Thousand more; Galen in his Book
of Sects never made mention of half so many. I think, if this worshipful
Rabblement were gathered together, they would make a much greater procession
than ever did the Monks, Friars, and Nuns, when they swarmed most in London.

This unprofitable Company have so increased in this City, that all the
Countries in England have taken notice thereof; yea, and at this day all the
Countries in Christendom may wonder at our Laws, in suffering and maintaining
of them.

Well, I say, we will let these pass with Tinkers, Carpenters, Old Women, etc.
and a great many of other Occupations, whereof some come out of France, some
out of Germany, and so of other Countries, some for Religion, and some to pick
Pockets. And all these are now become great Physicians, and Chyrurgions, to the
no small advancement of this noble Art of Medicine; for their worthy Cures do
bear such witness thereof, and give such a Report unto them, that at this day
the learned Physicians and Chyrurgions may not a little rejoice. I say no more,
but God amend all, and unless these things are quickly amended, I think the
diseased people with Wounds, Ulcers, etc. are like to have small help; and if
it shall chance the Prince to have Wars, then are this Company that I have
spoken of like to serve. And I doubt nothing, but that the Soldiers shall have
great courage to fight, forasmuch as they shall have such a goodly company of
Chyrurgions to cure them when they are wounded: As for others, there will be
but few left, unless better order be taken, and that with speed.

Thus we see that in those days the unwearied Endeavors of illiterate and base
People were not wanting in their Knavish Practices to overthrow the Medicinal
Art; but lest I tire my Reader with a preliminary Discourse, I shall hasten to
expose (which was the drift of my Undertaking) the Principal Intruders on and
Pretenders to the same, by whose disingenuous Practice it has received so
great a diminution in the estimate of some responsible, but mostly the common
People; each of which you will find the Subject of a particular Section.

Apologia Chyrurgica.
SECT. I.
UPON enquiry into the Causes of the Contempt both of Physicians and
Chyrurgions, we shall find in the first place (as one great Promoter hereof)
the perfidious Practices of a Fellow whom the Vulgar entitle Mountebank.

He is one whose true and fixed Character, with respect to his unsettled state
and condition, cannot properly be rendered, and therefore we will content our
selves with a description of his Employment.

An Emperick or Mountebank (after Dr. Blancard's concise and pithy remark on
him) is one who vends his irrational and immethodical Medicines to the Rabble
that surround him; for being mounted on the public Stage of his Ambition, he
blows so loud the Trumpet of his (otherwise insupportable) Fame, that the
Passengers who pass by him run as great hazard of being infected from his
Discourse, as did the Company of Ulysses, when they stopped their Ears, to
prevent being captivated by the charming Sirens.

It Is true, the musical concord of his Notes cannot be supposed so tempting as
was theirs; yet by reason of those fatal Events which do attend the Unwary,
that by this Bait are hauled into his Net, he may be looked on as more perilous
than those ficitious Musicianers.

Having sent his Fool before him, with his other antic Attendants, by some
pleasing, though ridiculous Gestures, to allure the People; when his Auditory is
somewhat numerous, Sir Fop himself (upon notice given) immediately mounts the
Stage, and after a very reverend Congee to his ignorant Admirers, addresseth
himself to this purpose.

Gentlemen,

The deep sense of your subjection to Bodily Infirmities, and your want of the
most true and necessary means for your recovery: I say, weighing in my Mind the
multitude of Distempers which my fellow Creatures are liable to undergo, if not
redressed by the hands of Art; and withal well knowing your want of able
Physicians, I thought in this great exigency there was an absolute necessity
for me to force my self from that private and contemplative life I lead in the
free enjoyment of a plentiful Estate, to make known to you my Abilities in the
practice of Physic as well as Surgery.

I will assure you, Gentlemen, I have obtained such stupendous specific
Remedies, for the cure of most, if not all your Distempers, as no Mortal
besides my self can reasonably pretend to.

Now having his Man ready that attends his motions with his Dish of Trumpery
for the entertainment of his Guests, he first pulls out his little Box of
Electuary, and proceeds.

Here is first of all, Gentlemen, my true and only famous Orvietan, a Medicine
of such admirable property, that it expels all manner of Poison, which is
incident to the whole Race of Adam 's Posterity.

Gentlemen, this only administration strikes at the very Root of Distempers,
and perfectly eradicates the worst of their Concomitants. The Orvietan of it
self, Gentlemen, is very well worth your Money, but it is the consideration of
your Wants, and the real necessity that there is to keep such things by you,
that occasions me out of a cordial love and respect to your welfare, to let you
have some other things, almost gratis, into the bargain.

Here are next of all, Gentlemen, my Pilulae Excellentissimae, a most
incomparable Purge I will assure you, Gentlemen, which answer all Intentions of
purging Physic, and are the most friendly to Nature of any thing yet known:
They sweep the Stomach, cleanse it of all Impurities whatsoever, and carry them
forth of doors with the greatest ease imaginable.

You have next, Gentlemen, my Pulvis contra Vermes, or Powder which kills all
Worms: This Powder, Gentlemen, not only expels those Crudities, and the
Corruption which engenders those troublesome Insects, but also procures a good
Appetite, makes a light Heart, and recreates all the Spirits, as well natural,
vital, and animal. And now, Gentlemen, that you may see I am as willing to take
care of those outward Accidents you are prone to, as your inward Distempers,

I give you, Fourthly, my Emplastrum divinum, which for its wonderful Virtues
may truly be so called. It cures all Aches proceeding from Heat or Cold, Pains
of what kind soever in any part of the Body; it resolves Tumors of all sorts,
though never so obdurate and hard to be dealt withal by other Remedies. In short
Gentlemen, you need no other Plaster to keep by you on any account whatsoever.

You have lastly, Gentlemen, my Balsamum Multarum Virtutum, which cures all
Wounds, Ulcers, Fistula's, and what not? for indeed it is of sufficient force
to withstand all putrefied Humors lodged in any part of the Body. So that you
see, Gentlemen, I am as willing to save you the unreasonable Fees of other
Physicians, as the extraordinary Sums of Money which a Chyrurgeon requires for a
small and inconsiderable Cure.

Having made this learned Harangue to the People, and rehearsed the same two or
three times over, he leaves them to pause a while, and then diverts them with
an Interlude of his fantastic Drollery; which being over, and Monsieur the
Doctor majestically withdrawn, his Confederate Juggler (almost as good an
Orator as himself) begins to this effect.

Gentlemen, I would earnestly entreat you, for your own safety, to embrace this
fit Opportunity of purchasing these most infallible Medicines, whilst you may
have the great benefit to find the Doctor in Town, which will be but a week at
farthest. (At the same time he designs to stay till he is forced to fly the
Town.) But, continues he,

I Will assure you, Gentlemen, you will never meet with the like Opportunity as
long as you live.

The Doctor, First of all, presents you, Gentlemen, with his most famous
Orvietan, which is the greatest Wonder in Nature, to procrastinate your Health
and Lives.

Secondly, He almost gives you his Pilulae Excellentissimus, in English, The
most excellent of Pills.

Thirdly, Here is the Dr's Pulve^e Vermibus, or his Powder to kill all manner
of Worms in Men, Women, and Children.

Fourthly, You may have his Emplastrum divinum, or a Plaster to cure all
manner of Aches, Pains, Swellings, or Tumors whatsoever.

Fifthly, and lastly, Gentlemen, here is the Dr's Balsamum multutum vertarum,
which heals all Wounds, Ulcers, and other Accidents proceeding from what Cause
soever.

You have all the whole Packet, Gentlemen, for the inconsiderable price of one
Shilling.

Gentlemen, it is not the small Gain which is gotten hereby that maintains the
Doctor's charge of his Coach and Horses; no, Gentlemen, he does it purely for
the benefit of poor People, as well as others, who are willing to be ruled by
his Directions.

Now Gentlemen, those that are willing to be Masters of these serviceable
Remedies, let them throw up their Money in Glove or Handkerchief, and the whole
Packet shall be returned them therein. If you make not use of the present
time, you must not blame the Doctor, when it shall please him deservedly to
debar you of this great privilege, by his speedy absence.

I have been the rather willing to impose the trouble of perusing these great
Impertinencies, in regard that from this exact Copy of the Original, the whole
Design may be more commodiously guessed at; for, first of all, his elevating
the Minds of the conceited Vulgar with the title of Gentlemen, (without which
he scarce repeats a sentence) argues his Endeavor from bringing them into a
high opinion of themselves, that they may harbor the same of him, and that he
the more unsuspectedly may carry on his Cheats.

Secondly, His frivolous Circumlocution and repetition of the same Discourse,
implies as well his Ignorance, as his incessant appetite of Lucre.

Thirdly, His thus openly publishing himself to the World does clearly indicate
his want of Merit to be sought after, and the shift he is put to for to
purchase a Living, by making this abominable fabulous proclamation.

Fourthly, His vain Ostentation by the antic Fooleries of his Tumblers and
Ropedancers bespeaks him to be the greatest Spend-time of the People, who are
the rather willing to tarry, when the thought of their Business is diverted by
the Conceits of Merry Andrew, and the Mountebank in the Interval, finds the
Sweets of an opportunity to put off and vend his Empirical Compositions.

Truly, this Fellow may most justly be accounted the Common Enemy of the
People, not only for the Time he cheats them of, which should be otherwise
employed, but also for their Money, which (if they want not for their own or
their Family's subsistence, and know not to employ it more advantagiously) is
better thrown to Swine, who will not evilly reward them, than given to these
deceitful Quack-pretenders, who prey both on their Purse and Persons.

Fifthly, and lastly, (which is the number of his Medicines) His
inconsiderately ascribing so many and different Virtues to each single and
improper Remedy, without reflecting on the various Intentions and Alterations
that are especially made in Surgery, before we can accomplish the cure of any
compound Indisposition, does absolutely demonstrate him to be ignorant and
knavish, and as great a Novice in Surgery as his Hireling Jack-pudding.

Having given you this cursory view of the Mountebank upon his Stage, we will
now conduct you to his Lodging, which is commonly near thereto, in some public
Victualling-house or Inn, where his Host (perhaps for botching up some former
Clap, or out of an expectation of Custom to his House) suffers him to live
Rent-free.

His Chamber is commonly set off with Skeletons of Puggs, Dogs, Rabbits, and
other Animals, which he has got some Butcher's Boy to anatomize and set
together for him. There are likewise the stuffed Skins of Crocodiles, Panthers,
and Sea-Lyons, and these, he tells the People, are such as have been presented
him, for some remarkable Cures in his dangerous Travels through the remotest
parts of the World.

In his Window it is possible you may find half a peck of Teeth, some of which
(as he tells you) he threw out on the Stage with the Point of his Sword, others
with an imperceptible touch of the forefinger of his right hand.

In other parts of his Chamber you may see Humane Bones, being such (he would
insinuate) as he has amputated or dismembered on necessitous occasions, yet by
a more particular Enquiry we shall find he procured them after the same manner
as his Caemiterean Teeth, or those from the Churchyard.

I shall conclude these Remarks with the recital of an Account I had given me
some time since, of a certain famous Empirick, who upon a Visit made him by a
Gentlewoman for his Advice, about a Pain in her Breast, she chanced to espy
under a Glass in his Closet a very black and deformed piece of Flesh, which
(out of curiosity) enqui^ing after, the Mountebank very impudently told her,
that it was a Cancer'd Breast which he had taken from the Body of a certain
Indian Queen, whom he had recovered in three weeks afterward. The Gentlewoman,
surpised at the Skill of this famous Operator, when she came home, imparted it
to some of her Neighbors, upon which the whole Imposture was detected* and the
Breast proved no other than that of a poor Woman's, by which Excision he had
sent her into the other World, and kept her Breast as a Pledge for payment of
the Money, till she should come back again to redeem it; which when he had
boiled, as Ketch does his quartered Members, (to preserve them from being
tainted by the Air) he kept as a Monument of his admirable Dexterity.

It would be too tedious to enumerate all the Cheats such Persons practice, to
render themselves famous; and therefore waving their particular Enarration, I
shall give you as short an account of his Education or Initiation in the
Practice of Physic, by which you may perceive the utmost of his
accomplishments in that sublime Science.

By an Enquiry of this nature you will find, that the whole of his Judgment
proceeds from a Twelvemonths cohabitation with some Country Practitioner, who
after covenanting that he should not molest him when he practices for himself,
(for a small Stipend) permits this Intruder to inspect his Business, till the
expiration of such a term of time; when the little Bagful of Conceit, thinking
himself sufficiently flegg'd in Knowledge, having thrown aside his
Leading-strings, begins to soar aloft on the Pinions of his unbounded Pride,
and scorning those mean Retirements of an obscure Practitioner, who permits
himself to be sought to, he thinks he has already a sufficient Call to publish
himself to the World; and thereupon immediately erects a Stage in some City or
Market Town, where he perpetrates the most enormous Mischiefs, under the notion
of a most undoubted Preserver of the People's Lives.

If this does not exactly quadrate with his original, but that he descends from
a better Progeny than the former, having spent his Patrimony through his
extravagant living, and disdaining to labor otherwise for his Bread; in this
exigency he can find out no better method for an idle and easy life, than that
of turning Mountebank; in order whereto, considering likewise that it was
absolutely necessary he should be skilled in some Terms of Art, the Virtues of
a few Simples, and the making up some vulgar Remedies (which he can easily
disguise) to amuse the People. On suchlike Reflections he betakes himself to
the turning over some plain and intelligible Author, from a short converse with
whom, together with the advantage of indifferent Natural Parts, he sets up for
the most experienced Physic and Chyrurgick Professor about Town: yet at the
same time, if he were brought to the Test, it is most certain, that he (nay, the
ablest of them all) knows not rightly to deliver either Diagnostick or
Prognostic in the most usual of disastrous occurrences to Humane Life, and so
much a Stranger to Chyrurgery, that you will find him unable to give a
discerning Querist a satisfactory definition of either Wound or Ulcer.

Now these are the fit Idols of the Peoples Applause, whose quacking and
dishonest dealings meet with less Calumny and Opposition than the just and
artificial proceedings of the Licentiate Practitioner.

One great Bait wherewith this Pretender ensnares his Auditory, is his fair
Carriage and splendid Equipage: and indeed (what is mostly to be lamented) when
by the influence of a Friend at Court he can skrew himself into the Prince's
favor, he then bears all before him, with his assumed Title of a
Regius-Professor ordinarius, or (as Medicaster Medicatus in his Banter upon J.
B.) One of the King's most Ordinary Practitioners.

The two notorious Empiricks, that have for some years past infested England,
when they had by the like means procured, as they call it, the Signal Testimony
of a Prince's Favor, the^ were no sooner mounted on the Stage, but it was
exposed to the Peoples view, who were from a prospect of this Royal Gratuity to
respect them as it were by consequence for very eminent Physicians. But did not
the many fatal Errors committed by them in most parts of the Town declare their
Arrogance, as well as Ignorance: yet I am well satisfied, that a considerate
Person can value no man so much on a gaudy appearance, as on that of a sound
and rational Judgment, which is not only furnished by Autopsy, in a continued
series of Practical Experiments, but adorned with the Theory of the choicest
Authors.

It may not be from our purpose, if I inform you, that notwithstanding the
Titles of Physicians and Chyrurgions in Ordinary, that very Prince himself we
were just now speaking of, neither before nor at the time of his unhappy
dissolution, did think it reasonable to confide, or trust his Life in the hands
of such his spurious Regii Professores.

After my endeavors to prove this Upstart as dangerous a Person as the People
can converse with, I shall lay down such a faithful account of his Practice, as
will, I doubt not, render his Name so ignominous and detestable in the Peoples
Ears, that in consideration of those many Outrages he commits on their Bodies,
they may as well venture their Persons amongst ravenous Beasts, as trust their
Health, Limbs, and Lives to the management of such Intruders on the Physician's
and Chyrurgeon's Duty.

I have already acquainted you with his Education, which if not positively the
same, I have intimated, yet circumstantially you will find it correspond.

I am satisfied it was never known of any Empirick, that he acquired the Skill
he boasts of by a diligent Service under a legal or rightly-qualify'd
Chyrurgeon, or commenced gradually Physick-professor at a University, but all
from such sinister clandestine methods, as renders their Pretensions as unjust
as their Practice destructive.

It Is but a few months from the writing hereof, that a late Mountebank or
Stage Player in M -- F -- was consulted by a Gentlewoman then laboring under
the severe Symptoms of an ulcerated Cancer, seated on her Breast. She had been
tampering some time before with a noted Doctoress about C --, famous for such
Cures, who labored all she could to put it upon suppurating (for you must know
she had been concerned before it ulcerated) she took much pains to persuade the
Patient there was no other way for cure, but (as she expressed it) by letting
out that corrupt Humor which was continually gnawing of her, and fed her
Cancer.

She said she had cured several by this new way, which the ablest Chyrurgeons
durst not meddle with: hereupon, by the incessant application of hot Topics,
and powerfully attractive (to use the ancient expression) Pultisses, she in a
little time accomplished her desire, but -- Quis talia fando, with so evil a
tendency of all things for the worse, that from this (as was to be expected)
the before occult and quiet Cancer now manifested its rage and cruel fierceness
more than ever; there was soon after the discharge a pertinacious Fungus thrust
forth in several parts of the Abscess, and the virulent Humor by erosion,
having opened the mouths of the Vessels, finding a clear passage, gave a free
egress to the vital Spirits with the Blood upon any the least provocation.

By this the Patient was debilitated, and her Spirits much exhausted, so that
of necessity being compelled to dismiss her Female Undertaker, and to add more
Fuel to her inextinguishable Flame, upon the rumor of a noted Empiric (one of
the beforementioned) she refers her case to him, who finding the Breast
movable (sure he thought it should not long continue so) most ignorantly orders
a Bottle of strong Spirits, for to bath the part affected, and half a dozen
Papers of purging Powder, to be taken every other day, which when she had
roundly paid for, she took home with her to her House near M --.

Upon the very first application, the most diffusive Particles of the subtle
Spirit, fermenting with the bilious adust Humor, lodged in the Glandules of
the Breast, soon hastened an Inflammation, by an increase of fluxion; which
when by circulation the morbid taint was communicated to the rest of the bloody
mass, there was presently excited so great an effervescence, and such a
continued Feverish Ebullition, that notwithstanding the too late assistance of
an eminent Chyrurgeon, the vital Flame was suddenly extinguished, and this
miserable Gentlewoman untimely hurried to her Grave.

I think we shall have no occasion to produce a more evident demonstration of
Empirical Ignorance, than this of the foregoing, where we find the application
of a burning Spirit to an inflamed ulcerated Cancer, which was as likely to
effect a Cure, as it is that the Fire should be put out by a combustible Sulphur.

I was the rather free to insert this Passage, for that being an eyewitness,
and enquiring what had been done, they showed me the Mountebank's Bottle of
Spirits, which (as I could imagine) were no other than an inflamable Spirit of
Turpentine, impregnated with Galbanum, Ammoniacum, and other Gumms; and his
Powder that of Jalap Root; a very likely thing to prove beneficial, where the
most lenitive Purgation oftentimes puts the Humors into an over-eager ferment,
to the disturbance of the part.

A Case likely to have been as fatal as the former, you may understand by this,
that when (a little while since) a Chyrurgeon had been sent for to take a view
of a weakly Child, he found one of our present Mountebanks there before him,
who had already made a demand for his intended Cure, and was preparing for his
Work: He told the Practitioner, that the Child had so large a Carnosity, or
fleshy Excresence, by the Fundament, that it hindered him from going to Stool;
but he did not question he should soon cure him, by cutting of it away: The
Chyrurgeon being curious to see it, desired a view of this strange case, which
being granted, he found nothing more than a bearing down of the Fundament, or
Prolaps of the Intestine, by cutting off which (if not providentially
prevented) this bold Undertaker had most certainly killed the Child.

Did not the fear of being burdensome to your Patience take me off from such a
design, I could relate some scores of my own observations on these men's
Practices, where the Success has been much at one with the former, more
especially in their Pretensions to the performance of Chyrurgick Operations,
such as couching Cataracts, extirpation of Wenns, and other preternatural
Excrescences; their cutting Men for the Stone, and extracting the same from the
Female Sex per dilatationem, where their prodigiously expanding and lacerating
the Urinary Ductus, if no worse Symptom intervene, yet by this violent usage
they so far weaken the Muscular Fibers, that the Patient from thence labors of
a Paralysis in that part, and is attended with an involuntary Miction all her
Life after.

Surely if such absurd Practices and daily Miscarriages as these, are not
sufficiently conducing nor enough prevalent, there can be nothing more coercive
to rectify Men's Judgments, or to caution them from their application to a
Pretending Mountebank, who not only acts out of the reach of his capacity, by
surreptitiously entrenching upon Medicine and its Professors, but also (which
is of much worse consequence) by so doing he too frequently brings the
overcredulous into danger of their Lives.

It was no rash Opinion of him who delivered his Thoughts to this effect; That
if Justice had taken place, a great number of these Vagabonds had long since
suffered by the hands of the common Executioner, as just Memento's to forewarn
others how they tempt their Stars beyond their Light. And the Comparison made
by another is as little disagreeable, That there is no farther disproportion
between the Mountebank and murdering Robber than this, that the former, by a
pretense of Service, having bereaved the unwary Passenger of both Money and
Life, passes undiscovered; whilst the latter, to accomplish the same ends,
more certainly suffers condign Punishment, on the account of open Violence.
There is also this disparity between the Cases of such who fall into the hands
of either, that the one ignorantly as it were consents (though upon a different
expectation) to be deprived of his Life, whilst the other is compelled to resign
the same, when overpowered by his Adversary. In short, they are both sacrificed
to the Interests of base Men, and if either be the more eligible, it is he who
gives us time enough to fly from him, or defend our Lives.

That I may take off what may seem to some a too rigid Censure on the Failings
of these men, I shall give you the concurring Testimony of one of Galen's
Commentators.

Whosoever (says he) does take upon him to administer in the Medicinal
Profession, for the safety of Man's Life, and being ignorant in the Principles
thereof, he administering therein, and the Man perishing in his Hands, or under
his administration; I say that this is Murder, and the practicing Pretender
answerable for the same, as well to humane as divine Justice.

Truly it is great pity that such Trespasses as these come not under the Verdict
of a skilful and inquisitive Jury, that the Treachery being hereby detected,
the Tragic Actor might receive his Praemium.

SECT. II.
AS a farther occasion that those honorable Professions of Physic and
Chyrurgery have been so meanly reputed, and so much undervalued, I shall give
you an account of the abuseful Practices of other Quack Pretenders.

A Quack is by a certain facetious Author described as a kind of bastardly
Breed, engendered by the Congres of a Mountebank and a City Doctress, from
whence is said to result this deformed lump of Impudence.

He is by others said to have been Jack of all Trades, yet could never live by
any; and therefore having well acquainted himself with the extravagant Humor
of such who cannot distinguish Truth from what is otherwise; without farther
deliberation he presently turns Doctor: but considering that his sudden
pretense to the cure of all Distempers would raise suspicion of his being no
more than a Pretender, he therefore (encouraged by the predominant Vice of the
Age) professes at first, that he is only Master of some pleasant, private, and
speedy method for the cure of the Lues or French Pox, and according as this
takes, if there be Money in the case, there is nothing comes amiss to him.

These Quack Practitioners were never so numerous as they are at present, there
being scarce a corner in either City or Suburbs, where one or other of these
Intruders have not shamefully crept in.

It Is true, I cannot suppose him full out so dangerous as the former, on account
that his meaner and more private station, does not admit him (if otherwise
willing) to make such heavy slaughter among the People.

There is also this farther inequality, That the former having summons'd a
concourse of People, is the crier of his own Abilities, by those fabulous
Stories he delivers to them; whilst this Person (for want of so much
confidence) contents himself by employing some Hackney Scribe, who sends abroad
for him a Noverint Universi, or Advertisement where to find the Habitation of
such an eminent Professor both of Physic and Chyrurgery, as will undertake to
cure them when left off by others.

We are so pestered now of late with these ridiculous Libels, that you cannot
walk from Temple Bar to Charing Cross without being imposed on to inspect three
or four of them. Indeed the divertisement they afford an ingenious Reader, may
in some measure requite him for his expense of time in the perusal, it being
certainly as pleasant to supervise some such as are especially intermixed with
a few doggril Rhimes, as to be Spectator at a Farce. Risum teneatis? may very
well be queried, there being such of them dispersed about the Town, as would
constrain a smile from the most mortified Anchorite or reclusest Hermit.

There is scarce a Corner-house in Town, or Entrance to a public Thorowfare,
where you may not find a Quack-pretender's Bill.

The one presents you with his Aqua Tetrachy-magogon, a word as far above his
Comprehension to etymologize, as the Zenith from the Nadir.

A second offers a most specious and grave Title of Read, Try, Judge, and speak
as you find; which when they do, it is commonly uttered with a shower of heavy
Oaths and Execrations on the Author, for his trying Conclusions, and leading
them on from an inconsiderable Mischance, (viz. a recent Venereal Gonorrhoea,
Dysury, Bubo, etc.) into the most lamentable, excruciating, nocturnal Dolors,
and often many more irrepairable Disasters.

A third gives you to understand, that at such a place lives the only, true,
and approved Physician of Twenty odd years Experience: But to solve this
Aenigma, we may make it out thus: The first seven years, perhaps, were served
in an Apprenticeship to some Country Apothecary, or practicing Barber, where he
had the liberty to see his Master oftentimes let Blood, and cut holes up and
down the Body, which he calls his Issues. After the Foundation was thus laid,
we may imagine that a second seven (being youthful days) were spent in rambling
foreign parts, where there might be as much Knowledge gained in Physic or
Chyrurgery as amounts to a Cipher. The last seven were not improbably) spun out
in working Journey-work, when coveting the Title of a pater familias, (he sets
up for himself, and spends the remainder of his days in diligently conning over
his Grandmother's Receipt-book.

Here he finds such admirable Titles to all his several Medicines, that he can
suppose he has already purchased a greater Talent of Knowledge than his Brother
who sends out the Three Infallible Remedies.

Here is first of all an incomparable Direction to make Lucatellus Balsam,
which the good old Woman would never impart to any one before her death. In
another place he finds a Receipt for Diachylon and Melilot Emplaster, for the
cure of Cuts, Bruises, Splinters, and suchlike. In a third place there is a
never-failing Mercurial Water, subscribed, This is that Wonderful Water with
which my Lady -- cured Thousands of poor people, and was bequeathed as her
Legacy to her Nurse Mrs. --.

With this Solution of sublimate Mercury in fair Water the Dr. dresseth all
Tumors, I should say Swellings, Wounds, Ulcers, and the several species of
them, under any appellation whatsoever. And amongst the rest, he has found out
a cheaper way (that he might be absolutely complete) than any as yet
discovered, to make Pil. Cochiae, with another famous Purger in all cases, made
of Aloes, Rhubarb, Coloquintida, and Jalap, brought into a mass, (or in the old
Gentlewomans Phrase a consistence) with the Syrup of Buckthorn-berries.

You have here a prospect of the Basis whereon is built the wounderful Skill of
the Rabble's many years Practitioner, from whence it will be no hard matter to
judge of his Accomplishments in Physic and Chyrurgery. And now if (your Spring
being drained) you are not obliged to withdraw, you may behold upon another
piece Cure without Poison, and that in Capitals.

This Gentleman speaks as truly as the rest, but only under the notion of No
Poison he would possess the People with a Belief, that from the Legal Artist
they must expect Poison in their Cures, when at the same time some of these
Pretenders shall not scruple to vend the worst of Poisons in their dangerous
Compositions

Indeed, if our sweet sublimed Mercury must deserve no other name than Poison
(though one of the most noble Medicaments yet known) I dare be confident there
never was any considerable Venereal Cure (pretend they what they please)
effected securely without its exhibition. And of the same opinion we shall find
the most reputable Authors who have written upon its Use and Virtues: I think
the ingenious Harvey, and the late Mr. Richard Wiseman, have said enough to
evince the great truth of this Assertion. However, to clear farther the
treacherous proceedings of one of these bitterly inveighers against Mercury, I
shall impart what was communicated to me from a person of good credit, who
himself pretending an occasion for a Box of Pills, bought about two drams of a
Quack, who had wonderfully decry'd the Use of a Mercurial Preparation in
Physic, when by a Chemical Analysis of the Composition he found therein
contained half a dram and fifteen grains of crude Mercury or Quicksilver.

After all, to bring up the Rear, another tickles you with the pleasing
invitation of No Cure No Money. This honest man may, not unlikely, tell you,
That it is customary however for his Patients to give him a small Fee of a Piece
or two for encouragement, which he calls your Admittance; and when he thinks he
has done enough for this, he knows how to accost you, upon your next
appearance, with a Complement of this nature.

Sir, or Madam,

Finding the dangerous states of your Distemper to increase upon you, and that
altogether through your own neglect, in not conforming to my Directions, I am
wholly taken off the thoughts of farther proceeding with you; nay, I am as well
satisfied, by your inordinate living, and by the appearance of new Symptoms,
that you have strayed and got a fresh Mischance, as if I my self had been the
person you have so lately been concerned with: Now, you know, it was by no
Covenant or Bargain of mine promised, that I would cure one Clap upon another,
without being satisfied for the first.

Here you find there is no Remedy left (especially if you would be genteel) but
to throw down a couple of Guineas more before you are discharged, and then you
have the liberty to seek out a second Quack-salving Physician, in a much worse
plight than you came to the first.

Whatever may be the Practice of particular Undertakers, who send abroad these
Papers, I know it has been a course taken with some, who have insinuated to
the Patient, they would have nothing till they performed their Cure; indeed,
such are usually the Hypocritical Shams and Evasions of selfish Ignorants, who
are forward enough to lay their own Miscarriages upon the Errors of their
Patients, when it is possible at the same time they were never otherwise guilty,
than being overforward to swallow down their preposterous and improper Drenches.

I would therefore seriously advise the Unfortunate Sons of Venus, who have
been paid the Wages for their Works of Leachery, that they as safely hazard a
fresh encounter with their darling Curtezans, in hopes (and with as much
likelihood) to find an Antidote where they received their Infection, as to rely
for Relief upon the Counsel of a Quack Pretender; for by a repetition of their
amorous Delights, they can but propel the malign Seminaries a little farther
into the Body, and by the inconsiderate and rash adhibition of these men's
Medicines, the said Infection is carried as far inwards, and being mixed with
the (now thoroughly polluted) mass of Blood, produces as dangerous and
inveterate effects.

That which principally incites the People to make use of this Intruder, is,
his retail vending of his Medicines; for being informed, that of such a famous
Physician they may have an Infallible Box of Pills, of another an Incomparable
Pleasant Liquor, of a third a Never-failing Tincture, Lozenge, or Elixir, and
all these undoubtedly preservative, as well as curative, in the Pox, with its
Attendants: Being allured, I say, with so plausible an Invitation, they scruple
not to send their Money by some trusty Friend, to purchase these Medicaments,
wherewith (as they are told) they may cure themselves, without hindrance of
Business, or knowledge of Relations.

Hereby accrews this great advantage to the Quack, that he is not obliged to
credit; for were not the Money paid upon the receipt of what he sells them,
there are few People (upon a too late repentance of their Bargain) would come
to return their Thanks.

It is the pleasing hopes to keep their Mischances secret, with the promise
that they meet with of so easy and cheap a Remedy to restore their Health,
makes them look upon these Bills as so many Oracles, and what they deliver to
be purely orthodox; but alas, the Event renders them the greatest Objects of
our pity, who by splitting upon these Rocks of Dissimulation, have shipwrack'd
their Lives and Fortunes.

I can do no less than admire that any Man should be so inconsiderate, not to
say ignorant, as to take for granted, that an Eighteen-penny Box of Pills, an
Halfcrown Bottle of Tincture, etc. should be of sufficient energy to withstand
or profligate a radicated Pox, in all its several shapes and diversity of
appearance, when at the same time it is not often known that any the most
recently contracted Virulency was ever thoroughly expelled by these frequently
mischievous and prejudicial administrations.

I have heard of a certain Quack in London, who (upon a bare Recommendation
from as wise a person as himself) undertook, and boldly exhibited the Powder of
Cantharides, or Spanish Flies, in order to carry off the Flux of a Gonorrhoea,
but with so fatal a consequence, that hereupon the miserably afflicted Patient
died suddenly convulsive.

We have an account of two Cases of some affinity with the former, related by
Meekrin, in his Chyrurgick Observations, which for the extraordinary
circumstances attending, I shall copy from the aforesaid Author, in page 141.

Bartholomeus Cabrolius, Anatomicus Monspeliensis, Observationem singularem
(huc facientem) adfert his verbis.

AVenionem evocatus, ut quendam majori in femore Sclopeto ictum, curarem, una
cum Joberto Guilimeo and aliis; e diverticulo, ad Hominem, enormi laborantem
Satyriasi visendum accessimus. Res ita habet, laborat quartana Aeger, in qua
profliganda strigae auxilium petierat, quae illi poculum ex j. seminis
urticarum, Cantharidum ij. sesqui dram coeparum aliisque concinnarat: hinc
it a exarsit in venerem, ut Uxor ejus per omnia sacra dejerarat, se ab binoctio
octuagies septies initam, interea saepius in lectum semen effudisse: imo nobis
adstantibus, brevi momento ter se polluit, pedem lecti pro foemina subagitans:
hinc in stuporem versi, quidquid fieri potuit remediorum adhibuimus, sed ipse
paulo post libitinariis pollinctoribusque cessit.

Huic affine, retulit Dominus Chauvet Avenionensis Doctor, aiebat ille, annis
abhinc 32, Evocatum se Gaderousam ad hominem eadem Satyriasi correptum, and
limine domus obvia fit Uxor, de praepostera libidine (rarum in mulieribus
querelae genus) mariti expostulans; quadragies illam una nocte hortum suum
fodisse; simul laceratam nimla affrictu ostendebat vulvam, remediumque ^olori
juxta ac colori quaerebat. Simili potione malum Aeger contraxerat, quam
praebuerat Mulier Xenodochio ancillans tertianae arcendae, qua hic in tantam
amentiam versus fuerat, ut catenis obsessi instar ligandus erat. Aderat cum
Domino Chaveto Sacerdos, qui cum verbis solari Hominem vellet: rogabat uti se
deliciis istis immori sineret: Foeminae cum linteo oxycrato immerso cinxere.
Mane mortuus, hiantiore membroque gangraena correpto, inventus, ridenti similis
est rictu quem Sardonium vocant.

I have the rather made this Digression, that the World may see what
intolerable Mischiefs an unskilful Person may be guilty of, when countenanced
the most illegally to practice in our Art.

If it be replied, That many who have received the Venereal Infection have been
cured by Quack Practitioners; I must needs say, that I am so far diffident, as
to question their Security from the danger of Relapse. I very well know they
have obtained a Truce, or short Requies, with their Distemper, in which
Interval the Undertaker fues for satisfaction; but after some little time
(remanente causa) there has been found to the Patient's sorrow, a Pejoration of
all Circumstances, such as from the patching up a Venereal Ulcer, the
retroceding of a malign Bubo, by refrigerant and repelling Topics, or the
untimely stopping of a Gonorrhoea with restringent Injections, or otherwise,
have imperceptibly transmigrated into the most inveterate Cephalalgia's,
extreme Lassitudes, the most pungitive nocturnal Dolors, with other universal
excruciating Pains in all parts of the Body. Indeed from such Ignorants you
must expect no other, than to be carried from a simple slight Infection, and
that most inevitably into the strongest Contagion; when if you seek Redress of
your Physician, you are told, That he has already commanded the Pox out of
your Quarters, and these are no other than Symptoms of a predominant Scurvy,
contracted by the profuse drinking of Wines and other strong Liquors, with your
liberal seeding upon Salt and Spiced Meats.

These are the Pretenses of such illiterate and Empirical Pretenders; scarce
any one of which ever freed a Patient of any Venereal Concern, without the
severe Relics of a Pocky Scorbute, which when arrived at their Extreme, are
sufficient to emaciate the most corpulent Body, and unless relieved by
Medicine, will unavoidably induce a lingering Chronick Sickness, oftentimes
terminating in Death it self.

I hope now, from the already recited Instances and Remarks, there will need
the fewer Arguments to dissuade Venereal Patients from their application to a
Quack, and in his room to introduce the true practical Chyrurgeon, where, upon
discovery of their Misfortune, and an enquiry into the progress of their
Distempers, they may with as much Secrecy, and far greater Safety (from a
rational and well grounded method of Proceeding, without which the slightest
Symptoms are no more than palliated) expect Recovery without the future access
or danger of a Relapse; for let Men boast never so much of their Specificks, or
infallible Nostrums, as an Eighteen-penny Box of Pills, a small Vial of their
Antivenereal Elixir, with the rest of their Empirick Remedies, they are all, I
say, the fantastic Notions and Chymera's of self-interested and deceitful
Intruders on the Medicinal Art, who have invented these fabulous Stories to
amuse and fool the People, defraud them of their Money; and run them not seldom
into the hazard of their Lives.

There is the less reason to exemplify by more particular Remarks the Cheats
by these Men practiced to beguile the Unwary, since the same begin now to be so
public and notorious, that you shall scarce light into the company of a
clapped Monsieur, who is not presently reviling of his Physician, and
lamentably condoling his Misfortune, for rashly confiding in the Judgment of a
Quack Professor.

I sincerely and heartily wish, that the distressed Gallican may be hereby
warned, however I have discharged my Duty, with respect to the Praemonition;
and if the Proffer of an undoubted Salutary Antidote be opposed or wilfully
rejected by an infected Patient, we have the less reason to be concerned, when
the Poison he has received shall prove as fatal.

SECT. III.
ANother great cause for the Scandal and Male-reflection upon Chyrurgery and
its true Professors, is, the base and burthensom Intrusion made thereon by the
Practice of a Barber, who by his Title seems to cry Halfs with the Chyrurgeon,
and bears as great a sway in the good Opinion of ignorant People as the Legal
Artist.

Indeed the very Notion of a Barber-Surgeon seems in some measure to
countenance the Arrogance of these men, and has so far imposed on such as are
unacquainted with the Truth, that they have never imagined the great difference
between the Chyrurgeon and this bold Undertaker; neither will they be persuaded
that the latter incurs a Penalty, by his assumed Confidence to intermeddle in
the Duty of the former.

Now have we not just reason to stand amazed at the Presumption of these men,
who are so numerous in all the out-parts of the Town, that it is almost a Rarity
to find one of their Poles without a Frame of Porringers, or some other Signal
of their Pretensions to Chyrurgick Practice: Nay, some of them have of late
years presumed so far upon our negligence to suppress them, as to hang out for
their Sign the Arms of our Profession; so that, as far as I perceive, it may in
time be no easy matter to know the rightly qualified Professor of our Art,
from the person of whom we are now giving you a description.

However, that I may render my design the more complete, and show my
willingness to rectify those men's Judgments who have been hitherto misguided,
I shall give you a true account of his Original, that you may see with how
great Injustice he takes upon him to administer in our Art.

If we look back on his Descent, we shall find his Rise from some honest
contented Barber, with whom having lived a little time in perfect abhorrence of
so strict a confinement, he waits for an opportunity and steals off to Sea,
where he passes indifferently for a Barber's Boy, till his Master dying; after
a first or second Voyage, he steps into his Place; and now being acquainted
with the custom of the Seas, on his next setting out he is, after some slight
Examen, introduced as the Surgeon's Mate; in which station having purchased
much Experience, and tired with rambling, full fraught with Knowledge, he comes
on shore, where settling in some obscure part of the Town, he goes by the name
of an able Barber or Sea-Chyrurgeon, and acquaints the People with such
wonderful Stories of his extraordinary Achievements in our Art, that they are
ready to repute him for as worthy a Practitioner as either Galen or Hippocrates
were in former times. You may be sure to find him talking (where he fears not
to betray his Ignorance) of nothing less than Fractures, Dislocations,
Gangreens, Mortifications, and Amputations, with other scraps which he has
picked from some ancient Author, and launching out into a farther liberty of
romancing, is continually boasting how many scores of Limbs he has taken off,
on which his ignorant Auditory shall ground a supposition, that without a
sufficient knowledge in the Practice of the Seas, it must be impossible for the
Land Professor to be truly accomplished, or well qualified for administration
in the Medicinal Art.

To remove this Scandal, I must ingeniously confess, that were I to deliver my
own Sentiments, I see very little reason to make distinction in point of
Knowledge between the common Sea Professor and the Town pretending Barber. I
know they are not seldom a Result one from 'tother; and I shall farther remark
for our advantage, that in consideration of the most slovenly and uncouth
Practice, together with the absurd (that I may not say ignorant) Proceedings
too commonly attending a great number of these Sea Practitioners, I am sensible
there will be found as great difference between such a person and the City
Chyrurgeon, as betwixt a deceitful Artless Pretender and a Master in the said
Art.

I would not be thought herein by any means to reflect on those legal and
ingenious Practitioners employed in His Majesty's Naval Service, but what I
have spoken hereto, is on account of the great Abuses committed by those
shameful Intruders on the Practice, who by making Friends to the Supervisers,
have clandestinely procured the Title of Chyrurgeons Mates, to the no small
detriment and personal damage of the King's good Subjects, whose Health and
Lives, in the Chyrurgeon's absence, are in the hands of these so lately Barbers
and Apothecaries Servants.

It Is not many years since a mere Novice in Surgery, humbly requesting a Grant
for the Office of a Mate, upon a trial if he was fitted for the discharge of
such a Trust, when he was asked, what he thought was the first intention in the
treating of a penetrating Puncture on the Thorax, he replied, He had never seen
such a thing in his life. Being farther questioned, if he knew where the said
part, viz. the Thorax, was situate in a Humane Body, he as ignorantly pointed
to the Hypogastrick Region of the Abdomen, and might (according to his
Judgment) as well have shown the Palm of his Hand: yet this Person, as I am
credibly informed, quickly after obtained his desire, and got off to Sea.

The small converse I have had with these men, and the inspection I have made
into their Business, has afforded me many opportunities of beholding as
indifferent Practice as might be expected from a tampering Old Woman.

A certain noted Sea Practitioner had some time since a Patient here on Shore,
who was afflicted with a malign Paronichia on his Finger, which he treated so
long with Suppuratives that the Ligaments were corrupt, and the Bone carious;
at length there happening a spontaneous discharge of Pus, the sinuosity was
dilated, and the Bone denudated for ex^oliation. Now to recover his former
negligence, in suffering the malignity to lie so long concealed, he as
prejudicially dressed the Patient with Basilicon and Oil of Hypericon, laid
immediately on the Bone, whereby the Putrefaction and Caries increased, a large
Fungus thrust out, and after all there was a necessity for an Amputation, which
was speedily performed.

I could recite many other instances where the Success has been much the same,
with the foregoing, but whosoever will take the pains to look over the
Observations of Mr. Richard Wiseman, will, I doubt not, be confirmed in my
Opinion, with reference to the common Sea Professor, and his Brother the
Barber-Chyrurgion.

There is another sort of the last mentioned presuming Undertakers, by whose
Abuses the Chyrurgick Profession has suffered a diminution of her quondam
Credit and Repute: He is one who not daring to run the hazard of the Seas for
his Experience, and finding that the Trimming Trade does not answer
expectation, enters himself as a Cubb under an Hospital Professor, or thrusts
himself into the acquaintance of a Chyrurgeon's Servant, who in his minority is
perhaps induced, by the gratuity of a Present, to suffer this Intruder to take
a Prospect of his Master's Practice, and to give him an opportunity of
phlebotomizing Poor People.

This is too commonly the Foundation of a Barber's Knowledge, who after some
few hazardous trials courageously turns Adventurer, and punctures all who come
unto him.

I believe it will not be altogether foreign to our present task, if I spend
some little time in making a discovery of their pernicious Practice in their
pretense to that part of Chyrurgery which we term Phlebotomy or Venaesection,
so mightily now-adays in request, that there is rarely an indisposition which
seems not in the Peoples opinion to indicate a necessity of emptying the
Storehouse of the Vital Spirits, by the drawing forth of Blood.

This frequent Custom were the less to be condemned, did not the Patient so
rashly trust the performance hereof to the management of a Barber, who is
generally unknowing in the many times prejudicial consequences attending this
Operation.

It will be impossible (says the famous Dr. Willis) to prescribe general Rules
according to the particular cases of every individual person, whereby the
quantity in letting of Blood may be exactly proportioned according to the
Disease or the strength of the Patient; but let this be left to the Judgment of
the prudent Physician, let his Commands be ever exactly observed; and let not,
as it every where is, such leave be given to Quacks, Empiricks, and Barbers, to
play with Humane Life, who every where rashly and wickedly use Phlebotomy; and
if the Blood spring more freely, and appear discolored, therefore bragging of
the Vessel's being well pierced, they say it must be let out more plentifully,
because it appears bad, when oftentimes on the contrary it ought to be spared.

I would not be thought so much affected with the Chymist's Principles, as
absolutely to condemn Phlebotomy, for such a Remedy as will prove at all times
of worse consequence than the Disease; neither can I cordially promote the too
frequently unnecessary administration thereof; and therefore, as I am well
satisfied that it is beyond dispute preservative in many affects, after other
Preparatives, as in an Apoplexy, Lethargy, Carus, Megrim, Mania, on the
occasion of Inflammations, as in the several species of an Angina or Quinsey,
Peripneumony, Pleurisy, with other Feverish Ebullitions of the Blood; so I
would not advise such as are about to undergo its extraction to conside in the
mean Judgment of a Barber; but rather let them take Counsel of the worthy and
able Physician, and if he approve thereof, let them rely on the performance of
an expert Chyrurgeon; for did not the ill success attending them in their
puncturing of Tendons, and Arteries for Veins, with other almost as
prejudicial, their intempestive and superfluous Venaesections: Did not this, I
say, give us a demonstration of their Ignorance, yet notwithstanding there may
be those among them, who know indifferently to penetrate those azure meandrous
Channels of the Microcosm, yet are they little knowing the damage or
disadvantages ensuing thereon. This was the ill fortune of a young Gentlewoman
at St. J --, who being already enclining to a Chachexy, at the instant of
laboring under a periodical Evacuation of the Menses, was seized (as is usual
to some at those times) with a great Pain in her Head, Back, and Hypochondria.
Her impatience till the Uterine Ferment should have secreted those monthly
Superfluities, put her upon asking Advice of a Physician, who order*d
forthwith, that she should be blooded in the Foot; and for this purpose there
was sent for a noted Barber near at hand, who not daring to venture on the
Saphena, or any of its Branches, notwithstanding she had informed him on what
account it was so ordered: He confidently told her, it would be equally
beneficial if she were blooded in the Arm; and thereupon overperswading the
unhappy Maiden, he drew from her to the quantity of 12 ounces of Blood, but
with so mischievous a consequence, that hereupon there followed a total
suppression of the Flux, and the noxious Particles which were them critically
to have been discharged by the Womb, regurgitating into the mass of Blood,
brought on several hysteric Paroxysms, with Syncope's and continued faintings;
from which (being almost wearied of her Life) she was in three weeks time
rescued by the Prescriptions of the Physician she had before consulted.

Thus you see the Practice of such a one, who right or wrong, rather than
hazard the loss of his Fee, will perpetrate the greatest Wickedness, and seldom
fail of bringing those who are concerned with him into jeopardy of their Lives.

I remember, some years since, I breathed a Vein for a poor Woman just then
come from a Barber in S --, who had been attempting it in the following manner.

The Woman was very corpulent, her Limbs of the largest size, and withal so
very fat, that her Veins were neither visible, nor indeed (by what I perceived)
at all perceptible to the Touch in her right Arm, where he had been trying; and
telling her it was never customary to bleed in the left, he was the more eager
to make a trial of his Skill; whereupon once more laying his Fingers on her
Arm, and finding no other part that was so tense, and perhaps to his
apprehension turgid, as the Tendon of the Biceps, after some little pause, gave
his opinion, That this was certainly the Vein, but it lay so very deep, as made
him fearful he should not pierce it. The Woman being herewith dissatisfied, was
about to leave him; and he, unwilling that another should go away with the
Prize, overperswades her, with some difficulty, to admit a trial of his
Abilities: Upon this he boldly plunges in his Weapon, and had not a miraculous
Providence intervened, had undoubtedly made such a breach in the Tendon of the
said Muscle, as had been most certainly past his Skill (not improbably that of
any other) to have repaired, without hazarding the loss of her Limb, if not her
Life.

Surely the most ignorant person could not have been guilty of greater
Simplicity, with respect to the Office of a Chyrurgeon, than this arrogant
Intruder on the foresaid Duty, who with the rest of his Brethren Quacks,
Empiricks, etc. ought no farther to be trusted with a Lancet, than a Lunatic
with any Weapon whereby he may either mischief himself or others.

I do imagine, that this Woman's fortunate deliverance was effected by her own
fearfulness, she (not unlikely) withdrawing, or some how altering the position
of her Arm, in the time of his incision, whereby the foresaid Tendon slipping
from him, most happily missed the Point of his Piercer.

Indeed, suchlike commissions, or the sufferance of so odious and abominable
actions, must not altogether be imputed to the free choice or delight of the
People, who are daily injured thereby, because not knowing the danger of a
wounded Tendon, neither what a Tendon is, or the difference between an Artery
and a Vein, they are easily induced to make use of the next Barber they come
to, and are content so long as he can any ways fetch the Blood out of their
Bodies, that he also ease them of the weight of their Purses. But I think we
have just reason severely to reprehend and censure the Presumption of such men
as are so wonderful ambitious to be reputed for Chyrurgeons, when they neither
are so, nor ought to practice in that worthy Art; and who, notwithstanding they
know themselves to be Intruders, that the best of them is incapacitated to
perform the part of an Artist, will nevertheless dare to intermeddle for the
hope of Gain, making their Shops so many Slaughter-houses, and detestably
exposing Humane Blood on their Windows and Benches, to invite the unwary
Passenger to partake of their bloody Banquets.

It is not often known, that the loss of Blood is not advised in almost every
Distemper of the Body by these Men, out of the sordid desire of Gain per fas
nefasque.

This truly, with his undertaking to make an Issue, are the chief and main
points of Surgery that this pretending Barber could ever arrive at; not but
that there are some of them too forward to encounter with more difficult cases.

Having however shown you his dexterity in Venaesection, or opening a Vein, I
will here take the opportunity of diverting you with a short view of his
Performance in cutting of an Issue, which is likewise a Practice so frequently
nowadays in use, that rarely Man, Woman, or Child, nay, Infants themselves, but
what (as the before mentioned Doctor says) must have their Skins pricked full
of Islet-holes: and did not the advantageous event attending this Operation
sufficiently countenance the continuance thereof, we might have grounds to
censure what is amongst all at present in so great request.

I would be understood, that a Fontanel or Issue made upon good advice, by the
hand of a knowing Artist, is a very preservative, and oftentimes curative,
Remedy in a multitude of Infirmities that are wont to infest us; otherwise I
have and do daily find, that they are most commonly painful, perverse, and
attended with many Inconveniences as well as Prejudice to the Health. Such
generally are those which are attempted by a Barber, who not knowing how or in
what part they are most commodiously instituted, thinks it sufficient that he
can make a Solution of Continuity, or a hole in the Skin which will hold a Pea,
not heeding the appropinquating Result, which is very commonly the sending for
a Surgeon, to afford the Patient a little ease in the extremity of his pain,
arising from the inartificial making this little Ulcer upon the body of some
Muscular part, where it would have been continued with the most intolerable
vexation, and no small danger to the welfare of the Limb.

Thus I have known some Pounds deservedly bestowed on an eminent Chyrurgeon,
for his trouble in resisting the severe Accidents of an Issue, which has been
a product of the Proceedings of this bold Undertaker.

Both Reason and Experience dictate, that if an Issue be not made as near as it
is possible in the Interstice of the Muscles, or the space between two fleshy
parts, it is generally kept open with so great trouble and perplexity to the
Patient, that the inconsiderable benefit of its discharge is in no measure
equivalent to the great Mischief and Misery that accrews therefrom.

Now the People, as I hinted before, not knowing this distinction between Art
and its Opposite, or the legal Chyrurgeon and the Person we are speaking of,
are as ready to comply with the one as 'tother, to be blooded, or to have an
Issue made, not minding the sometimes-fatal Prejudice by the hazard of the
former, and as little imagining that there is any peculiar distinct part of the
Body, whereof these men are ignorant as themselves, and wherein only the
Operation is to be performed.

The ridiculous Practice of this nature, which I have seen such as have assumed
the Title of Chyrurgeons guilty of, would make one really stand amazed at their
profound Ignorance, and admire by what means they keep up their Repute and
Credit with such as are more stupid than themselves, and will not take warning
by the Fate of others, till a Self-tryal, conjoined with a too late Experience
and Repentance, make them sensible of their Error.

It is truly a difficult matter to find one Issue in One and twenty in a
convenient or proper place, or that can be long continued without manifest
detriment to the Safety of such a person as has employed therein a Barber, or
a Petticoat Practitioner. Some I have seen come from them with an Issue made on
the body of the Bicep's Muscle in the Arm; others on the Brachialis Externus;
some on the outside of the Deltoides; and one that I was advised about, with
the most intolerable pain threatening a Gangreen, made not a Finger's breadth
from the Tendon of the Biceps, in the bent of the Cubit. In the Thigh I have
found them directly on the musculous part of the Vastus Internus, others on the
same in the Rectus. In the Leg they have been made on the middle of the
Gastroecnemius, where every extension thereof, besides other Accidents, was
subject to throw out the Pea.

There is, I am certain, no occasion to enlarge farther hereon, since the Truth
is so obvious to every judicious person, that I dare assure my self there are
not many of the same Profession, who have not made suchlike Remarks in the
Variety of their Chyrurgick Occurrences; so that in these two Particulars, and
indeed in the general practice of Chyrurgery, we have abundant cause to account
this Person an unallowable Undertaker, considering that some of the most noted
amongst them have all-along, and do still discover to us as much ignorance as
is taken notice of in any other the most insufferable Intruder.

What gross and most ridiculous Actions do we find committed in the Examples of
such bold Encroachers on our Art, which are delivered to us by a multitude of
worthy Authors, particularly in the Observations of Mr. Wiseman, who has in
several places given us very necessary hints of the extreme injury the People
receive from the toleration of Barbers in the Practice of Chyrurgery.

I shall here transcribe one more remarkable than some others, from his
Observations upon Wounds of the Head, where he tells us, that

A young fellow, who was Servant to a Horse-courser, was thrown off his Horse
against some of the Bars in Smithfield, whereby the Calvaria or hairy Scalp
was torn up from the Coronal Suture to the Temporal Muscle on the left side;
the Skull was bared about two or three inches in breadth: He was led to the
next Barber, who cut the piece off, and hanged it up in his Shop. The day after
the Patient was brought to me; I caused the Hair to be shaved off from about
the Wound, and dressed the Bone and Lips with Linimentum Arcei warm, and
embrocated the parts about cum Ol. Rosarum and Chamomeli, and applied
Emplastrum Ebolo over the Wound, with Compres and Bandage rolling up his Head.
He had been let Blood the the day before, without consideration of the great
quantity he had lost from his Wound: I continued the former way of dressing,
etc. Thus (says he) it was cured as Wounds with loss of substance, a
troublesome and vexatious work to the Patient and Chyrurgeon, which might at
first have been cured by Agglutination, with a less Cicatrix, and thereby he
might have enjoyed the natural tegument of his Hair, whereas that part remained
bald and unseemly. Were it absolutely requisite for a fuller satisfaction, I
could from my own Remarks on these men's Practice, acquaint you with diverse
cases tending to evince the weakness of their Judgments. It Is but a very little
while from the writing hereof, that one of them happening to puncture a Tendon
in the Foot of a Maidservant, would have solved the business by upbraiding the
Artist, who was afterward employed, for that he, by his improper applications,
had hastened those dangerous and important Symptoms.

I remember Mr. Young of Plymouth gives us an account of a business of the like
nature, though more troublesome, occasioned from such a person's puncturing of
the Bicep's Tendon in the Arm of a Woman, an Inhabitant thereabouts. This
fellow (having no better Subterfuge) went about to justify his Proceeding,
strenuously affirming and assuring the Patient, that these Accidents were no
other than usual Symptoms frequently attending a disordered Body, abounding
with evil Humors.

If the Reader think it worth his while to peruse the said Author's Treatise of
Ol. Terebinth. he may be farther informed with how great trouble, the
pertinacious Symptoms of this Puncture were overcome, and at length an
indifferent use of the Arm restored.

Surely if these Events were no more than usual Consequences of Venaesection,
(as the Pretender intimates) I am apt to think we should not find such great
numbers of People thus willing to be blooded on every slight occasion.

I may truly say, it is the much to be lamented sufferance or toleration of
such Knaveries has been one great cause that we meet with so many obstinate
and oftentimes incurable Distempers. Indeed, the first Surgeon sought for
amongst the meaner sort of People, when an Accident befalls them, is commonly no
other than a Barber, who when he has shown his Skill by the most contrary
administrations, and marred instead of mended the business, they are then at
liberty to refer themselves to the true practical Chyrurgeon, whose demands of
a reasonable Gratuity for his officious care and diligence in performing the
Cure, is not seldom requited with the opprobrious Language of Unconscionable;
because, forsooth, that such a Barber (who to gain Experience at the cost of
their Lives, will run a mile or two to purchase Porter's Hire) would have
dressed them so long for little or nothing.

What great pity is it, that the Sons of Art should be vilified and disesteem'd
for their not complying with the base and sordid Principles of such men, who
have already so far disgraced and undervalued this most noble Art, that in time
it may (not unlikely) be forced to stand in competition with the meanest and
most contemptible mechanic Occupation.

Were not the Art it self as far above the reach of his Capacity, as it is from
being a legal appertenance to his Calling, we could expect no other, but that
it would be held the meanest and most despicable of all others, not only for
the multitude of such Pretenders thereunto, but also for that the succesless
Events of their Chyrurgick Undertakings, are by too many, undeservedly imputed
to some Knavery in the Art it self; they hence inferring, that the Profession,
at best, is no more than Pretense or Contrivance to delude the People, and
deceive them of their Money: And indeed, how can we expect less, than that the
best of Arts should partake of such a distressed Fate, when so great a liberty
is allowed the most Ignominious to practice without molestation.

When we consider the great and most perplexing difficulties that we are
oftentimes obliged to encounter, the many intricate and hazardous Undertakings
that we meet with, where the Lives of our Fellow Christians lie at stake; did
we seriously and impartially reflect on this, we should imagine it to be no
such easy Task for the most diligent in our Art to attain Perfection; much
less might we expect an Artificial Performance from any Ignorant Professor. Did
we farther consider all Circumstances attending some People's Complaints
against us, I as little question but we should find Chyrurgeons are not the men
some ignorant and malicious Spirits have endeavored to represent them. How
rash a Censure is that of their being unconcionable (one of the great
Objections) because they endeavor to set a small value on that most noble Art,
which can never be too highly esteemed.

Is it not Ingratitude, that the worthy Artist should be requited with
Revilings for his care in the performance of a Cure, the reasonably demanded
Recompense for which is thought a Crime, because it has already cost the
Patient so much Money under the hands of several false Practitioners? If such a
ta^t'ling Doctress has filch'd so much, such a Practicing Barber as much more,
and such a pretending Bonesetter as much as both, yet still the Patient is left
in a condition much worse than before; is it not unjust, that the Chyrurgeon,
who is last consulted, when he has diligently recovered and restored them to
their Health, should be so meanly looked on, or so evilly rewarded?

I remember where a late Upstart Pretender was entertained by a Gentlewoman, in
order to treat a Scrophulous Tumor on her Son's Knee, when for Two Years
attendance he demanded but Forty shillings, he was thereupon thought a very
honest and able Artist, till it was made apparent to the Patient's Friends,
that they had better have given him as many Pounds never to have undertaken it.

When the good Gentlewoman perceived no likelihood of her Son's recovery, she
thought fit to dismiss the Undertaker, who, as a Mark of his Judgment, left
behind him this Prognostic, That if they waited till Time or some casual
application should put the Swelling on Apostemating, there would then be no
question of a probability for cure.

In some months afterward the Wish of their presaging Chyrurgeon was
accomplished, but so fatally to the Patient, that soon after the discharge of
an indigested wheyish matter, and sometimes a slimy viscous Pus, there ensued
an inveterate Synovia, accompanied with a most foetid Stench, proceeding from
the parts affected, and undoubtedly arguing a Cariosity; the Ligaments were
corrupt, and the Joint so loose, that the Apophyses or Extremities of the Bones
at length showed themselves in the Absces, as perfectly separated as in a
dislocation.

This Gentleman was truly the most miserable Spectacle under suchlike
Circumstances that I have seen, and so far from hopes or a possibility of cure,
(without Amputation, which he would not admit) that when he had languish'd many
months, he painfully resigned his Breath.

I was the rather guilty of this prolixity, since the Example seems to afford
us as pregnant a demonstration as we need desire, of the Abuses committed by
unskilful People in their Chyrurgick Administrations: for, first of all, when
the Patient had got an Accident of a contus'd Wound, he was committed to the
care of one who went by the name of a Barber-Surgeon, where when he had
suffered considerably through Ignorance, to rectify the Mistake, he referred
himself to a most incomparable Doctress, who was Mistress of a famous Pultiss,
to work Miracles: Under her hands the Tumor was rendered schirrous, and the
Joint immovable. When there was an unlikelihood of recovery perceived here,
being still misguided and flattered by fair Promises, he unhappily submitted
himself to the management of another Pretender, and finally died under the too
late care of an eminent and approved Chyrurgeon, whose Advice, or that of any
judicious Practitioner, if he had first been governed by, I think it is not to
be imagined that so slight a Contusion, in the worst habit of Body, should ever
have arrived to so incurable a Malady.

Whilst I was writing these Observations, I was diverted for some little time,
being called upon to let one Blood, who took occasion in Discourse to tell me,
That he had never been blooded more than once before, and that was by reason of
a Wound he had received into his Body, which, he said, had like to have cost
him his Life; hereupon his Mother, being by, immediately slipped back his Shirt,
and showed it me: I asked him who had been his Surgeon; he replied, One Mr. --,
a very able man in C -- street: I told him, 'twas like the Workmanship of such
an Intruder on our Art; Truly, answered the good Woman, we have great cause to
respect him, since he saved my Son's Life; for he told us when we came to him
first, that the Wound was but an Hairs breadth from his Heart; and that had it
been a little larger, his Bowels would have fallen out: yet notwithstanding
this imminent danger, her Son had been recovered in about three weeks time.

Thus the Case had been represented, the most notoriously false that could be,
and therefore to solve the Doubts of the surmising Reader, I shall impart the
Truth in all its Circumstances, that we may see how easily the People are
imposed on, and take all for granted that is put upon them by deceitful Men.

The Wound was a Puncture, occasioned by a Fall against an Iron Spike,
superficially entering the Cutis and Carnous Membrane, and stopping, without
hurt to the Sternon, a hand's breadth or more above the Ensiform Cartilage.
This insignificant business, which would (not unlikely) have admitted of a Cure
by the first intention, and perfectly healed in two or three days time by the
application of Agglutinatives, was tented so long, and afterward ignorantly
dressed up with some slabby Sarcotick Unguent, till an Hypersarcosis thrust
forth as large as a Small Nut, which the Operator not knowing what to do with,
or what it was, however thought it necessary to alter his Medicine, and by
chance, most probably dressing it with some powerful Epulotick, at length
produced a Cicatrix thereon, leaving the same deformed, as if there had been a
Ganglion or Wenny Substance.

Could any man have played the Knave and Ignorant in a greater measure than this
Pseudo-Chyrurgus? First, his keeping open a not penetrating Puncture; secondly,
his suffering a Fungus to thrust forth; and thirdly, his not correcting the
same, but cicatrising on the Excrescence, does as evidently declare the
weakness of his Judgment as his unbecoming Arrogance; the former, in so
irrationally treating an inconsiderable Puncture; and the latter, for his
ascribing so much of Art and Industry, where there was nothing more visible
than the greatest want of Honesty and Discretion.

I cannot choose but reflect moreover on the Patient's Weakness, who could so
easily believe that a Protuberance on the Breast Bone, was occasioned from some
of his Bowels pressing forwards to get out.

We have really (considering the over-credulity of the People in Chyrurgick
matters) great cause to bewail the neglect of the Civil Magistrate and all
other Powers therein concerned, who are so little careful to suppress
Pretenders, and to take notice after what manner Men are qualified for the
public profession of the Art of Surgery. I am satisfied that the enterprizing
such a Task as this would be extremely commodious, and the Reasons for such an
Undertaking are, I think, as extraordinary weighty, if it were but on
consideration of those evil and dangerous consequences continually resulting
from the toleration of illegal Practitioners; a fatal Instance whereof you may
find from the subsequent account.

A Youth aged about Fifteen years, laboring of a malignant Fever, when by a
Metastasis or critical translation, the peccant matter was thrown forth of the
bloody mass it produced an Erysipelas, spreading it self on the right Arm, from
the Cubitus or Elbow to the top of the Os Humeri, upon which the Patient began
his complaint of a violent and intense heat affecting his whole Arm; in order
to the removal whereof, it was thought necessary by his Friends to send for a
Barber-Surgeon of their acquaintance, who coming to take a view of the case,
told the young man, that he had got a St. Anthony's Fire, but he would send him
something that should kill it before the next morning. Whereupon, without
making any manner of Revulsion, or otherways preparing of his Body, he
immediately orders an expressed Juice (supposed to be that of House-leek) in
which the Patient was to dip a folded Linen Cloth, and bind the same upon his
Arm. After some few repetitions of this Remedy, the heat was indeed abated, and
the Inflammation (before highly red) gradually inclined toward a livid
complexion. But now the Youth's Complaint was, of an extraordinary Stupor or
Numbness possessing the whole Arm, as if somewhat had been strictly tied about
the same. He was moreover hence disturbed with a Subsultus Tendinum, or light
Convulsive twitches, now and then infesting, and plainly arguing the danger
which ensued; upon which the Barber was again consulted, who thinking it time
to lay aside his first application, instead thereof, prescribes an Embrocation
of Unguentum de Althaea, by the use whereof the Patient receiving nothing of
advantage, but finding himself much worse, and wholly deprived the use of his
Arm, for farther satisfaction, a more eminent Practitioner was called in, who
found a confirmed Necrosis, or Mortification, which had already seized the
whole Arm, spreading it self forwards over the Clavicle and Pectoral Muscle,
and reaching backwards the whole compass of the Scapula. The sphacelated Member
was however immediately taken off, but to little purpose, the mortification
still increasing and opposing the most powerful Endeavors, soon obliged the
Patient to a surrender, and accept of a Quietus.

I hope this may Warn a practicing Barber, how he intermeddles in Chyrurgery
(quite out of his Element) to the loss of his Credit and Reputation, and
oftentimes to the irreparable danger of the Patient; as in the foregoing case.

We may, I think, imagine it one of the worst of Sins, thus shamefully to
trifle with the concerns of Humane Life; and doubtless, according to the
impartial method of Divine Justice, the Miscarriages of those poor Creatures,
who have thus miserably suffered through wilful Ignorance, calls aloud for
vengeance on the Heads of such as have in the manner here described, been
accessory thereto. What a burden must there lie upon his Conscience, who by an
unjust pretense of a Call to the Practice, will intermeddle in another's
business (notwithstanding the knowledge of his inability to perform what is
required) till by such his unwarrantable actions he has brought the Patient
into the most miserable state imaginable?

I think I shall not need (though I am farther furnished) to make other
Reflections, since those already mentioned may abundantly satisfy an
inquisitive Person, with how little Reason the Barber boasts himself a Surgeon,
and with how great detriment to the People his Chyrurgick Undertakings are
countenanced without interruption.

SECT. IV.
THAT the Chyrurgick Art has been yet farther misrepresented, and its legal
Professors by many People rendered ignominious, we are not a little obliged to
the sordid and base Practices of those men, who affect to be known by the
peculiar name of Bonesetters; as if because they particularly apply themselves
to that only part of Chyrurgery, they would be the more esteemed, or for such
their Pretenses thought more famous and successful than other Men.

The Fame of an Experienced Bonesetter sounds so great in the Ears of a Vulgar
Apprehension, that thinking the reduction of a fractur'd or broken Limb, or the
reposition of a Bone dislocated, to its place, more properly his Employment,
they wholly neglect consulting with the more eminent Chyrurgeon herein, as
believing it no appurtenance to his Profession.

Why the Legal Practitioner should be excluded from this so considerable a part
of his Duty, is somewhat strange, and much more so (in my opinion) that the
particular Undertakers hereof should be more than ordinarily confided in, or so
wonderfully sought unto.

If we make a scrutinous enquiry into the Practice of these men, I am satisfied
we shall find, that they have not been wanting by their unworthy proceedings to
bring as great Contempt upon us as any of the rest: And this, in a great
measure, has been brought to pass by their detestable as well as impious
Principles of constantly asserting for an undeniable Truth, That almost all
Accidents that happen where they are required to lend their assistance, are no
less than Fractures, or undoubted Dislocations.

If your Arm be so weakened, as that you have not the complete and perfect
motions, by a Contusion, overlifting or reaching, by which the Ligaments and
Tendons of the Muscles may be extended beyond their natural tone; if you seek
Redress herein of one who calls himself a Bonesetter, you are presently
informed with the sorrowful tidings, That your Limb is out of Joint. If by
slipping of your Foot aside, or treading the same awry, you are disabled for
the present to walk without some pain, you will (if you refer your self to him)
be sure to find a broken Leg, or an Ancle out of its proper place.

It is no difficult matter for any confident Undertaker, to persuade Men (of a
large capacity in other respects) that when they come under the restraint of a
Cubicular Confinement, by any outward Mischance, it is for no smaller matter
than a broken or disjoynted Member; out of which seeming considerable
Misfortune, when (by the most immethodical course taken) they have the good hap
to be recovered, the operating Bonesetter is then applauded for a Skilful
Person, and certainly very Honest, because he tried no Practice with them,
neither kept them so long in hand as is usual with Chyrurgeons.

This is too commonly a Practice made use of by these Bonesetters, to deceive
the Ignorant; and we have the less reason to admire that the Knavery is not
detected, when we consider how little difficult it is for him who can thus
stifle the Dictates of his Conscience, to delude the Unwary, and impose upon
their Judgments.

I have oftentimes found, when called to such as by the occasion of a Blow or
Fall have been incapacitated for the wonted motion of their Limbs, they have
been ready enough to imagine them either fractur'd or out of Joint. Nay, I have
farther met with some of so peevishly indiscreet a Temper, that when they had
litt on a Disaster proving troublesome, beyond their own imagination of the
Cause, would tax the Artist of want of Judgment, if unwilling to treat them
(though merely fictitious) as really broken or dislocated Members.

This was the case of a Victualler not far from B -- street, who by a fall down
Stairs had received a Contusion on his Ribs, forwards to the Breast Bone, for
which he was let Blood, and rationally treated by an expert Practitioner, with
hopes of speedy recovery. The night ensuing, from the abortive tattle of some
ignorant Old Woman, he was importuned, and at length prevailed on to send again
for his Chyrurgeon; who hastening, found him lamenting his Misfortune, being
redoubled from his Wive's Complaint, and pitifully condoling his case, in being
neglected, for so much as he was now fully assured, that his Ribbs were broken.

Hereupon, for his farther satisfaction, he was again strictly research'd, and
his indisposition more diligently inquired into; although nothing could give
conjecture or suspicion of a Fracture: yet however, the discontented Patient
would by no means rest satisfied till the Surgeon (contrary to his own honest
intentions) had favored him in his opinion, that there might be a broken Rib,
and by Compress and Bandage dressed him up again: for his farther Security
Venaesection was repeated, and a Traumatick decoction, with a Pectoral Linctus
were prescribed; but from the second day that he was bound up, he grew well of
his Conceit, and soon after went about his Affairs.

By this we may be acquainted where a Man is minded to act a Knavish Part, how
courteously his Abuses are entertained by ignorant People; and indeed, if such
a Practice as this be at all tolerable, it must be allowed in such a case,
where the Patient proves obstinate to the Advice of his Chyrurgeon, being
resolved to pay for his own Folly, in augmenting the value of an inconsiderable
Cure.

Indeed, it is abundant pity that a free and entire submission or condescension
in the Patient to his Chyrurgeon's Honesty, should be so evilly requited as it
is by too many of these only Titular Bonesetters, who are certainly some of the
vilest, for their treacherous Practices on the People, of all other the
spurious Pretenders to this worthy Art.

It Is not unlikely to be objected, That I am too severe in my Censure of these
men, who without question, in the diversity of Casualties happening in their
way, must certainly at some times meet with real Fractures and Dislocations,
and if then they were deficient in Judgment to manage one as well as the other,
doubtless they would be decry'd for the most notorious Cheats, and wholly
unable to keep up their Repute.

To this I reply, That as I doubt not but there are many Mischances of this
nature, which in reality sometimes present with other Business to their Care,
so I shall require no other (neither desire any better) Proof of their
Indiscretion or want of Knowledge artificially to administer Relief; than to
supervise their Proceedings with any Patient under such an Affliction.

Were I to give my Opinion, I must acknowledge, that I look upon that person's
case to be very dangerous, if not desperate, who in order to his Cure has
applied himself to such an one as we are at present discoursing of; and my
Reasons that he has been still enabled in some measure to preserve his Credit
with the World, are these: first of all, his slight and careless looking after
a simple Strain or Contusion, after a pull and hawl or two, affirming, That it
was a Fracture or Dislocation, and is now set to rights. The speedy Success, I
say, attending suchlike Operations, is one great cause that he has been so
wonderfully esteemed by the beguiled, who can well enough wink at some few
Failings now and then intervening. Furthermore, his Disappointments of this
nature, if they are not more numerous than his successful Enterprises, are
looked on by the Deluded to proceed from Causes extraordinary: or, where the
case has been so full of danger (though no more than a simple Fracture) that
the Patient, in all likelihood, must have miscarried under any other the most
able hand.

That the matter in debate will bear a Reflection of this nature, I shall now
endeavor to demonstrate; and I think we may prove from Experience, that upon
the reduction of a Bone, which has been displaced through a considerable
force, whereby a defluxion is excited, and the part (till such Accidents which
ensue, removed) rendered unapt for motion. I say, that notwithstanding the said
Bone has been safely reduced, it is a very unlikely thing that the late
suffering Member should so suddenly recover its wonted strength, or that it
ought to be permitted so speedily to exercise its usual functions. I am very
well assured, that if the business were positively so, as it is too often
represented, notwithstanding the Patient's Endeavor to exert the utmost of his
Strength, he would find to his sorrow, an inability, and that he was, for very
great cause, debarred the privilege of so hasty a Recovery.

I know it is a usual thing with many of these men, when they have persuaded
the Patient that his Limb was luxated, but is now certainly, by their diligence
and care, replac'd, to permit him presently to go about his business, without
binding, keeping up, or any ways to favor the Limb so lately out of Joint;
neither is he to regard the wearing of more than one Cerecloth (as they call
it) and the use of a Five-shilling Pot of their infallible Ointment, to finish
the work.

There are many persons have thought much to be rationally treated and kept
under a necessary confinement for suchlike Accidents, because they have
received information from their Neighbors, that far greater matters have been
made light of under the care of a skilful Bonesetter.

When I was visiting a poor man in S --, for whom I had reduced a fractur'd
Clavicle, it was thought a very dishonest Principle in me, because I forewarned
him of using his lame Arm, or putting it on its wonted actions in almost three
weeks time. I was much censured by his Sister, who stood by, and took upon her,
from her own knowledge, to assure me, that Bonesetters were not so strict, yet
much more successful: To confirm this, she told me a Story (I think it may be
so thought) of her Husband, who had been some time before cured by Mr. T -- in
a very little time; but what was most admirable, this man, on the same Limb,
had his Coller-bone broken in three places, his Shoulder put out of Joint, the
two Bones below the Cubit, viz. the Radius and Ulna, were also fractur'd, and
several of his Fingers wounderfully bruised by a violent force; yet
notwithstanding all this, by the application of a sovereign Pultiss, her
Husband was completely well in little more than a fortnights time, although he
could then, with much ease, raise an hundred weight a great height from the
Ground with his broken Arm.

Where is there such an execrable piece of Impudence to be paralleled, that
dare thus impiously contemn the divine Mandates, and profane even the
Authority of Heaven it self?

It is the injurious Practice of these knavish Undertakers makes many Persons
so unwilling to submit to a just and reasonable government of themselves under
suchlike Calamities; and it has been, I am certain, the ruin of some
Thousands, who have been so imposed on, still running from one to another,
without redress of their Grievances, till at length (having undergone the
greatest Misery) they have rendered themselves unpitied, and their Infirmities
irrecoverable.

I question not but you have heard the Fame of some Country Plow-jobbers, who
are so dextrous at the knack of Bone-setting, that where a poor man has been
brought to them ten or twenty miles, with his Knee or Ancle out of place, it
has been presently set for Two shillings or Half a crown, when dressing him up
with a famous Plaster of Paracelsus or Barbadoes-Tarr, he is presently ordered
to put forth his strength, and (if he can) to walk home, whereby, he is told,
he may disperse and scatter those naughty Humors which would fall thereon.

It Is such a like Rumor as this, that has deceived many, and some of them of
good repute, who being blinded in their Judgments, have forsaken the most
eminent Professors here in Town, and conveyed themselves twenty or thirty
miles, to some noted Bonesetter, where when their Self-experience prompts them
to a Repentance of their Folly in suffering themselves to be deluded, they have
returned in a much worse condition than they went: and I think it is the less
severe, that incredulous men learn by their own Misfortunes to beware for the
time to come. It is an ancient Saying, Exemplo alterius, etc. -- but truly, for
the most part, another's Miseries will not caution us, that we fall not on the
same, who are seldom so thoroughly satisfied, unless we taste of them our selves.

Is it not a very great Argument of a frail Capacity, for us to think, that a
Limb, by a very considerable force displaced, and oftentimes as great a one
used to restore it, whereby an unavoidable fluxion is stirred up, which
produces Pain, Tumor, and sometimes Inflammation, attended with an Ecchymosis,
or Sugillation of the Blood, oftentimes stagnating in the capillary Vessels and
Interstices of the Muscles, if nothing worse occur? How unlikely, I say, is it
that such a suffering Member as this should (till such Accidents are overcome)
be safely permitted the liberty of its accustomed Use?

I would not be thought hereby to lay down such a Rule as should admit of no
exception, for that I know where a light and trivial Accident has concurred to
the production of a Dislocation, in a Member predispos'd thereto, by a
relaxation of the Ligaments or otherways, the danger is not so great, and the
Patient (if minded to hazard a Reluxation) sooner capacitated for its use, upon
a restitution: but where the case happens otherwise, I am well satisfied, that
the reposition of such a Dislocation, and removing its sometimes severe
Attendants, is a work of much greater moment and concern, than we are tempted
by the Stories of unlearned men to imagine.

Hence we would infer this kind of Bonesetter to be a deceitful person, as
abusive as dangerous, and a very mischievous Intruder on the Profession of our
Art.

That he is such as represented in this present Section, will want no other
Proof than his constant Endeavors to possess People with a Belief of his
Abilities for the Practice; and when they get the least mischance (whereby for
the present they are in some measure disabled) his pretending by a feigned
extension, and other juggling contrivances, to reduce what before he (falsely)
affirmed to be a Dislocation.

Thus I have heard of one of them, who when he came to a Patient, and had
busied himself some time in an Extension of the Limb, at length cunningly
turning off his Head near the part supposed for reduction, would make such an
artificial noise by the grating of his Teeth, that the bystanders, and the
Patient himself, were forward enough almost to swear they heard the disjoynted
Bone (which was never out) knap into its place.

Let us take but a Survey of those Accidents which prove Luxations, and have
been managed by the most famous Bonesetter, I am certain we shall find him more
ignorant and dangerously robustick, more irrational, immethodical, unsafe, and
far more tedious than a Chyrurgeon's Servant of but two years experience.

How many stiff and curved Members, what numbers of useless emaciated Legs and
Arms proceeding from Dislocations, which have been affirmed (but were never)
set, may we find at this day in London, being Fruits of the Undertakings of
some presumptuous Bonesetter. And shall we still be so misguided in our
Opinion, as to slight the Labors of the faithful Artist, whilst we confide in
the Promise of one whom we account more worthy, only because he takes upon him
no other business than the reducing of broken or disjoynted Members.

Having thus far hinted to you his Dealings, with reference to what he calls a
Dislocation, I shall trouble you with a short account of his Behavior where he
meets with a Fractur'd Limb, at least where he takes upon him, right or wrong,
so to affirm it; and these two, viz. a division or disjunction in the
continuity of a Bone, called a Fracture, and a distortion of the Head thereof
from its Acetabulum, named commonly a Bone out of joint, are the principal or
sole parts of his Employment.

His treating the former of these, is but little different, or varies not much
from the method which he takes in looking after the other. It Is true, for the
most part he reap more Profit and Repute from the one, inasmuch as a broken
Limb is generally looked on of greater moment, and the cure thereof more
valuable than that of a Dislocation: so that where a Contusion on the Muscles,
or a sudden wrench of their Tendons, passes under the denomination of a
Fracture, and the Patient in a short time (as well he may) recover, you must
conceive his Skill is then more highly extolled, and his Pay advanced.

But after all, if to discover the real Truth, we may be so inquisitive as to
trace him where he has been concerned indeed, either with a broken or
displaced Member, and make our observations on the course of his Proceedings,
we shall find him, I doubt not, so far short of the Knowledge required in that
difficult part of our Art, that it will be the least of Crimes to account him
unworthy of his assumed Title, in comparison with the more able and experienced
Chyrurgeon.

His Anatomical Judgment, that absolutely necessary Basis for this
administration, is so very inconsiderable, that I have known some of them
justly reprehended for their ridiculous Talk, by an indifferently well read
Mechanic.

Comparing Man with other Animals, he presently concludes, that he also has
Bones in his Body; and therefore when the People get any hurt, there must
forsooth presently happen a Fracture or Dislocation in one or other of them,
which is nearest to the part complained on by the Patient: But if you raise an
Argument (although no Critic) you find him no man for Discourse, unless you
can bear the Burden of his Nonsense.

Ask him how differently Bones are conjoined, which of them by Articulation,
and which by Symphisis; the distinction between Diarthrosis and Synarthrosis;
the several ways of their connection under these two Heads; ask him which he
calls Enarthrosis, Arthrodia, and what Ginglymus; enquire by how many several
manners Bones are joined by Symphisis; what he means by Sutura, Harmonia,
Gomphosis; or what he understands by Synchondrosis, Synneurosis, Syssarcosis,
or Syntenosis; I say, query but these things of this wonderful Operator, and
(notwithstanding we must own them to be requisite appurtenances to the Study of
the Art, in which no one can be unskilled, if complete in the Practice of
Bone-setting) you shall gain as satisfactory Answers, as if to an Infant you
were discoursing in some unknown Language.

How can it be supposed now that any one who is ignorant or unknowing after
what manner, and by what means the several Bones of Humane Bodies are
conjoined, should be in a capacity the easiest way, the safest and most
commodious, or indeed by any way to repose them, when by a Misfortune they are
slipped from their proper places; is it not farther more improbable, that such a
person as perfectly knows not where the breach is made, whether any or not; if
any, whether transverse, oblique, etc. or how to resist the Accidents which
will ensue, and afterward kindly to assist Nature in the generation of a
Callus, or, in short, what a Callus means; is it not, I say, a Presumption to
imagine, that a desired Success should attend such an abuseful Intruder's
Undertakings?

We find it, I am sure, a very rare Case, to see either Leg, or Arm which have
been fractur'd, and the reduction thereof attempted by a pretending Bonesetter,
(if they have escaped the tyranny of a Gangreen or Sphacelus, occasioned
frequently from their immoderate bandage intercepting the Spirits, and
retarding the circulation) without some or other indubitable mark of their
Ignorance and Indiscretion, as a crooked Member from a common and simple
Fracture, an ill-favored if not painful Protuberance, which might often have
been prevented by Art, but will now, to their no small prejudice, show they had
a broken Limb all their life after.

This was the ill hap of a poor man, at that time of L -- W --, who in the
morning having fractur'd both Foeils of his Leg, was carried to a famous
Bonesetter at the other end of the Town, who ignorantly girt him up with half a
dozen pieces of a Hoopstick laid over a single Cloth, which had been spread
with a sort of Paste, next to the bare Leg, and fastened with many
circumvolutions of a narrow Filleting; afterward ordering the poor wretch to
be carried home a mile and half, where he was as negligently laid into his Bed,
without Pillow, Junks, Cradle, or other desence from the incumbent Bed clothes.

Having lain thus whilst the Evening, in extremity of Pain, his Friends out of
pity requested a speedy Visit from a neighboring Chyrurgeon, who, with my
self, coming to him, we found the Patient roaring after an hideous manner, and
taking a view of the fractur'd Limb, could plainly perceive, above and below
the Bandage, it was already vesicated, and tending to mortify from the Foot
upwards.

Having cut away, and otherways with much difficulty separated the Clothes,
which had been daubed over with some very Emplastick Composition, we found the
Splints, by a strict compression, had even buried themselves in the Flesh, and
with abundance of pain and trouble could not be drawn away without excoriating
the parts they lay upon.

When we had thus cleared our way, (not having an Elixivium in readiness) we
ordered some common Spirit of Wine to be set over the Fire, whilst we snipp'd
off the Vesications, impleet with a livid Serum, and laid down the Leg upon a
soft and easy Pillow, where it was fomented with a sufficient number of warm
Stuphes, and at length with a suitable Rowler dressed him up leaving the Limb in
as easy a position as we could contrive. We contented our selves for this time
with what had been done, not so much regarding the Fracture, till the more
important danger of a mortification was taken off, which was in a few days
afterward, with all its threatening Symptoms removed, when taking a greater
liberty in searching for the broken Bones, we perceived a part of the Tibia
almost ready to protrude it self, lying prominent a little above the Maleolus
Internus. But finding that every little motion was extremely painful, from the
uneven superfice of the fractur'd Bones molesting and irritating the Nervous
Fibers; and being terribly perplexed with the thoughts of a Re reduction, he
declared positively his dissent therefrom, begging for God's sake that we would
desist from troubling him, but lay down his Leg without Plaster or Bandage,
where it lay easy to him; for since the danger of its being mortified was
over, he was certain in himself that the former Undertaker had placed the Bones
right, and that in a little time they would grow together.

Hereupon (finding him so very wise) we left him to his own management, having
first given him to understand what he must trust to, if he persisted to believe
that his Bone was set: Thus we parted. Whether or no the Bonesetter was
afterward sent for, to be informed of his Work, I know not, but have lately
seen the Patient a mere emaciated Cripple, scarcely able to walk by the help of
Crutches.

I could give you an account of many more Examples of this Nature, where the
Practice has been of near affinity with this so lately mentioned, and the
practicing Pretender some famous Bonesetter.

Indeed, a man shall rarely at this time peaceably and quietly discharge his
Office without interruption; either we must be accounted unknowing in our
Applications, because the Patient finds not presently his wonted Ease; or
negligent, because we will not, neither can with safety open their Limbs every
day or two; or, last of all, dishonest, intending to make a Prize of them, by
keeping them so long in hand. All this befalls us from their consideration that
so many People so speedily recover under the care of Bonesetters: whereas I
have told you, every simple Contusion being by these men represented as a
Fracture or Dislocation, the Patient may as safely be permitted to follow his
business at a week or ten days end, as we can suffer one, who has in reality
received such a Mischance, in a month or six weeks time: and I think all such
may be thankful to GOD and their Surgeon, that they escape so, especially if
they consider how far worse it happens to some under suchlike circumstances,
when taken in hand by these unjust Practitioners in our Art, as in the
preceding History.

Amidst the multitude of such as have most unworthily assumed the Character of
Bonesetting, it were almost an inexcusable omission, should we forget to number
the deceased T --, but since it would be a petty kind of Impiety to trample on
the Ashes of the Dead, I shall forbear all Reflections of my own, yet cannot
pass by a remarkable Case given us by a late Author, where this person had been
concerned.

A Youth (says he) of about Twelve years of age was seized with a Pain in his
right Hip, it increasing with Tumefaction and great Lameness; the Parents
suspecting it might be out of joint, sent for T -- the Bonesetter, he declared
it luxated, and pretended to set it, and dressed it up his way: The Child
continuing lame, they sent for him again; he assured them that he had set it,
and that in time the Child would recover strength in it, and be well: But the
Child growing daily more pained, Chyrurgeons were consulted, and at last my
self; I saw the head of the Os Foemoris shot upwards, and a large Tumor
possessing the Hip and parts about, under which there seemed to be lodged
Matter; there was also a long white Swelling stretching down the forepart of
the Thigh, from the Groyn toward the Knee, within four Fingers breadth of it:
the Tumor seemed to be full of Matter, and to derive it self from the Hip, and
that the Luxation had been made by Fluxion, and increased by Extension. But
however it was, the Bone was not capable of reduction, nor could I promise my
self any Credit by my Endeavors there; yet I complied with his Parents,
resolving to serve them as well as I could, but desired that the Bonesetter
might be first fetched to see his Work, I not thinking it safe to meddle in the
Cure whilst he insisted, that the Bone was reduced: They sent often for him,
but he did not come, till I accidentally met him at a Person of Honor's
Lodgings, and by Threatenings brought him with me to the Child, where he
acknowledged his Fault, and declared the Bone incapable of reduction; yet this
fellow went directly back to that Person of Honor, and upon demand where he
had been, declared, That he had been with me to set my Patient's Hip, and that
he had reduced it. This fellow's scurvy using me almost discouraged me in the
Undertaking, but after making a Presentation of it, I attempted the Cure, etc.
By this account you may perceive the base shifts and evasions these men are put
upon oftentimes to raise their Credit.

I have seen great numbers of People, where I have been conversant, in reducing
of Fractures and Dislocations, who when an opportunity has presented, would
very commonly affirm, That after a fortnights time, when their Limbs as (they
were told) were broken, and had been set together by the said T --, they were
as fit for the most weighty and stirring business as before in their whole
lifetime: A matter as unlikely as impossible; for if we consider that the
division of these solid parts is not conjoined by Agglutination, or immediate
unition, as in Wounds upon a fleshy part, but by interposition of the
nutritious Particles, falling off from the little mouths of the ruptur'd
Vessels, and other the Pores in the divided medullary parts of the Bone it
self, which at the space of so short a time will be no more confirmed than,
like a Jelly or soft Wax, receiving any accidental impression, and for want of
care, by a disorderly or irregular position, is the occasion of many crooked
and deformed Members. This weighty Consideration does infallibly and
experimentally indicate, that where so early a liberty is given to move their
Limbs, and no prejudice ensues from such a liberty, there was no Fracture or
Solution of Continuity in the Bone.

I have strictly examined and searched some few, who have been deluded by these
Pretenses, but could never find (nor was it likely that I should) any bearing
out of a fractur'd Bone, or other perceptible demonstration of a Callus, which
must of necessity intervene, and is the most certain and permanent indication
thereof.

I hope, by what has been said, there are sufficient Arguments given of the
Ignorance of a Bonesetter: Indeed, the Name is a mere Bubble, or empty Title,
wherewith unwary and imprudent People are ensnared, and oftentimes too dearly
pay for their Experience.

One would imagine, if this worthy Art were so easily attained as might be
conjectured from the Presumption of these men, there would be little occasion
for us to put our selves to the charge of purchasing our Experience, under some
eminent Practitioner, by a sedulous Study, and a tedious Service therein: nay,
it might be not unreasonably thought, that we are fond of a Confinement, when
we consider, that if a man have but confidence sufficient to avouch for
himself, whether or no he be otherwise qualified, if he please hereupon, to
take the Profession of a Surgeon upon him, he shall meet with the same welcome,
and by many who have not tried his Abilities be accounted as worthy as the best
of us all. For confirmation hereof I will deliver to you on my own knowledge a
remarkable instance.

A Weaver in B -- street coming home in the Evening much in drink, there arose
a difference between him and his Wife, which grew to such a height, that he
could bethink himself of no other Revenge, at least no better method, to avoid
the Storm which was coming on him, than by hastening back again to his company,
where he hoped to be at quiet. Hereupon going to the Door (which the good Woman
had beforehand locked, resolving to keep him in) and finding himself unable to
force his passage there, he fearlesly makes to the Window, and (although a
Story high) leaps out thereat, but was received by the Ground with so unkind
and rugged an embrace, as made him forcibly content to be carried up again a
farther way than he came down, where by the help of his Neighbors, in great
misery he was laid upon his Bed.

Being immediately called in to officiate for my Master; upon enquiry, I found,
that by his Fall he had fractur'd the Fibula or minor Focil of his Leg; there
was already a large Tumor and Extravasation; the Fracture was made obliquely,
and the lower end of the Bone protuberating a little above the Maleolus
Externus; however, with a little assistance I reduced it, and with a small
Compress and Defensative dressed him up, as usually in such cases, laying him
in as easy a position as I could, and ordering his Wife in looking after him
to keep him still and quiet.

Thus I left him for that time, and returned the next morning, when I found my
Patient very sensible of his condition, and heartily sorry for his
Indiscretion; there were all things safe, and not the least Symptom attending
more than commonly intervenes. He promised to be ruled, upon which I told him I
did not question but when we came to open it, we should find all in good
forwardness; and accordingly, on our first taking off the Dressings, the Leg
was straight, without inequality or bearing out of the fractur'd Bone. He
rested well from the first night, and so continued.

At the end of One and twenty days I took him out of Bed, and at the expiration
of a month he set his Foot to the ground, from that time walking by the help of
a Crutch, till a short time after that it was laid aside. And now the Tumor
which fell upon his lame Leg, upon his first uprising seemed wholly to be
discussed, whereupon taking the liberty to walk abroad, and falling to his
wonted course of drinking Brandy and strong Beer, he contracted so ill an habit
of Body, that the Humors now abounding, for want of his accustomed labor,
occasioned a new defluxion on the broken Leg, with a small inflammation, and a
very troublesome Pruritus, which was certainly caused from his having been for
some time kept up to a spare and moderate Diet, and now coming of a sudden to
make use of a more strong and plentiful nourishment; upon this he made his
Complaint to us; I told him the reason of it, and to prevent farther mischief,
advised him to bleed and purge: he desired time to consider farther of it, and
promised to return in two or three days; but however it happened, we heard no
more of him till about five or six weeks afterward, when going by his House, I
took the opportunity of calling on him, and was presently welcomed by his Wife
with the opprobrious Language of a dishonest and unskilful person; she told me,
that I had ruined her Husband, and that his Leg was very near to have been cut
off since I had seen him; that it was broken out all over; and farther, that
she had taken the Advice of three several Chyrurgeons, one of them being the
King's general Surgeon, who told her, That these severe Symptoms were brought
upon him by his broken Leg, which had never been well set.

I was very attentive to the Woman's Discourse, and did at first imagine it to
be a Fiction or plausible Story, invented with a design to keep off the Demand
of Satisfaction for his Cure, till being better informed of the business by
others, I began to admire extremely, that any Artist (especially the King's
Surgeon) should be so void of Knowledge, as well as Honesty, to impute this
defluxion of sharp Humor upon the Leg to an ill reduction of the Fracture,
which had been set and united by a confirmed Callus, above a month before. I
thought it very strange, that three such Practitioners as they were represented
should be so far short of the Truth, and upon that account endeavored all I
could to inform my self who they were; the first of these, I came soon after to
understand, was a Barber in the Neighborhood, whose Frame of Blood-Porringers,
and his Cloth sewed round with Teeth, were all that rendered him so eminent a
Professor: the second who had been consulted was a practicing Ap -- in S -- F
--; this Person had forewarned the Patient, that he should not bleed, because
the Weather was not warm enough; and for the same cause Purgation was
interdicted. The last that had been advised with, I found to be an illegal,
skulking, Sea Practitioner, who had wheedled himself into their good opinion,
and by assuming the Epithet of a Regius-Professor, was looked upon as an
Oracle, and his Promises already little short of Performance. They thought they
could do no less than give this sworded Gentleman his Fee in hand for his
Visit; after which the Doctor took an occasion to withdraw and show them his
backside, for they could never after hear what became of him.

These were the three famously qualified Operators, who had concurred in their
Opinions, That the Bone was not rightly set, and that if they had not been
consulted, the Leg must have been cut off.

I have been the larger in a rehearsal of all circumstances relating to this
case, that I might more clearly investigate the whole truth of the matter, and
give the plainer demonstration of the fraudulent Practices of such abuseful
Intruders on this noble Art.

I think the Case was here so evident, that nothing unless a Barber's Ignorance
could have made, upon an excoriation, the most irrational prediction of an
Amputation: what other Survenient might indeed have been expected, than that
from the Patient's acquired Chacochymy he should be infested with so
troublesome an Ulceration, which was no other than the effect of an acred or
sharp Serum in the Blood, more readily redounding on the weak Member than
another part.

Who, unless such an imprudent practicing Ap --, would have forbidden in this
case Phlebotomy, with the repetition of appropriate Catharticks? or, what
Novice other than an unexperienced Sea Practitioner would have advised the
application of Digestives, to increase the pain and fluxion, where when the
acidity of the Blood had been corrected, there had needed nothing more than an
anodyne Epulotick to have perfected this mighty cure?

We may hereby inform our selves how inconsiderable a distinction the
Commonalty make between a legal Artist and a spurious or false Pretender. They
imagine (as we may reasonably think) that there is no other difference between
a Barber's Pole, when his Window is beset with Porringers, and the Surgeon's
Arms, than in some few degrees of a larger purchased Knowledge and acquired
Experience; and therefore whilst the former calls himself a Barber-Surgeon, and
will practice underhand, it may be for little or nothing, they are content to
save themselves a present Penny, although it cost them a Pound hereafter; or to
let this Person try Experiments upon their Bodies, in order for the future
Employment of the Chyrurgeon. They can easily enough believe, for that the Ap
-- sells them out his Balsams, Unguents, and Emplasters, he must certainly be
acquainted with their true and proper Uses; and therefore, if he take upon him
the Practice, they scruple not his Fidelity, his Judgment, nor his Honesty.
But, above all, they seem the most willing to be imposed on by the Pretense of
a Sea Professor: if he be not altogether so arrogant as to take upon him the
Title of the King's Surgeon in general, yet his large Experience on the Seas,
his having been present in so many hundred Engagements, where he has taken off
men's Limbs by the dozen, seldom eating a morsel till he has whipped off a
score Members; where the Bullets were wont to rattle like Hail about his Ears,
some taking off his Wig, some piercing his Hat, and others (if you will believe
him) have almost touched his Heart, yet still, by his unbounded Knowledge in
the Art of Healing, he remains alive: he has sailed so many times into Asia,
so many to Arabia, and as many to the farthest parts of America; or, if he
please, to the outmost Borders of the Earth; has gone through so many several
Hardships, and met with such miraculous Deliverances, as would make you shake
and tremble at the recital: It Is this, I say, that renders him a man of great
repute, and you must certainly admire to hear him tell what he underwent to
purchase Experience in the Medicinal Art, or to render himself the more
completely qualified for the Chyrurgick Practice.

SECT. V.
AFTER all, as if this so worthy Profession had not suffered by these means a
sufficient diminution in its Repute, or its honorable Professors had not been
hereby enough degraded, we are not wanting of the utmost Endeavors of a
Petticoat Pretender, to farther our present Ignominy and Contempt.

Were I speaking to any one of a discerning Judgment, I would argue nothing
more against the Sufferance of a practicing old Gentlewoman, than the single
consideration of the divine Mystery of Healing, in the contemplative or
theorical part thereof, together with the great and intricate difficulty of its
Practice, being wholly above the comprehension of a Woman's Genius, and vastly
distant from the reach of a Feminine Capacity.

But since I expect to meet with opposition from some conceited pusilanimous
Spirits, I shall, for a more general satisfaction, take the same course I have
in the preceding Sections, and lay their too common Abuses open to the naked
Eye, that so all may see (unless here and there one will remain blind, and
think it a piece of Modesty to blush at the reproach of their Grandams Skill in
Surgery) with how great and scandalous Reflection on good Literature, I had
almost said, on the Sense and Reason of all Englishmen, the Magistracy suffer
such continual Delusions, practiced by ignorant Women, in the Heart of their
Metropolis, the City of London, where there are such prodigious numbers, who
take upon them to practice both in Physic and Chyrurgery, that scarce a
Street, Lane, Court, Alley, or other Building therein, which remains
unfurnished.

If you get a Fall, you are no sooner up again, but advised to send for the
Cerecloth of some infallible old Wife. If by accident you are wounded, and
cannot manage it your self, you are presently recommended to a skilful
Gentlewoman. Nay, if by ill Company you are drawn aside, and by an infected
Curtesan happen to be clapped, you shall not walk far before you meet with some
bawdy Doctress ready to entertain you, and administer to your Infirmities, be
they never so obscene. Lastly, let your Business be as it will, unless very
ghastly or ill-favored to look on, you need not question the Confidence of
some Female Enterpriser thereof. So that it is very rare if a Chyrurgeon be
now-adays consulted upon any business which comes not to him out of the wearied
or tired hands, or which has not been nearly spoiled by the workmanship of a
Woman.

If you are minded to take a view of her Closet or Surgery, you may find the
same set off with a multitude of consus'd Preparations, with as many Glasses,
Gallypots, Boxes, and Plasters: in the former she keeps Blackcherry, Bawm,
Carduus, Mint, and other Waters of her own distilling, which when mixed up with
a little Syrup of Gilliflowers, makes a Cordial to answer all Intentions. In
her Gallypots she keeps her Ointments and Balsams, the chief of which is that
of Lucatellus, and her Ointment of Marshmallows. In her Boxes are Pills, and
Spanish Flies to draw Blisters, and by the help of a Pepper-corn, to make an
Issue also. Her Plasters in common use are Diachylon, and Melilot, and upon
extraordinary occasions Paracelsus and Oxycroceum, for those that will go to
the price.

From the Furniture of her Closet we will conduct you to her Library, or the
Fountain of her Knowledge; and first of all, (as deserving the chiefest place)
we must not forget to mention (...), as well his Midwifry as his English
Physician, which Book alone is the chief part of her Treasury; the rest, such
as the Good Wife made Doctress, the Woman's Counselor, and the Plain Rules for
Health, with some other Receipt books, being more for the ornament of her Study
than for real use. I had almost forgot to tell you of those famous Baths and
Pultisses (for you must conceive she neither approves of Cataplasms nor
Fomentations) she is likewise Mistress of upon occasion.

Being thus accomplished, like an honest, grave, and discreet Matron, she sets
about her Work, which is, first of all, if she meets with a green Wound, let it
be where or in what part it will, to strew in her Bole Armeny, that the
Haemorrbage (if there be any) may be restrained. Now, if the 'foresaid flux
proceed from some divided Capillary, it may chance to take effect, if not, the
Patient must seek out for other help. Her next or second Intention is, to cram
the Wound full of Lucatellus Balsam, and to apply a Cloth with some of the same
daubed over it, and covered with a Woollen Clout, for you know it must be kept
warm: and to talk to her of Dossils, Pledgits, Compress, and Bandage, you are
told, they are the cramp words of Conjurers and Chyrurgeons, wherewith they
amuse the People, intending to make a Cure of every Trifle, whilst she, good
Woman, (meaning honestly) can do without.

This is the exact method of her Proceedings hitherto, being confirmed to me by
many (I may say) hundred Observations, where the Event has been frequently the
same, viz. the employing a Chyrurgeon to rectify the mistake, and finish after
a different manner the desired Cure. What other indeed can be expected from
such a treatment, where a Wound has been plastered up with the improper
application of Lucatellus's famed Balsam, so mightily cried up by the People,
for the principal Salve necessary in a Woman's Salvatory?

I will by the way take the liberty to inform you, that I see very little
reason to admire the vulgar Use of this Composition; neither did I ever find
any other effect from its external application, than a Slough induced, which
covers the bottom as well as lips of the Wound, whereby Digestion is retarded,
and by consequence a fluxion of Humor excited, begetting Pain, Tumor and
Inflammation on the Parts about. How then is it likely that Unition in a recent
Wound by Conglutination, otherwise termed the first Intention, should ever be
procured, where the sides of the Solution are kept distended by this clogging
Medicament; and there must at length be a necessity (protracting time) to heal
it, as a Wound or Ulcer with loss of Substance, when by Sutures and Bandage, to
retain them close, the same might have been attained in a third part of the
time, with far less trouble and much more content to the Female Patient, by
avoiding of a Scarr, which upon the Neck, Face, Breasts, or Arms of the fair
Sex looks very unseemly.

It may here be query'd by some, how it should come to pass, that so many and
(in their weak Opinion) such considerable Wounds, are often Cured by the alone
application of this Wonderful Balsam.

I reply hereto, That were it convenient my single Judgment should take place,
such an Effect is not so much to be imputed to a Virtue latent in the said
Medicine, as to the homogenious or true and genuine Crasis of the Blood, by
whose Balsamic quality I have heard of many large and seemingly dangerous
Wounds (where no part of exquisite Sense has been divided) which have been
healed without any topic or outward administration, more than a slight
covering bound about, to defend them from the Particles of the circumambient
Air. And of this nature (unless I mistake) are many of those which by some
fanciful men are supposed to be wrought by Sympathy.

I shall be wholly silent as to the good or bad effects of this Balsam, when
exhibited internally, since by speaking thereto I might seem to impose on the
Duty of a Physician; but I am well satisfied, that should we go about to debar
our Female Practiser of this her most admirable Salve, she must wholly desist
from farther intermeddling in Chyrurgick Practice, there being a great number
of them who have nothing more to support their ridiculous Pretenses than a
Gallypot or Box of Lucatellus's Balsam, and a Roll or two of Paracelsus
Plaster.

It should seem reasonable that I beg excuse, if in the present Section I lay
too great an imposition on the Patience of any judicious Person, more
particularly on that of my Brother the Chyrurgick Reader. Although it be
altogether unlikely to advantage him, who already knows the truth of what I
shall deliver, yet it seemed highly convenient for the benefit of many in this
incredulous Age we live, for illuminating their Understandings, and removing of
that Veil of Ignorance which has beguiled them, with a false prospect of our
just and honest Intentions.

I should have had the less concern upon me, had I perceived their Frauds to
have taken place, and passed undiscovered by no other than the inferior
Rabble-Proselites like themselves; but when I found that the Minds of a more
understanding People, such of far greater Worth, Reputation, Credit, and
sometimes Quality, were not exempt or freed from the same Mist of Ignorance,
this Consideration gave me Grounds for the most profound amazement, as well as
pity, and was indeed a great incitement to induce me to lay this Injunction
(not yet, that I know of, so fully performed by others) upon my self.

I shall not trouble the Reader with a rehearsal of many particulars; nor do I
see occasion, where the general Rule of Practice is altogether preposterous.

Thus, against that Maxim of Contraria contrariis, in a recent Contusion, where
a repellent Topic (as a Defensative) should take place, we find her tampering
with hot Cerecloths or Pultisses, whereby a ready way is made for the Influx,
and when the Tumor happens to be considerable, or the Extravasation large,
there often succeeds an incommodious Suppuration or Inflammation, at best, a
vexatious itching (the old Gentlewoman's sign of healing) heat and excoriation,
accompanied with a very troublesome sense on the part so grieved.

It is not without cause that I am ready to think this to be a great occasion
of our meeting with so many obstinate and perverse Humors attending an
inconsiderable Wound, Ulcer, or Contusion, whose Descent has been first
invited by the improper application of hot Pultisses, Unguents, or Emplasters;
so that we find that (which if then rationaly treated) would have been little
troublesome, now impossible to admit of healing, till the intemperies brought
upon the part be carefully removed.

You will scarcely believe that a simple Herpes, exasperated by a Woman's
improper application, should make such an inveterate improvement in its
erosion, as not to admit a check under a fortnight's time: and it may seem as
strange to you, that a bare solution of continuity on the superficial parts of
the Body, where, it is probable, there has been nothing more than the Cuticle
and Cutis divided by the efficient cause, or that a mere Excoriation by the
scratch of a Pin or Nail, should by improper Medicines (especially where there
is a salino-sulphureous Dyscrasy of the Blood predominant) occasion three or
four months trouble to overcome.

I was some years since desired to look upon a Woman, who from a trivial
Accident suffered at that time under the formidable Symptoms of a putrid
phagedenick Ulcer upon her Leg, so extremely corrosive, that in a little time
it had spread it self to the compass of a hands breadth, and when the Sordes or
Slough was thrown off, it exposed the fore part of the Tibia denudated and
carious.

I will not affirm, this arrived at first from a famous Doctress, her dressing
the said Leg with an Ointment of Tobacco and Marshmallows, enwrapping the same
about with a stiptick Plaster of Paracelsus; but I dare appeal to any
discriminating Artist, whether any thing much better could be expected from
such a treatment.

As I shall by no means seek to ingratiate my self into the favor of any anti
prejudiced Person, or such an one as may unreasonably bear an aversion to the
honorable Professors of our Art: so neither shall I require the admission of
his Faith to any thing I have said, farther than the prevalency of right Reason
will constrain, or beyond a confirmation of the Truth he may receive from those
remarkable Instances which continually emerge.

Let him take but a serious view of the weekly Presentations made to those two
sacred Sanctuaries for the Sick, I mean the Hospitals of St. Thomas and St.
Bartholomew, or supervise those great numbers which are daily offered to the
Undertakings of the more private Practitioners in our Art; and after a free
enquiry into their Distempers, with the former management thereof, he will, I
doubt not, receive information, that the greater number of their Maladies (some
of them by delay now grown incurable) had their foundation laid in, or took
their original from the hands of some confidently-pretending Baggage, or other
fair promising Female Undertaker.

Is it not a very usual thing for People to consult us about any troublesome
Accident, being dissatisfied in their Doctress; and we oftentimes find, where
they have been deluded under the notion of a Sprain, that their Limbs have been
obscurely broken, and a Callus (although deformed for want of Art,) thrust
forth, attended with the disadvantage of an ill-shap'd, crooked, and sometimes
almost useless Member. The like may be said of Dislocations, which are by base
unlearned Women treated for no other than simple Contusions, and so long
neglected, that there is no hope of Remedy; which might at first, with as much
facility as success, have been administered.

Indeed, it is much the same comparatively in all other cases where there has
been admitted a Feminine Chyrurgick Operator, who if one undertaking succeed,
although a score miscarry, that one proves a sufficient Basis for the light
Fabric of her Reputation. Nay, she being most commonly the proclaimer of her
own Fame, you shall not want to hear the flying Stories of her Fortunes, whilst
those of her unbounded Ignorance are buried in as deep a silence, and revive
not otherwise than through the Courtesy of some sorrowful Mother, who is
beholden to this famous Doctress for making of her Child a Martyr.

She is one, who if she finds you wavering in your Opinion of her Skill, or
dissatisfied at her Proceedings, knows how to terrify you from falling into
the Chyrurgeon's hands, where you are to expect nothing less than the
unspeakable Tyranny of Probation, Incision, and Scarrification; whereas she,
like a tenderhearted Woman, makes use of no such Cruelty; she has none of
those frightful Instruments to perplex and disquiet you, but is willing to cure
you with her sovereign Balsam or Plaster, which she will admit you to take off
and put on your self.

This is the pleasing Subterfuge of Ignorance, and a Bait very easily swallowed
down by inconsiderate People, not seldom to their destruction. It Is truly the
main Objection, why many Persons are so fearful of the Chyrurgick Artist, viz.
his severe and cruel usage to his Patients. Now therefore, that I may unriddle
this great Mystery, and expose the whole Truth without reserve, thereby to see
if the matter in debate be such as represented, we will thus argue: If thou
should at any time labor of an Infirmity, either Tumor, Wound, Ulcer, etc.
whether may it be thought more reasonable to confide in him who is thoroughly
experienced in the progress and event of each Distemper, which thy self and
Fellow Creatures are all prone to, has had his abundant Knowledge therein
confirmed to him by his Education under some learned and ingenious
Practitioner, and is himself continually conversant in suchlike practical
Observations? Had thou rather trust thy self in the hands of such, or in
those of some senceless Petticoat Pretender, who has no more Judgment in thy
Distemper than thy self, neither more Authority to take upon her the
Profession, than what she basely and most unjustly assumes? I can easily enough
foresee what may be answered hereto, that you the rather prefer a Woman,
because she will not cut or make Incisions upon your Flesh; she hates those
inhumane Cauteries or Searing Irons wherewith Chyrurgeons (who are sworn to
make a Cure) perplex and disturb you, but will carefully endeavor, by her
Ointments and precious Salves, without any Severity, to remove your Disorders.

To this I could reply, if there were occasion, that of the Poet, --
immedicabile vulnus,
Ense recidendum --
or, That a desperate Case requires as severe a Remedy: And whether or no the
Disease be arrived at such a state, I think the able and knowing Artist the
more competent Judge: so that it is not to be disputed, but where necessity
calls for it, so rough and rigorous an administration is undeniably to be
justified.

I do not go about to persuade, that this must be the result of every one's
particular condition, since I would have all to understand that it is much
beneath the Principle of any Christian Professor of our Art to exercise such
seeming Cruelties upon his Patient, if he could otherways discharge the Duty of
his Calling, or perform what is required of him.

It seems most strange to me, and I think this may supply the place of a
conclusive Argument, that an ignorant unlearned Woman's Judgment should surpass
that of the most eminent Artist, or that she should in any probability be
capable to relieve us, without such handling as we are frighted with, whilst he
whose proper business it is, knows not to perform the same.

What an extreme Folly carries some People into a resolute Belief (which they
will not alter till they have rendered themselves Sufferers) that such an one
as is unknowing in the cause of a Distemper, or what the same Distemper truly
is, can make neither Prognostic nor Diagnostick thereof, neither can tell by
what appropriate Remedies the same Distemper should be profligated, but
hazardously prescribes her fortuitous Medicines, which for all her knowledge,
may do more injury than good. That she (I say) should notwithstanding have
found out a more easy and salubrious Methodus Medendi, than the more judicious
and skilful Practitioner in the said Art.

I would sincerely advise those who are so wonderfully afraid of having their
Flesh cut, (as the only Preservative therefrom) that they shun a pretending
Doctress, one, who by her Ignorance gives too commonly the first occasion of
such unavoidable proceedings, and indeed many times for that which is of higher
consequence than a small Incision (viz.) Amputation, or (to save their Lives)
dismembering of a Limb.

If they would repair in time to the Fountain of true Knowledge and
Understanding, they might find from their own experience, there would be no
reason to apprehend such danger, or thus dismally to affright themselves, being
secure under the industrious care of a tender and compassionate Artist: Or let
the case be what it will, when you have been misguided and so long neglected
your self, and at length repair to him, you may assure your self you will find
no Surgeon so indiscreet as to undertake (without your free consent) any thing
of a dubious consideration or event; if he finds your condition perilous, or
full of danger, he proposes the method he intends to proceed by, and which is
absolutely necessary he should observe, if to your full satisfaction he
discharge the Duty incumbent on him. If you dislike such his Proposal, you can
but reflect upon his Caution, and blame your self for an unwillingness to
submit thereto. Farther, if you cannot comply with such his intended course,
yet will still put your self under his care, I am certain you will not find
wanting (when he has forewarned you of the danger) the utmost of his Endeavors
(which should, as I conceive, be much more prevalent than a Woman's) to restore
and cure you without this painful and severe usage.

I could wish that every Patient would make choice of such an honest and able
Professor of this Art as they might reasonably confide in, and then wholly,
under the Supreme Power, to submit themselves (without dictating their own
erroneous Sentiments) to his management, I would have them banish all those
childish and fearful Apprehensions of his supposed Cruelty, and remain
steadfast, in a firm belief, that he will act no otherwise by them than himself,
if under suchlike circumstances; or, that what he does is purely designed for
their recovery and well being.

It is but little short of a Miracle to me, that any one should imagine we can
be so much delighted in (what they call) the persecution of our Neighbors,
when we take upon us those troublesome operations of Incising, Cauterising,
Amputating, etc. as to account the same for Pleasure or Diversion, which is no
more than what we are prompted to from the urgent necessity of such miserable
States and Accidents as require such performance.

Can they think, I wonder, that the clamorous Shrieks and Outcries of poor
suffering Creatures are such grateful Concord or harmonious Melody, to make us
fond thereof, if we knew to avoid it? Rather let me inform such who have been
too subject to censure us in this manner, that every faithful Practitioner is
at these times of distress an almost equal Sufferer with his Patient, as well
by a deep concern for his Affliction, as on the account of that burdensome
Care which then lies upon him, arising through the disturbed Thoughts and Fears
of a Miscarriage under his hands: Which are, I think, sufficient grounds for
our Belief, that no man in his Senses would take upon him some very troublesome
Operations in our Art, did not an indispensible necessity, with the
conscientious discharge of his Duty, compel him to the same.

I doubt not in the least but many have suffered, and that in an extraordinary
measure, through the Ignorance of some unallowable Practitioners in our Art,
but I cannot think that any one, unless some stupid Atheist, who believes
neither the Divine Omniscience nor Omnipresence, would dare the Divine
Vengeance, by trying Conclusions and Experiments upon his Fellow Creature,
whereby he might be endangered of either Limb or Life, or after any other
manner wittingly torment his distressed Patient, farther than the urgency of
his Case commands: and he who has thus far followed the Rules of Art with a
good and just intent, is undoubtedly to be justified, his Actions also to be
accounted warrantable before GOD and Man.

I must needs say I have so high an opinion of all that are known to my self,
as to believe them in no wise guilty of such impiously degenerate and sordid
Practice; and I am so far from censuring all others of this faculty, that I as
little question but that every of them who are legally qualified for the
Practice would scorn to act the same. Let me therefore advise all malevolent,
mean-spirited, and ill-principled Persons, who have unreasonably contributed to
the disheartening and discouraging their Friends from being concerned with the
Chyrurgick Artist, (in his room preferring an Old Woman) that they desist from
such their dangerous Persuasions, till they can bring a justifiable Accusation,
to countenance what they endeavor to insinuate against us.

I might here, according to a more orderly proceeding, lay before you a Scheme
of every individual Woman's Ignorance, and recite to you their Names and Places
of residence, but truly considering the present state of affairs, where a
feminine pre-eminence in Chyrurgery is made a kind of Disputation, and that the
whole Nation sounds of their wonderful Achievements; the former would be as
troublesome as the latter without number. Since then it were no News to tell
you of an Old Wife's Failings in her Pretenses to the Practice, and as little
strange to be informed where there lives such a famous Gentlewoman, who is
turned Doctress, or other Petticoat Undertaker. Waving (I say) a rehearsal of
suchlike Fooleries, I shall come toward a conclusion of this my last Section,
not forgetting first to acquaint you with the Transactions of a wonderful She
Professor beyond L -- B -- who seldom intermeddles in any thing short of such
difficult business, as has been declared incurable by the most eminent of our
City-Chyrurgeons, viz. Cancers and Scrophulous Tumors, which she seldom keeps
under hand by any long delay, but for the most part makes a quick (though
painful) dispatch, giving them a speedy deliverance out of all their
Afflictions. It Is not the expiation of a public Whipping, or any thing less
than a capital Punishment, that can so far satisfy as to make complete
atonement, or restitution to the hands of Justice, for this bold Pretender's
multiplied Offenses.

You will scarce believe those unheard of Rarities, found out by the Industry
of this Person, such as the cure of a confirmed Cancer upon the Tongue, by a
Plaster of Earthworms, whereby the Patient (though before sick and weak) was
with a little of her help enabled to take a Journey into the other World. Nor
is it likely that you have heard who it was that the deceased Mr. W --. courted
as an Assistant, let me tell you then (as it came from her) 'twas the lately
mentioned Gentlewoman who blazed it abroad for the increase of her Fame, That
this ingenious Artist proffered her One Hundred Pounds to take the Charge of
his most difficult Practice. A very likely matter! that such a person as a
Serjeant-Surgeon, who had accumulated the greatest Honors of his Profession,
should at length make suit to a presumptuously-intruding Gossip, and proffer
her a Stipend to be his Coadjutrix.

What will not Impudence leave unattempted, to purchase the empty Nothing of
Popular Applause?

It was by suchlike Insinuations that the 'foresaid Person wheedl'd her self
into the good Opinion of a Gentleman who had been for some time afflicted with
an Ulcerated Cancer, spreading it self from the Coronal Suture on one side,
reaching over that part of the Bregma and Os Temporis to the Mandible. The
Patient, not content with a palliation of this raging Malady, was induced (by a
confident promise of Cure) to submit himself to her management, under whose
hands he languish'd for some time, till he died a miserable Object, to forewarn
the Unwary how they embrace the Poison of a Woman's Speech, whilst they neglect
and contemn the Counsel of the Legal Artist.

It would be too burdensome a Task to give a succinct or complete Narrative of
those gross Cheats and Abuses offered to the Inhabitants of the City of London,
by Women pretending to the Art of Surgery. The one professes the Cure of sore
apostemated Breasts, another for sore Eyes, a third for the King's Evil, a
fourth for sore Legs, a fifth for Scald Heads, a sixth for Cancers, and so of
the rest; when at the same time making no manner of distinction in the
Temperaments or Constitutions of Humane Bodies, but having purchased one
particular Medicine, as a Mercurial or Vitriolick Water, a famous Ointment,
Balsam, or Plaster; and either of these having casually proved successful,
they confusedly ever after use the same upon all occasions, extolling them as
the most sovereign Remedies yet known.

It is not long since I was discharged by a Gentlewoman, in order for the
entertainment of a Woman, who undertook to cure the most inveterate Abscess,
with no other application than a Cloth spread with equal parts of Basilicon,
and an Ointment of Marshmallows; But what was the consequence? When the Tumor
suppurated, the discharge was left to Nature (for, you must know, it would have
been a piece of Cruelty to have opened it either by Caustic or Incision;) and
the more fluid part of the Matter vented it self at a small Orifice, whence the
residue subsiding, her Pain afresh increased, and I was at length admitted to
open it in the more depending part, by which means the same in a short time was
perfectly healed.

It Is most certain, where the Pus or Quitture has no commodious vent, it
frequently falls down lower, and begets Sinus's or Caverns, which, for want of
timely opening, especially where the Humor is corrosive, and the Bone near the
same becomes carious, the hollowness in time growing Callous. And truly, for
the most part, such kind of Work as this gives us the opportunity of meeting
with so many incurable Fistula's, which oftentimes take their rise from an
inconsiderable Abscess, whose Cavity was never opened, or otherwise deterged,
than by that base pernicious Practice of Injections.

I shall divert you (before I sum up all) with an account of somewhat of the
like tendency with the last recited Case, out of Mr. W -- 's Observations.

Whilst I was dressing a Patient (says the said Author) in a Citizen's House,
I was desired to look upon the Breast of the Gentlewoman of the House: She had
lately lain in, and from abundance of Milk and ill handling, her right Breast
had been Aposte-mated, and broken out in many holes. A Woman famous in the City
for dressing fore Breasts was her Chyrurgeon. I had observed, that the Breast
had at first broke in the upper part, in a small Pin-hole, and the Matter not
having had sufficient discharge, had subsided, and so made the other Openings,
and afterward passed an inch lower than any of the Openings, and could not be
discharged otherwise than as it filled up the Sinus, and ran over, or was
pressed from below upwards with her Hand: By this means the Breast continued
inflamed* and apostemated, insomuch that it was impossible to cure it by that
method, till it had apostemated the whole Breast.

I pitied the Patient, and wondered that a Woman (so famed for such Cures)
could be so ignorant, and yet preserve her Credit with that Sex. I showed the
Patient the Cause of her Pain, and the unlikelihood to be suddenly cured by
such a Chyrurgeon, and prevailed with her to permit me to lay a Caustic on the
Depending Part; and having made an Eschar the compass of a Threepence, opened
it, and gave vent to the Matter, and left her a little Unguentum Basilicon, by
which she was Cured in few Days. THE CONCLUSION.
I Have now discharged my self of what I thought an Obligation, by endeavoring
to evidence the notorious Abuses arising from a sufferance of unallowable
Practitioners in the Chyrurgick Art, which is so dark and obscure, so
unintelligible in the Practick as well as Theorical part thereof, to the
Judgment of every one, unless that of its Professors, that he who is minded to
act a dishonest part, or play the Knave therein, shall carry on the most
fraudulent Designs imperceptibly to the People, and so far, it is possible, from
meeting with interruption, that it is no wonder if he be nobly rewarded, very
honestly accounted, and as charitably thought of for so doing. Indeed, whilst
this liberty is granted to every impertinent Intruder, who has Confidence
enough to carry on his Pretensions; whilst their frequent Failings are so
little heeded, their male Practice no ways minded, nor themselves in the least
questioned, how qualified for the same; whilst these, I say, are buried in
silence, we must expect no other than a perpetual decay of Knowledge, a
discouragement of Learned Men, and (let our Care otherways be never so great)
must be incident to the greatest Calamities, occasioned from so prejudicial and
shameful a toleration.

Were either Galen or Hippocrates now living, to see this spurious Issue made
so much of, their Pretenses unquestioned, their Abuses even countenanced, and
they advanced, whilst their legitimate Offspring are degraded and disesteem'd;
were they informed of this worthy Rabble, who basely take upon them the
exercise of our Art; or did they know how every Water-flinging Piss-prophet
boasts himself as great a Doctor as the most gradually-commenc'd Physician; how
the most contemptible Mechanics, such as Tinkers, Cobblers, etc. not only make
it a point of Controversy, but endeavor with all their might to monopolize
the Art, and exclude the worthy Artist; were these Worthy men in a capacity of
inspecting these matters, we may suppose they would not a little wonder at the
Age we live in, and grieve to behold our miserable Neglect, who suffer the most
honorable of Arts to be rendered the most despicable, that Art which they
themselves were not more painful and laborious to new model and complete, than
we are careless to support and prevent its final overthrow.

There is truly at this time so little care taken to correct and punish the
Presumption of any illiterate Person, that if a man have but an Inclination
thereto, though the most injudicious or unknowing, if he have Wit enough to
hang out a Bloodporringer, to call himself a Barber-Surgeon, to set forth a
Urinal or Scheme of the Celestial Houses, with any other Hieroglyphick of his
Skill, he shall pass in the Crowd for the most learned Professor of Physic as
well as Surgery. What is worse, let his Ignorance be as manifest as the
Injustice of his Claim, he goes on unmolested, without danger of opposition.

I believe there are at this time some Thousands of false Practitioners in the
City of London, besides those whom we more peculiarly entitle Quacks and
Mountebanks; at least such as undertake to bleed, cut Issues, set broken and
disjoynted Members, or to administer Physic, and the one half of these no
other than ignorant and foolish Women, whose enormous Practice has been one
great cause, as well to lessen the number of its Inhabitants, as to bring the
most ridiculous Contempt and Scandal on the best of Arts.

If you take a Prospect of the outparts of the Town, you would imagine there
were a plenary Indulgence granted to all Empiricks, Quacks, Barbers, Old Women,
and others, whom it shall please to take upon them the Profession of
Chyrurgery; you will either think this Art the most easily attainable of all
others, since a mere Pretense to the same will carry a man very far into the
good Opinion of the People: or, last of all, you will find just reason to
imagine this (formerly sublime) Profession is now become a kind of Sanctuary or
Refuge for decayed Tradesmen, who know not to live longer upon their own
Employments.

I remember, (says an ancient Author) when I was at the Wars of Mutterell, in
the time of the most famous King Henry the Eighth, there was a great
Rabblement, that took upon them the Practice of Chyrurgery, such as Tinkers,
Sowgelders, Shoemenders, and the like; this noble Sect performed such wondrous
Cures, that they got to themselves a perpetual Name; in two or three dressings
they most commonly cured their Patients, making them whole and sound for ever.

When the Duke of Norfolk, who was then General, understood how the People died
of inconsiderable Wounds, he sent for me, and certain other Chyrurgeons,
requiring us to make search how these men came by their Death, whether it were
by the grievousness of their Wounds, or through want of Knowledge in the
Undertakers. According to his Command, we made search throughout the Camp, and
found many of these Good fellows, who took upon them the Titles of Chyrurgeons;
not only so, but the Salary also: We inquired with whom they had been brought
up; and they shamelesly would answer, With some Skilful Person or other, who
was dead some time ago. We farther demanded to see what Medicines they had to
Cure the Wounded; and they would readily show us a Pot or Box which they had in
a Budget, wherein was such Trumpery as was only fit to grease Horse-heels
withal; others, who were Cobblers and Tinkers, made use of Shoemakers-wax, and
the Rust of old Pans, wherewith they compounded a Noble Salve, as they termed
it.

In the end this worthy Rabble were committed to the Marshalsea, and threatened
by his Grace to be hanged for their Wicked Deeds, except they would declare the
Truth, what they were, and of what Occupations: They did finally confess as I
have declared to you before; upon which the Duke gave Commandment, That they
should immediately avoid the Camp, upon pain of Death; and if after they
appeared there again, they should be hanged as Murderers.

I could wish that the present Nobility of our Nation, with others the supreme
Governors and Magistrates thereof, would imitate the Example of this eminent
person, and take care to punish all such deceitful persons, who fall from their
proper Employments, and most unjustly assume the Profession of Chyrurgery.

I am sure, if the public Interest, or the Honor of the said Art were sought
to be advanced, such a course would be taken, whereby insolent Pretenders might
be silenced in their attempts, their Abuses prevented by their condign
Punishment, and the People secured from suffering through Ignorance, in the
management of their Distempers.

If we reflect on the Care and Industry of every private Tradesman, who is
himself a Freeman, to discover any Stranger who has unjustly encroach'd upon
his Privilege, what a bus^ie and stir he makes to keep out Foreigners, never
leaving nor desisting till for his own and his Company's good he has routed
and put them down. If (I say) we consider the Care taken about inferior
matters, where the Contest is upon a small and frivolous occasion, what are we
in the mean time to be accounted, who negligently dispense with those
intolerable Impositions made by Strangers, Ignorants, and all others, upon the
Practice of Chyrurgery, where the Debate is not upon a mere Livelihood, or the
advancement of Trade, but here our Health, Limbs, and Lives are the Price of
our Contention, and by permission hereof we are continually in danger of being
Ruined in them all.

It was the Opinion of a Person very eminent in our Profession, that no one
could be qualified for Practice, Nisi in eadem educatus, exercitatusque fuit.
With how great Peril do we then (from his words) confide in these presumptuous
Undertakers, who cannot subsist by the Income of their proper Occupations, and
have nothing to set them off but their Impudence and a little Book-Knowledge,
wherewith they amuse those who take them to be rightly accomplished Physicians
and Chyrurgeons. They are so far from having been initiated under the Care of
any Legal Practitioner, or so little exercised in the said Art, that their
short Conference with some Confident Empirick or Quack (having thereby
purchased one or two particular Medicines) is the whole Stock of their
Learning, as well as Grounds for such their pernicious Pretenses.

I will however hope, that from the foregoing Observations the People may see
what intolerable Mischiefs an unskilful Person may perpetrate, when
countenanced the most illegally to practice in this Noble Art; and although I
doubt not but many others have made the like Reflections upon the erroneous
Actions of these Men, yet I may think, at least, that this public
manifestation of their Ignorance and Deceit, from the important urgency
thereto, with the unavoidable necessity for the same, will the rather excite or
spur on some generous Person (whose station will admit thereof) to perfect in
some sense a regulation of these Abuses.

What indeed can we expect from the continuance of such a Sufferance, but that
the Medicinal Profession (formerly held in so great repute and admiration) is
not only likely to stand in competition with the most mercenary Employment, but
that its genuine Professors, meeting with so great discouragement, may in time
lay aside and neglect its farther improvement, to the no small diminution of
all true and methodical Knowledge therein, and to the universal detriment
thereby accrewing to the whole Nation.

If he who has spent the greatest part of his Life has been instructed by the
ablest Master of the said Art, by a long and tedious Service therein, and
constantly habituated to the study as well as practice thereof, all which he
finds little enough to render himself capacitated. If, after all, such a Person
as this shall be no better accounted than an Upstart Empirick, no farther
relied on than a Foreign Quack, no more confided in than a Practicing Barber,
his Skill thought scarce equivalent to a cheating or deluding Bonesetter's, and
himself in all respects, for his Art, little more esteemed than a Female
Enterprizer. If Tinkers, Cobblers, Heelmakers, and Butchers, with the rest of
this spurious and sordid Tribe, shall be as well rewarded as the most judicious
and faithful Practitioner, what other Fate to attend can we imagine, unless
that of the irrepairable Confusion of this once famous Art?

How profitably a Regulation of these Disorders might be undertaken for the
suppressing base Pretenders to Chyrurgick Practice, where the Concerns of Life
it self are daily hazarded, would, I doubt not, soon appear with the Product of
these great Advantages. First of all, the Unwary would be no longer misguided
by the plausible Stories of the Ignorant, nor exposed to the Miscarriages they
are now subjected to. Furthermore, the lawful Practitioner would not be
molested or impeded in his Practice by these surreptitious Quacksalvers, whom
we should quickly find dissolved into their pristine Employments: There would
be no Toleration for any of them to enter themselves as Cubbs in an Hospital,
hereupon to be accounted for rightly-constituted Chyrurgeons. No Tradesman
would, with polluted Hands, intermeddle in the Medicinal Art, or any other of
them presume upon this Privilege, if not only the Fear but the Effect of a just
and reasonable Prosecution could be of sufficient force to reduce them into
their proper Elements.

How might we rejoice to see the presaging Piss prophet broke to pieces with
his Urinal, and the Empirical, with the strouling Bill-Doctor, forced to take
up some other Business, wherein it may be unlikely they should do that injury
to the generality of Mankind?

Let those few, and some of them fatal, Instances I have given, caution all
Persons how they confide in the Promises of any confident Undertaker: Let their
frequent Failings be no longer winked at, but let every one who wishes well to
the Public use his utmost diligence, that these Abuses be as well reformed as
detected. It is not so trifling a Concern as may be supposed, since the Lives
of so many miserable Creatures are forfeited by our delay herein. And
therefore, as we may read in Ancient Authors, what good and wholesome Laws were
made to punish all such arrogant Persons, let us endeavor all we can that the
same, or the like, may be in force, and put in execution against those who by
their malevolent and slanderous Aspersions, together with their most detested
Practices, have procured as much Mischief to the People as Contempt to Surgery,
and its honorable Professors; the well-wishing to whose Prosperity will be but
little available, till there be an Attempt made for the removal of those grand
Impediments of their Luster and Renown.

I think I cannot more pertinently finish what I have to say upon this Subject,
than in the Words of one of our own Authors to this purpose.

As you would that this Noble Art should flourish, you must not be wanting in
your Endeavors to take away the Occasions of its Prejudice and Disrepute;
neither yet to acknowledge your dependence upon the Supreme Being, who has as
well created and appointed the Means thou shall think fit to use, as ordained
thee to be the Instrument of such his Favor. Furthermore, be thou never
wanting to petition Heaven for Success upon thy Chyrurgick Enterprises, whereby
the Sick may be advantaged, and an Eternity of Comfort and Satisfaction
procured to thy self. FINIS.

