ADDENDA and MVTANDA, In the Late DEFENSE OF THE MARRIAGE OF AN UNCLE with his
NIECE Being the Daughter of the Half-Brother BY THE FATHER's SIDE.

By the Author of that Defense.

LONDON, Printed Anno Dom. 1686.

Addenda and Mutanda, In the late Defense of the Marriage OF AN UNCLE with his
NIECE, ^eing the Daughter of the Half-Brother by the Father's Side.
PAge 20. And they take no manner of notice under the second of these Heads --
of the Marriage of the Uncle with his Brother or Sisters Daughter.) This, I
confess, is not very agreeable to what I have written in my Resolution of Three
Matrimonial Cases, p. 3. Where, to prove that a Parity of Reason ought to be
allowed in Matrimonial Prohibitions, I appeal to the Practice of the Jews; and
I did it with reference to this very Case of an Uncle marrying his Niece,
though it appears the Jews have no where forbidden it: And the Reason of the
Mistake was, That in general I remembered very well, that the Jews did prohibit
several Degrees, which are not expressly set down in the Law of Moses; and the
Marriage of an Uncle with his Niece, seeming to me at that time, to have so
exact a parity of Reason with that of an Aunt and her Nephew, though now I am
unalterably of another Opinion, and I presume, I have shown very good reason
for it; I took it for granted, without consulting the particular Authorities
which I there mention, and being in very great have, as will appear by
comparing the date of my Resolution, with the time when those Questions were
proposed to me, which will appear by the Preface to those Cases, that the
Marriage of an Uncle with his Niece was forbidden by the Jews themselves.

P. 35. Fratres patrueles, consobrini, amitini, etc. To this it belongs what my
Lord Vaughan says in his Reports. Harrison and Burwells Case, p. 241. in the
British names of Kindred my Fathers Cousin German has the Appellation of my
Uncle, and again in the very next Paragraph. The word Uncle is an equivocal
Expression, and in several places signifies several Relations; as in the
British, the Father or Grandfathers Cousin German is accounted an Uncle to the
Son. -- But this was for no other reason, but because Cousin Germans in ancient
esteem were looked upon as Brothers, and unless when they express it by a
Periphrasis, the Hebrews have no one word to signify a Cousin German, unless
you will grant it to be included under the name of Brother, which as it belongs
in its utmost latitude, to the Nation of the Jews, and then more restrictively
to all of the same Tribe, the same Family or Kindred, so next to its most
narrow and proper acceptance, it belongs most peculiarly to a Cousin German,
especially when the Declarative Circumstance is added, of his being born abroad.

P. 39. The Jews interpret this place of two real and proper Sisters, etc.)
That is, the Rabbinical Jews, for the Karraites understand it as I do, as a
prohibition of Polygamy, and in this they are followed by Franciscus Junius and
his Fellow-Partner in the Translation of the Bible Emanuel Tremellius, a
converted Jew.

P. 42. This was not at first denied to Clergymen themselves) this is thus far
true, that being married before hand, did not hinder a Man from entering into
Holy Orders, but after he was once entered, he could not Marry, though I
confess, I did not consider this when I wrote this Paragraph, but this is an
Observation, though natural from the Premises, yet foreign to our purpose; and
it is no matter as to this particular business, whether it be true or no.

P. 48. That Marriage cannot be divorced by virtue of any Law -- which is
neither expressly forbidden in it self, nor stands in the same rational parity
with that which is) This is no more then what my L. C. J. Vaughan says in the
Case already mentioned, p. 209. If Marriages neither prohibited in terminis in
Leviticus, nor being in the same Degree with a Marriage there prohibited,
should be unlawful, there would be no stop or terminus of unlawful Marriages.
-- Now I have proved undeniably, That the Uncle and Niece is really a Degree
lower, when we speak of Marriage, than the Aunt and Nephew: And besides,
supposing the Marriage of the Uncle and Niece had been forbidden expressly, or
by just and lawful Consequence, as it is by neither; yet here there would two
other Questions have arisen: First, Whether the Prohibition did equally extend
to the half Blood as the whole? And this St. Ambrose, though otherwise a rigid
Man in these Cases, seems to have doubted very much; at least, he would not
absolutely pronounce the Half Blood to be unlawful, in the Case of an Uncle
Marrying such a Niece; but he says of it, Hic autem gradus tertius est, qui
etiam jure civili a consortio conjugii exceptus videtur; doubting, as it seems,
within himself, whether the Obligation of that Civil Law, which forbad the
Marriage of the Sisters Daughter, did extend so far as to the Half Blood or no,
and much more to the Half Blood by the Father's Side, which was the Case of
Paternus his Son. And from hence the second Question arises, Whether the Half
Blood by the Father's Side, be not still a Degree or a Remove further than the
Half Blood by the Mothers? And this Question, after what I have said concerning
it, I leave to the Adversaries of this Cause to determine for themselves; and
if notwithstanding that the Marriage of the Uncle and Niece is not forbidden
any otherwise than by a Parity betwixt that and the Marriage of an Aunt with
her Nephew; and if this Parity be no Parity at all, no more than Even and Odd
are paria to one another; if besides this Disparity, which I have shown to be
threefold in the first Case, there be likewise a twofold Disparity arising from
the Half-Blood, he must needs be a very hardy Man, that in the face of five
good Reasons against his Assertion, will still pretend to say the Case is the
same. At this rate of arguing, any thing may be inferred from any thing, and we
may say very safely and assuredly with my Lord Vaughan, That there will be no
stop or terminus of Unlawful Marriages. And in another place, to assure this
Point the more effectually, the same Reverend and Learned Justiciary says, We
take the Degrees of 240. ib.
Marriage, prohibited by God's Law, to be the Levitical Degrees expressed, or
necessarily implied by Parity of Reason, or a fortiori.

P. 54. The Argument of St. Ambrose against the Marriage of the Uncle with his
Niece, presses the hardest of any other upon us.) My Answer to this Objection
of St. Ambrose, to the best of my understanding, would not be unsatisfactory,
though it had been the Niece by the Whole Blood, as it was not. But this was
Man's Case in Crook's Reports, who for Marrying his ut sua p. 247.
Wives Sisters Daughter, which is a Niece in Affinity, was by the High
Commissioners divorced, upon this Reason, because Degrees more remote * were
forbidden, That is, ^^isin Ger^^^s.
though they confessed themselves at the same time, that it was not prohibited
within the Levitical Degrees; and for that Reason, upon the Suit of the
Plaintiff, a Prohibition ib. p. 24
and Consultation was granted; but the Issue of it cannot be found upon Record.

After this, in the time of King James the First, for the former Case was in
the Reign of Queen Elizabeth) there was such ib.
another Case of one Richard Pearson, wherein a Prohibition was granted out of
the Common Pleas Court, for Marrying his Wives Sisters Daughter; and it was
resolved by the said Court, upon consideration of the Statute 32 H. 8. c. 38.
That the Marriage was not to be impeached, because declared by the said Act to
be good, in as much as it was not prohibited by the Levitical Degrees. Which
Determination of the Judges of that Court, at that time, must of necessity
proceed upon one of these two Suppositions; either that our Law had no regard
to Parity of Reason in these Cases; or, that there was indeed no Parity betwixt
the Marriage of an Aunt and Nephew, and that of a Man's marrying his Wives
Sisters Daughter, which is his Niece by Affinity. But now, since
Consanguinities and Affinities, by the Levitical as well as Civil Law, are the
same, and equally forbidden to the same Degrees, it follows, That if in the
Judgment of our Law, the Marriage of the Wives Sisters Daughter shall stand
good, so shall that likewise which is Consummated with her who is Daughter by
the Half-Brother on the Father's Side. And indeed, the Half Blood by the more
uncertain and imperfect Side, makes it still come nigher to Man and Pearson's
Case, and makes it rather an Affine than Consanguineous Relation.

Furthermore, in the Case of Harrison and Burwell it self, Harrison had Married
his Great Aunt, the Widow of Abbot his Grandfather's Brother; and my L. Vaughan
declares this Marriage to be valid, p. 207. And this Case, by the Hill. 21 Car.
2.
King's Command, being referred to the Opinion of all the Judges of England,
Trin. 22. Car. 2.
the Chief Justice delivered their Opinions, and accordingly Judgment was
given, That a Prohibition ought to go to the Spiritual Court for the Plaintiff.

Now there is nothing more clear, than that the Aunt is expressly forbidden to
the Nephew in Marriage; and for this Reason, which the Law assigns, She is
thine Aunt, thy Senior, thy Superior, and, in Construction of Law, Parentis
loco. All which do hold as well, though not so immediately, and indeed the two
first much more strongly, in the Great Aunt, than in the Aunt at the first
remove. As the Jews in their prohibitory Tables do forbid by Analogy of Reason,
as they conceive, not only the Wives Mother, which is expressly forbidden,
Levit. 18. 17. but also her Grandmother, V. Seldom Ux. Hebr^ L. ^. c. ^ and de
ju^ Not. and Gent. L. 5^ c. 10.
the one being looked upon Parentis loco as much as the other, though not so
immediate as the other is; but the Law of England proceeding only by the
Letter, without any regard, or at least very little to Parity of Reason, (for
the Marriage of the Daughter and the Whole Sister are not inferred to be
unlawful by a Parity, but by a manifest Superiority of Reason) would not
disanul the Marriage of the Great Aunt, though the immediate were so expressly
forbidden.

And to show yet further, That our Law in Matrimonial Cases does not proceed by
Parity of Reason, at least where that Parity is so obscure, and so many ways
defective, as it is in our Case; there are two passages of the same Judge
Vaughan in his Report of the aforesaid Case of Harrison and Burwell which are
very well worthy our notice and observation; the first is, where speaking of
the Act 32 H. 8. c. 38. he says, p. 211. Those words, God's Law except, must
refer to such other Marriages as by Gods Law might be impeached, and not to any
for consanguinity or affinity, for had not those words been, the generality of
expression, no Marriage shall be impeached without the Levitical degrees, had
excluded the impeaching Marriages for plurality of Wives or Husbands at a time,
for Impotency, and for Adultery, as Sir Edward Coke observes, at the end of his
Comment upon this Statute in his second Book of Institutes. -- Adultery and
Polygamy are both of them forbidden by the Levitical Law, but when we speak of
the Levitical Degrees of Affinity and Consanguinity, they cannot properly be
referred to them, and the sense of these two Reverend and Learned Gentlemen is
this, that though Adultery, Polygamy, and Impotency are warrantable Causes of
Divorce according to Gods Law, yet if the Act of Parliament had not mentioned
Gods Law, but only insisted upon the Levitical degrees, there could no Divorce
have ensued, by the Law of England, which keeps it self most strictly to the
Letter, in any of these Cases.

The other Passage which I aim at is this; where speaking of the Acts of
Parliament 25 and 28 H. 8. concerning the Succession, wherein the Matrimonial
Prohibitions are limited and declared from the Levitical Law, he says thus, p.
216. The Marriages particularly declared by the Acts to be against God's Law,
cannot be dispensed with; but other Marriages, not by the Acts declared in
particular to be against God's Law, are left statu quo prius, as to
Dispensations with them: that is, so far as concerns the Levitical Degrees,
they may be, and are actually dispensed with; not by the Pope, whose Power of
Dispensation was now abolished and abrogated for ever; nor by any Priestly
Absolution, which accounts only for what is past, but cannot make any thing
lawful de futuro, which either the Law of God or Man makes null and void: but
by the Law it self, which by not prohibiting such Marriages, has made them
Lawful.

It is true indeed, there are other Bars to Matrimony, besides the Levitical
Degrees, which are included in the Act 32 H. 8. c. 38. under the general Term
of God's Law, as has been already observed: But yet my L. C. J. Coke was of
another Cok. Lit. F. 235. a.
mind, he understanding God's Law and the Levitical Degrees, to be only Terms
declarative of one another. And in this Interpretation he seems to be favored
by the Words of the Act of Parliament, 28 H. 8. c. 16. whereby it is Enacted,
That all Marriages solemnized within this Realm -- which be not prohibited by
God's Law, limited and declared in the Act made this present Parliament, for
establishing the King's Succession, or otherwise by Holy Scripture, shall be
lawful and effectual by Authority of this present Parliament. Where there is no
Question but by God's Law and the Levitical Degrees limited, and declared by
that Act of Parliament, as also by another before it, in the Twenty fifth of
the same King, the same thing is to be understood; but when it is added, or
otherwise by Holy Scripture; it is implied by this, that there are other bars
to Matrimony besides the Levitical Degrees: Yet notwithstanding, when in the
Act 32 H. 8. c. 38. God's Law is only mentioned, without the insertion of that
other Clause, or otherwise by Holy Scripture, we must either say, that the
Parliament at that time had not so great a deference and regard to Holy
Scripture, as when the former Act was made, or else, that under the
comprehensive terms of God's Law, not only the Levitical Degrees, but all
Scripture in general is included, and this is certainly most reasonable to
believe, the Design and Intention of all these Acts of Parliament being only to
reduce the Matrimonial Prohibitions, and the causes of Divorce to the Standard
of God's Revealed Will, and to evacuate, annul, and disappoint the
Encroachments and Usurpations of the Canon Law; so that in this I agree
perfectly with Vaughan against Coke, but this does not properly concern our
Case, for it is the Levitical Degrees and they only to which we are to appeal.

I wish my Lord Vaughan, as he disagrees with Coke in this particular, in which
we are not concerned, so in another in which we are, he had not disagreed with
himself. For notwithstanding, in what has been cited out of him above, he does
so plainly intimate, that we are not to strain the obligation of these Laws
beyond the Letter of them; yet, p. 216. he says, No degrees being mentioned in
the Statute to be prohibited by God's Law, but those which are expressed, it
cannot thence be concluded, that the Statute intended no other than those to be
prohibited by God's Law, for take the words at most advantage for the purpose,
viz. Since many inconveniences have fallen by Marrying within the Degrees
prohibited by God's Law; that is to say, the Son to Marry the Mother, the
Brother the Sister, etc. in the same manner is it, if a Statute should say,
Since many inconveniences have happened, P. 217.
by doing things prohibited by the Kings Laws; that is to say, by depopulation
of Farms, by substracting of Tithes, etc. It would not be concluded that the
things so enumerated were all the things prohibited by the Kings Laws.

For, besides that this seems to be a flat Contradiction to what he had said
before, That all Marriages particularly declared by P. 216.
the Acts to be against God's Law, cannot be dispensed with; but that all
others may; or in Words to that effect; the Case is not the same in these two
several Examples: For, when we speak of Levitical Degrees prohibited by God's
Law, and then enumerate all the several Particulars, as they are set down in
Leviticus, than which there are no more Particulars of Prohibited Degrees any
where to be found in Scripture, in this Case God's Law, and the particular
Branches of it thereafter expressed, being taken all together, are coextended
to one another. But when we say, Whereas many Inconveniences have happened, by
doing things prohibited by the King's Laws, that is to say, etc. instancing in
three or four Particulars only; it is manifest, that the King's Laws are
abundantly of greater latitude than the Particulars that follow. But yet the
words, That is to say, in both Cases refer only to the Particulars thereafter
expressed; and if there be any other things prohibited by the King's Laws,
which are not expressed and enumerated in these Particulars, the abstaining
from such forbidden Practices as those, is not bound upon us by virtue of this
Law, but by the particular Sanctions of other respective Laws, wherein those
Offenses or Enormities are forbidden: For it would be a strange thing for a Man
to be hanged for stealing an Horse, by virtue of a Law which punishes the
Non-payment of Tithes. How can those words, That is to say, be referred to
those Particulars which are no where said or expressed? or the words
before-rehearsed, or above-expressed, to those which are no where rehearsed, or
expressed? I do not say that a Parity or Superiority of reason is not to be
admitted, but I say the words of a Statute, which is the Statute Law, will
extend no further than themselves, and in what instances this Parity or
Potiority of Reason lies, belongs to a Court of Conscience, or of Equity to
determine, but then these Instances are not referred to by the Words, that is
to say, or by the Words afore-rehearsed or above expressed, which belong only
to the naked Letter of the Law, but they are pointed at by the Instances
themselves, as those Instances by Parity or Superiority of Reason do point at
other Instances that are not mentioned; as for example, When it is forbidden to
Marry the Half-Sister, this evidently darts a Prohibition upon the Whole-Sister
likewise, because the Whole-Sister is really the Half-Sister and something
more; and when it is forbidden for a Man to Marry his Grandchild; this points
still more strongly upon his Daughter: for, if the Grandchild be forbidden for
the sake of the Daughter, as there is no question that is the reason, the
Daughter is much more forbidden for her own and her Father's sake, and for the
sake of the Grandchild, who is for her sake expressly forbidden at a further
remove: But if where there is neither an express Prohibition, nor so much as a
Parity of Reason, we will suppose a Law, notwithstanding to oblige, which is
exactly our Case; we may as well extend the Prohibition in infinitum, so that
there need have been but one Prohibition of Marriage, and that would
effectually have barred all other Instances that can be supposed, for where a
Prohibition stops not with Parity of Reason, what other Limit or Boundary can
we set?

Neither let any Man take shelter in Archbishop Parker's Matrimonial Table,
which being first published in 1563. was afterward in the Year 1603. among
many other Canons of a Convocation held that Year, being 1 Jacobi 1. ratified,
confirmed and allowed under the Broad Seal of England, in which Matrimonial
Table among other Prohibitions the Marriage of an Uncle with his Niece is
forbidden.

For this Table was made with an unquestionable reguard to the Levitical
Prohibitions, and it was upon supposition of a Parity of reason betwixt the
Marriage of an Uncle with his Niece, and that of an Aunt with her Nephew; that
the former of these was prohibited in that Table, notwithstanding it be not
expressly mentioned in the Law of Moses it self, but now since I have shown
plainly that there is no such Parity of Reason as is pretended, the Table
cannot prohibit such Marriages any longer, unless the Act of Parliament must
give place to the Table: For by the Act of 32 H. 8. c. 38. it is expressly
ordained, that, No Reservation or Prohibition, God's Law except, shall trouble
or impeach any Marriage without the Levitical Degrees; and what those Degrees
are, appears by 28 H. 8. c. 16. wherein those Degrees are said to be limited
and declared in the Act made for establishing the Kings Succession, which is,
28 H. 8. c. 7. wherein the Degrees expressly mentioned and set down in Leviticus
are expressed, and none other; and if we add any other, but what are included in
the Degrees mentioned, either by Parity or Potiority of Reason, there can be no
end of Prohibitions while the World stands, but they may be heaped and piled in
infinitum upon one another, without any other Authority to make them good, then
what either prejudice or fancy shall create. I demand therefore, if the
Marriage Table had quite altered the Degrees mentioned in Leviticus and
substituted others in their stead, whether it would have obliged or no,
notwithstanding the Act of Parliament expressly says, that, No Reservation or
Prohibition, God's Law except, shall trouble or impeach any Marriage without
the Levitical Degrees, which Degrees by another Act are limited and declared,
as aforesaid? I believe no Man will be found so hardy as to take upon him the
Patronage of this Doctrine, and since the reason is the same in all, there can
be no Prohibition in any one Case, (and consequently not in ours neither) where
the Law of Moses allows a Dispensation*

P. 58. And all such Marriages were pronounced Valid) It is true, this Act of
Parliament, so far as concerns Precontracts was repealed 2 Ed. 6. 23. and that
Repeal confirmed 1 Eliz. 1. but it was for the greater inconveniences which
were found by experience by nulling of real Contracts, then by pretending of
Contracts, where there were really none, which was the reason of the Act in
Henry the Eighth's time, and is a plain instance in both Cases, for the Repeal
was not founded upon Right but Convenience, that Laws in many Instances do not
so much regard, Quid fieri jus fasque sit, as Quid expediat, vel intersit Reip.
ut fiat, vel non fiat.

P. 72. Being only the half Sister by the Father's side) the Daughter of the
Half-Brother by the Father's side, which is a double Paternal Consanguinity, so
that our Case is more favorable than that of St. Ambrose, which made him
notwithstanding hesitate a little, in spite of all his Rigor and Severity in
these matters; I suppose no Man will say, that the Half-blood and the Whole are
the same; and Abraham's Case with respect to Sarah his Wife, is an unanswerable
instance for the Fathers side, that it is more favorable and more allowable in
Marriage than the Mothers.

Ib. Cannot without Ignorance or Wickedness, and in either Case without
palpable injustice be vacated or dissolved) This ought not, and, I hope, it
will not be interpreted as any disrespect to any Court of Justice, for I honor
the Seats of Justice with all my Heart, and will do as much as any Man to the
utmost of my Power to assert their just Authority and Reputation, for as much
therefore as I am given to understand that there is a Sentence passed in this
Cause to the prejudice of the parties in in whose behalf I have pleaded, I do
hereby declare, that these Papers were written a good while before the passing
of that Sentence, and that they were actually Printed before it was possibly
for me to know any thing of it, besides that a wrong Sentence may sometimes be
pronounced not only by an Upright Judge, but a Wise and Learned one too. --

(...) AN ADDITION Of some other CONSIDERATIONS Not hitherto suggested.
FIrst, As to the Half-Blood, the Talmudical Doctors were of opinion, that
though it were forbidden for a Man to Marry his Brother's Wife, in any Seldom
U^ Hebr. L. ^ c. 2.
Case but only where the Brother died without Issue; yet this was to be
understood only of the Brother by the same Father: but that it did not hold in
the Frater Vterinus. Which Opinion of theirs was founded upon this Reason, That
the Inheritance, which was the Reason of such Marriages in default of Issue,
did not descend from the Mother, but the Father; so that the Law of the
Leviratus was not concerned in the Case of a Frater Vterinus, who was reputed
of another and a distinct Family from his Half-Brother by another Father,
though the Mother on both Sides were the same. I confess, I am very clear and
positive against the Rabbis in this: For whatever becomes of the Inheritance,
it is certain, that in case of Issue, the Brother by the Father's Side was
forbidden upon account of nearness of Kin; but that nearness, for the Reason
already mentioned more than once, is certainly greater in construction of Law
on the Mother's Side, than on the Father's. But I bring this Determination of
the Rabbis, whether true or false, to show that they did not think the
Half-Blood so sacred, and so indispensably prohibited as the Whole; and that
the Half-Blood on one Side may possibly in some Instances be more severely
prohibited than the other: And if this Doctrine will hold in any Case, it will
certainly in ours, the Father's Side being certainly, as to Legal Construction,
the weaker Consanguinity of the two.

Secondly, Though my Lord Vaughan, ^ill and ^^od 's ^se, p. ^2.
in Hill and Good's Case, be very inconsistent with himself, if we compare him
with himself in Harrison and Burwell's, where he speaks very favorably of the
Marriage of a Man with his Wives Sisters Daughter: for in this latter Case of
Hill and Good, citing all the same Precedents he had done before, he concludes,
By all these Cases, the Marriage of the Husband with his Wives Sisters
Daughter, is a Marriage prohibited within the Levitical Degrees, for nearness
of Kindred to the Wife: Yet afterward he makes us a sufficient Amends, if a
flat, positive, and deliberate Contradiction can do it. For within a very few
Pages afterward he puts the same Case, and resolves it as follows. A Man
before ib. p. 326.
the third of November, 26 H. 8. by Dispensation from Rome, had married his
Wives Sisters Daughter, which Marriage was prohibited by the Canons of the
Church; and no Divorce had been attempted in the Case, until after 1 Eliz. and
the Reviver of the Statute of 28 H. 8. c. 16. which made void all Dispensations
from Rome.

It is plain, that this Marriage being not prohibited by God's Law, limited and
declared in the Act of 28 H. 8. c. 7. was by the express Words of the revived
Act of 28 H. 8. c. 16. a Marriage to continue good without Separation,
notwithstanding all Dispensations from Rome were nulled; because it was no
Marriage excepted out of the Grace intended to be given by that Act to the
King's Subjects Married by Dispensation before November the third, 26 H. 8. and
not then separated.

And now from this Determination of my Lord Vaughan's, the Inference is plain,
That our Case must stand a fortiori: For Consanguinities and Affinities in
these Cases are the same, and prohibited to the same Degrees; a Man and his
Wife are all one; and his Wives Sister, as to this Particular, is the same with
his own; and her Daughter, the same with his Consanguineous Niece by the Whole
Sister; which if it be determined lawful, the Daughter of the Half-Brother is
much more, the Half-Blood and the Paternal Consanguinity taken together, making
the Case more favorable by Four to One, which is the exact Proportion.

Thirdly, Though it be true what I have affirmed, That the Talmudists or
Traditionary Doctors are agreed in permitting the Marriage of an Uncle with his
Niece, and this as far off as the time of Josephus, and probably a great deal
longer; yet the Karraites or Scriptuary Jews forbid it, as well by the Brother,
as the Sisters Side, conceiving it, as I suppose, to be included by Parity of
Reason: But this is so far from being a Prejudice to our Cause, that it is the
greatest advantage it can possibly receive, for it is absurd to think that the
(...), the Misnical or Traditionary Jews were ignorant of this Opinion of the
Karraitish Faction, and therefore their determination in this case did not
proceed out of heedlesness or inadvertency, as it is found to have done in many
others, but was certainly grounded upon one of these two bottoms, either that
Parity of Reason was not to be regarded, and that, according to Ancient
Tradition, it did not indispensably oblige their Forefathers, who upon
Prudential Considerations assumed a latitude and liberty to themselves, either
of entering into such Marriages, or abstaining from them; or else, that there
was indeed no Parity in this Case, as certainly there is not, and much less in
the Half-blood, and the Half-blood by the Fathers side; and though I am no
great friend to the Traditions of the Jews, which in many cases are
monstruously fabulous and impertinent, yet where a Tradition has reason to
assert it, this is a great Argument of its Truth and Credit, and the Reason and
Tradition do reflect upon each other a mutual Authority and Reputation.

Fourthly and lastly, Though Archibishop Parkers Matrimonial Table were
confirmed by Authority of a Convocation in the Second of King James the First;
yet it is to be considered, that the power of such Assemblies, and Synods of
the Clergy, and the Validity of what they shall determine is founded upon 25 H.
8. c. 12. and in that Act there is this provision made; Provided always, that no
Canons, Constitutions or Ordinances shall be made or put in execution within
this Realm, by Authority of the Convocation of the Clergy, which shall be
contrariant or repugnant to the Kings Prerogative Royal, or the Customs, Laws
or Statutes of this Realm. Wherefore all the Question is, whether this Marriage
be against the Law of God, as I think I have abundantly proved that it is not,
and upon supposition that I am in the right, the Matrimonial Table, as to this
particular Prohibition is of no manner of force or obligation, because the
Statute of 32 H. 8. c. 38. expressly says, That no Reservation or Prohibition,
Gods Law except, shall trouble or impeach any Marriage. And this is all I have
to say, only since there is a Sentence of Divorce already past in this Cause, I
would humbly recommend it to those before whom the final determination of this
Controversy shall lie, that they would reflect upon our Saviors injunction in
Cases of this Nature, whom God has joined, (as he has joined all those who
being actually Married, are not antecedently by his Law forbidden to Marry) let
no man put asunder, and that in the Judgment they shall give upon this Case,
they would set the great Judge of Heaven and Earth before them as a Pattern,
who has told us not only for our instruction, but imitation too. (...), I will
have Mercy and not Sacrifice, and that in the midst of Judgment he remembers
Mercy.

FINIS.
(...). Reliquiae Secundae.
I Did believe upon the Writing of my last Paper that I had exhausted the
Argument which was the Subject of it, but upon further enquiry I find I have
not, and there is further to be added, to what I have said already, as follows.

First, Learned Men are divided in their Opinions, whether the Prohibitions in
Leviticus are Natural, that is, founded and rooted in the Law of Nature, or in
the Natural and Eternal Reason of things, or whether they are purely positive
and no more. Of the first sort is Lyranus, Abulensis, Bonfrerius, Masius,
Montanus, and Nicholas Serarius, and among the Reformed Mr. Calvin; of the
latter is Paulus Burgensis, Cajetanus, C. a Lapide, Sanchez, and the Authors by
him cited, Tirinus, Lorinus, Menochius, and Magalianus, and among the Reformed
three great Authorities, Drusius, Episcopius, and our Learned Bishop Tailor; as
for mine own Opinion, I must confess, that I incline rather to the Sentiments
of the former, but they that think with the latter, that the Obligation of
these Laws is positive and no more, they have no pretense for a Dissolution of
this Marriage, because in Laws merely positive there is no such thing as Parity
to be admitted, such Laws being all of them a manifest restraint upon the
Natural Liberties of Mankind, and therefore ought not to be strained by
Parities, and Interpretations, whether true or false, beyond the Letter of them.

Secondly, As to my Interpretation of the Phrase of Dying Childless, it is
confirmed by the Authority of the Learned Jesuit Stephanus Menochius, who in
his Comment upon that place, has these remarkable Words to the very same Sense
with mine, Hi incestuosi non sinentur in hoc scelere permanere donec liberos
habere possint, sed occidantur, and this, when all is done, is the true meaning
of the Text, though the Jews who are horribly unskilful in the remote
Antiquities of their own Nation have devised other fanciful Glosses which will
not abide the test of a judicious enquiry, and that we may not wonder at this
severity of punishing all Incestuous Conjunctions with Death, Paulutius
Forojuliensis refers it as he very well might, besides the Reason I have given,
to the Arbitrary disposal of Almighty God, who may annex what Sanction he
pleases to his Laws, or, which is all one, to some Impulsive Cause or Motive
which he has not thought fit to reveal, so that with respect to us it is
Arbitrary, let it be what it will in it self, where speaking of Congress with a
Menstruous Woman being punished with Death, he says, Multa alia quae non sunt
peccata mortalia puniebantur paena mortis ex aliqua causa legislatorem movente,
ut esus Sanguinis.

Thirdly, When it is said, Levit. 18. 6. None of you shall approach to any that
is near of kin to him, to uncover their Nakedness. It is to be observed, that
this nearness of kin is to be measured not from our selves, but from the
Fountain of Kindred, that is, from a common Father or Parent, as when it is
said in the Prohibition of the Aunt by the Fathers side, v. 12. Thou shall not
uncover the nakedness of thy Fathers Sister, she is thy Fathers near Kinswoman.
And again, v. 13. of the Aunt by the Mothers side, Thou shall not uncover the
nakedness of thy Mothers Sister, for she is thy Mothers near Kinswoman. It is
plain, that though the Niece be at the same distance from me in the descending
Line, that the Aunt is in the ascending, yet when the express Reason assigned
in the Law, why I may not marry mine Aunt, is not because she is mine, but my
Father or Mothers near Kinswoman, this is so far from darting any Prohibition
upon my Niece, that it is on the contrary, plainly favorable and propitious to
a Marriage in that Relation; because my Niece, who is my Fathers Grandchild, is
plainly at a further distance from him than mine Aunt who is his Sister; and
that for two Reasons, First, Because the one is an immediate Relation, but the
other, by the interposition of a Son or Daughter betwixt, is a Relation at the
second remove; and because no Man or Woman can get or bear Children by
themselves without the Conjunction of another, it is therefore only a Relation
by the half Blood, and if it be the Niece by the Brother, there is not only the
Half Blood to be considered, but that that Half Blood it self is the more weak
and uncertain Consanguinity of the two, as has been already frequently
declared; so that if the nearness to my Father or Mother be the express Reason
assigned in the Law of Moses, why I may not Marry mine Aunt, no Man can with
any show of Reason infer from thence, that I am forbid likewise to Marry my
Niece, because the distance is manifestly greater from the Fountain of Kindred,
and the Relation unquestionably more imperfect.

So also, when it is said, v. 14. Thou shall not uncover the Nakedness of thy
Fathers Brother, thou shall not approach to his Wife, she is thine Aunt. Here
there are three things manifestly implied, First, That in the Levitical
Prohibitions, Consanguinities and Affinities are considered as the same, and
are prohibited to the same Degrees. Secondly, That the Reason of her being
forbidden in Marriage is because she is my Brothers Wife, that is, in
Construction of Law, my Fathers Sister or near Kinswoman; And Thirdly, As in
the two former Cases, that this is done out of respect and honor to my Father,
with whom she stands upon the same Level or Horizontal Plane in the Scheme of
Consanguinity or Affinity, so that to Marry mine Aunt is to make my Fathers
equal my inferior, and to subject her to the mean and servile condition of a
Wife to whom I owe the Service and Honor of a Parent. And this is the true
Interpretation of those Words in this last place, She is thine Aunt; for every
Man knows without the help of Revelation, that his Fathers Brothers Wife is his
Aunt; but there is manifestly included in them an intimation of her Superiority
over us, by reason of her standing equal in the Table of Affinity with our
Father or Mother, and therefore she ought not to submit to have her Nakedness
uncovered by her inferior and dependant, or put her self into a condition of
Subjection to him, from whom she may expect and challenge the Duty, Service and
Allegiance of a Son; and therefore the Greeks called the Uncle and Aunt by the
names of (...) and (...), alluding, as I suppose, in the use of these words to
the Ancient, Absolute and Arbitrary Power which all Parents had over their
Children; so that as to all the instances to which their Power or Possibility
of Action could extend it self, they were as absolute and unaccountable as God
himself, and were his Vicegerents upon Earth in their respective Families, and
the Uncle and Aunt were (...) and (...), they had, as it were Aliquid divini
juris in liberos liberasque fratrum and sororum, they had a right of Reverence,
and a natural claim of Duty and Respect from their Nephews and Nieces, which
were accounted but a remove from Children; and laid so great a weight upon all
their Advices, Admonitions and Commands, that to disobey them in any thing not
very unreasonable, was accounted an heinous Crime, although their Power of
Coercion were not all out so great, as that of their natural and proper Parents.

And now from what has been just now said, it is plain, that the Reason of
that Law by which the Nephew is prohibited to Marry his Aunt, being founded in
these two things, First, In nearness of Kin, which is greater to the Father in
his Sister than his Grandchild. Secondly, In the superiority and preeminence of
the Aunt over the Nephew, I say, it is plain that it cannot from either of
these considerations be inferred by any Parity of Reason, that the Marriage of
an Uncle with his Niece is forbidden, and with respect to the latter
consideration, the superiority is not violated by such a Marriage, but rather
pleased and gratified by it, because it still continues where it was, that is
in the Uncle, only by Marriage it is rendered more absolute and perfect, so that
unless contraries may by Parity of Reason be inferred from contraies, there can
be no inference from the Prohibition of an Aunt, which shall debar or obstruct
the Marriage of a Niece.

Fourthly, It is certain, that Amram took to Wife Jochebed his Fathers Sister,
and this could not be long before the giving of the Law, for of that Match
Moses and Aaron and Miriam were descended; the thing is mentioned in more
places than one of the Scripture without any manner of blame or reprehension,
and we are not rashly to suppose Persons that were so highly honored by God
with a Prophetic Spirit, a gift of Miracles, a Priestly Character annexed for
ever to the Family of the one, and a Legislative Power invested by God himself
in the Person of the other, to have been Spurious or Illegitimate; from whence
it follows, that whatever reasons of Convenience or Interest there may be to
hinder such Marriages From being entered into, yet it was not a matter of
absolute and indispensable Obligation till after the giving of the Law by
Moses, and that if it had not been for the giving of that Law, it would have
remained still in the same prudential indifference which it had before; for
what is once lawful, must always continue so, till a supervening Law forbids
it, and makes it unlawful; but if the Marriage of the Nephew to his Aunt were a
Marriage good and valid before the giving of the Law by Moses, that of the
Uncle to his Niece was much more, it being shown in so many and various
respects to be so plainly a more favorable Case, and therefore not being any
where expressly forbidden, it must continue still as it was, prudential and
indifferent, and consequently lawful. For when restraints are laid upon lawful
things, there is no inference from the prohibition of one thing to the
prohibition of another by Parity of Reason, whether pretended or real, but the
Prohibition stops within it self, and extends no further than the Letter, as if
part of a Common Field should be enclosed, and this Enclosure established and
warranted by Law, there lies here no Inference by Parity of Reason for the
Enclosure of the rest, but what is not actually and legally enclosed, is
common, and must remain open as it did before.

Besides, that Moses by Gods appointment should so severely forbid the Marriage
of an Aunt with her Nephew, a sort of Marriage of which he himself and his
Brother Aaron were descended, bringing by that means a sort of Aspersion, and
something that is, at least, very like a Reproach upon himself and his Family,
upon his Brother Aaron and the Family of Priests that were for ever after
descended from his Loins, and yet take no notice in the least of the Marriage
of an Uncle with his Niece, in which he was not concerned, but might have
forbidden it without any manner of reflection upon himself or his Relations, if
God had intended to prohibit them both alike, is a thing to me so incredible,
that nothing can be more, and I presume it will appear so to every indifferent
Person that shall reflect upon it.

Fifthly, There is also the Case of Achsah and Othniel in the Books of Joshua
and Judges, in which, if we understand the Text so as that Othniel, who was the
Son of Kenaz, shall be the Half Brother of Caleb by the Mothers side, for Caleb
was not the Son of Kenaz but Jephunneth; then here is another Instance after
the Law, of the Uncle Marrying his Niece, the Daughter of his Half Brother by
the Mothers side; the Words of the Text are these, Jos. 15. 17. Othniel the Son
of Kenaz, the Brother of Caleb took it: (Kirjath-sepher) and he gave him Achsah
his Daughter to Wife. And again, Judge. 1. 13. Othniel the Son of Kenaz See also
g. 3. 9.
Calebs younger Brother took it, (Kirjath-sepher) which words in both places
may either be so Interpreted, that Othniel had this double Relation, he was the
Son of Kenaz, and he was likewise Calebs younger Brother by the Mother's side,
and then Achsah the Daughter of Caleb will be Othniel's Niece, and his Niece by
a nearer Consanguinity than that in the Case before us; or else, that Othniel
was the Son of Kenaz, which Kenaz was younger Brother to Caleb; and so Othniel
and Achsah will be Cousin Germans. Both of these Interpretations, if there were
nothing else but these Words to be considered, are very natural and easy; but
when I consider that after the Death of Caleb and Joshua the Children of Israel
were made Captive by Cushan-rishathaim, for the space of Eight Years, Judge. 3.
8. that God raised up this Othniel to be their Savior and Deliverer out of the
Hands of this Oppressor, v. 9, 10. and that the Land had rest afterward under
the Government of this Othniel for the space of forty Years; no Man will ever
think that Caleb and Othniel in that Age of the World could probably be the
Sons of the same Mother, when it is so plainly demonstrable, that there was at
least Forty nine or Fifty Years differance between their Ages, for to this
Forty eight we must add one or two more, because before this period began they
were both Cotemporary, and Caleb, if he were Brother to Othniel, was then the
elder by a Year or two at the least.

But this is not all, c. 2. 8. we have an account that Joshua died, and v. 10.
That all that Generation, of which Caleb was one, were gathered to their
Fathers, and then, before this Revolution of Cushan-rishathaim, we have an
account of several other Oppressions which the Jews for their many Sins and
Provocations labored under; so that the distance between the Age of Caleb and
Othniel is still considerably greater than what has been represented. It
remains therefore, that Achsah and Othniel were Cousin Germans, that is,
Brothers Children, who in their Circumstance might lawfully Marry, for it
appears, that Achsah was an Heiress, otherwise her Father could not have given
her the Southland, as he did, and added afterward to it the Upper and the
Nether Springs, all which, by the Mosaic Platform of Inheritance would
otherwise have devolved upon the Male Issue.

If you ask how any Woman can be called an Heiress while her Father is yet
living? I answer, That in strictness she could not yet be called by that name,
there being no Inheritance necessarily devolved upon her, but her Father was
now so old, that he was past the hope or expectation of any more Children: For
at the first entrance of the Children of Israel into the Wilderness, he was one
of the Heads of the Tribes, Numb. 13. 6. and one of those who together with
Joshua and others, v. 17. were sent by Moses to spy out the Land of Canaan;
after this they remained in the Wilderness Forty Years, and Joshua who seems
to have been much of the same Age with Caleb, soon after his entrance upon the
Land of Canaan died, being at his Death of the Age of an Hundred and ten Years,
Josh. 24. 29. Judge. 2. 8. And if we allow ten or twenty Years by which Joshua,
without any reason that appears, shall be supposed to be older than Caleb; the
Age of Caleb at the Marriage of his Daughter Achsah, will be an Hundred or
Ninety at the least, wherefore being so old and unfit in Person to be at the
Head of a Vigorous Assault, he propounds the taking of Kirjath-sepher to some
other with a reward, He that smites Kirjath-sepher and takes it, says he, to
him will I give Achsah my Daughter to Wife; not that any one Man could take a
City or Town by himself, or that every Man was fit to Command a Party; or that
the Inheritance which was to go along with Achsah, could be legally diverted
from Othniel, who was the next Heir Male of that Family, only by these general
words he propounds the Conduct of the Expedition to Othniel with Promise upon
Success, that he should immediately be Married to his Daughter, which the Old
Man during his Life time, was not obliged to permit, and have part of the
Inheritance in hand before hand. And this is the true State of this Case, which
though in it self it be nothing to our purpose, yet there is an use that may be
made of it, and that is this;

That it would be very strange, if God had intended equally to prohit the
Marriage of an Uncle with his Niece, as of an Aunt with her Nephew, not only
that he should no where expressly prohibit the former of these, as he has done
the latter, but that the Holy Spirit in this particular Case of Achsah and
Othniel should speak of the Marriage of Cousin Germans after such a manner,
that many, and those very Learned Men too, have been induced to believe it was
the Marriage of the Uncle with his Niece, for of this Opinion were most of
those whom I have already cited as Asserters of the merely positive Obligation
of the Mosaic Law.

Sixthly, and lastly, Though I am far from disputing the Kings Power in
dispensing with a Statute in Cases of necessity, of which he is the Judge, yet
in ordinary Cases he is never supposed to intend it, and it is certain, that
when among other Articles presented to him by the Convocation he gave his Royal
Assent to the Matrimonial Table, in which the Uncle is prohibited to Marry his
Niece, the Convocation themselves were of Opinion, that this Degree was some
way or other prohibited by the Law of Moses, and the King agreed to this
Prohibition among others, upon that supposition, but now since it appears so
plainly, that this sort of Marriage was never actually forbidden by the Law of
Moses nor so much as intended to be forbidden, either nothing but Gods Law can
impeach any Marriage, and by consequence this cannot be impeached, or else an
Act of Parliament may be Repealed by an Act of Convocation, which yet has no
Power to make any Laws or Ordinances whatsoever, but what the Parliament it
self has given it, and the Parliament can never be supposed to put a Power
destructive of their very Constitution into the Hands of the Clergy met
together in a Convocation; nay, they have expressly provided, with the Kings
Royal Assent, who, without necessity, which cannot here be pretended, will
never break his Word with his People, and then the breach of it is the truest
Justice, that no Convocation shall exercise any such Power.

FINIS.
AN Additional Advertisement Concerning the HALF-BLOOD.
Deuteronomy. 13. 6. It is provided in case of Idolatry; If thy Brother, the Son of
thy Mother, or thy Son, or thy Daughter, or the Wife of thy Bosom, or thy
Friend which is as thine own Soul, entice thee secretly, saying, Let us go and
serve other Gods, etc. v. 8. Thou shall not consent unto him, nor hearken unto
him, neither shall thine Eye pity him, neither shall thou spare, neither shall
thou conceal him; v. 9. But thou shall surely kill him; thine Hand shall be
first upon him to put him to death, and afterward the Hand of all the People.

The meaning of this Law is, that Idolatry should certainly be punished with
Death, let the Relation be never so nigh, or the Endearment and Friendship
never so great, as appears by those Words, Or the Wife of thy Bosom, or thy
Friend which is as thine own Soul; and when it is said, Thy Brother the Son of
thy Mother, without mention of the Brother by the Father, it is implied, that
the one is nearer of kin than the other, in the Interpretation of the Levitical
Law, this best answering the intention of this Law of Moses which did oblige
them not to conceal even their nearest Relations, and in this Prohibition the
Brother being the Son or supposed Son of the Father is included a fortiori.

Books written by the same Author, and Printed for Walter Kettilby, at the
Bishops-Head in St. Paul's Churchyard.
1. ANimadversions upon the Doctrine of Transubstantiation, in a Sermon
Preached before the Lord Mayor, October 19th. 1679.

2. A Discourse of the Divine Omnipresence and its Consequences, in a Sermon
Preached before the Honorable Society of Lincoln's Inn the first Sunday of
Michaelmas Term, 1683.

3. A Sermon Preached before Sir P. W. 1681. with Additions. To which are
annexed three Digressional Exercitations. I. Concerning the true time of our
Saviors Passover. II. Concerning the Prohibition of the Hebrew Canon to the
Ancient Jews. III. Concerning the Jewish Tetragrammaton, and the Pythagorick
Tetractys. Quarto.

4. Two Discourses Introductory to a Disquisition, demonstrating the
unlawfulness of the Marriage of Cousin Germans, from Law, Reason, Scripture and
Antiquity. Octavo.

5. A Letter of Resolution to a Friend concerning the Marriage of Cousin
Germans. Octavo.

6. A Resolution of Three Matrimonial Cases, viz. I. Whether it be lawful for a
Man to Marry his disceas'd Wives Sisters Daughter. II. Whether the Half-Blood
makes Kindred. III. Whether such a Marriage being made, it ought to be
dissolved or no.

7. Boaz and Ruth, A Disquisition upon Deuteronomy. 25. 5. concerning the the Brothers
Propagating the Memory of his Elder-Brother deceased; in which the Antiquity,
Reason and Circumstances of the Law are Explained, the Mistakes and Impositions
of the Jewish Rabbis in this and other matters detected, and a fair way opened
for a clearer understanding of the most obscure and dark places in the Law of
Moses; together with a discovery of several things as well in the Eastern as
Roman Antiquities, never yet explained or understood by any.

8. An Argument in defense of the Marriage of an Uncle with the Daughter of his
Half Brother by the Fathers side. Octavo.


