CHOICE EXPERIENCES OF The kind dealings of God before, in, and after
CONVERSION; Laid down in six general Heads. Together with Some brief
Observations upon the same.

Whereunto is added a description of true E X P E R I E N C E.

By J. TURNER wife to Cap. John Turner.

PSALM 66. 16. Come and hear all ye that fear God, and I will declare what he
has done for my soul.

LONDON, Printed by H. Hills, and are to be sold at the Black spread-Eagle, and
the Three Bibles at the West end of Paul's 1653.

To the Churches of Christ who worship God in spirit and truth according to the
holy Commandments of Jesus Christ, especially those my dear Brethren at
Newcastle, Barwick, and Scotland, with whom I have taken sweet counsel in the
house of God for several years past, grace, mercy, truth and peace be
multiplied from the Lord Jesus Christ.
PRECIOUS and dearly beloved Brethren, I know it would seem very strange to
you, if this following Treatise should come to your hands without my public
owning of it, as indeed well it might, considering my near relation to the
Author; it is no small joy to my heart that the Lord is pleased in these our
days any way by any means to put his People in mind of that which they are so
prone to forget, namely the various workings of God in their poor hearts, which
you will find in this small Treatise in these three general heads, viz.
before, in, and since Conversion; we find the Lord in Scripture often calling
upon his People to remember their unconverted state, Isaiah 51. 1. Look unto
the Rock whence ye are hewn, and to the holy of the Pit whence ye are dug;
And the Lord knowing our great inclination to forget it, he is pleased to mind
us of it, as in Ephesians. 5. 8. 1 Cor. 6. 10, 11. Tit. 3. 3. Ephesians. 2. 1, 2, 3. etc.
The right remembrance of our unconverted state will be a means to engage our
hearts to be much in the thoughts of, and highly to prise, that unspeakable
love and grace of our God through Jesus in quickening us who were dead in
trespasses and sins, in translating us from the Kingdom of darkness into the
Kingdom of his dear Son; the serious pondering of these things in our hearts
will sweetly force us to break forth into admiration with the Apostle, 1 Ioh.
3. 1, 2. Behold what manner of love the Father has bestowed upon us, that we
should be called the sons of God, etc. but when we forget the two former, we
lose our communion with God in a great measure, and cannot prise and improve
the kind dealings of our God with us, since Conversion, neither walk holily and
obediently before the Lord in all his holy appointments as we ought, but leave
an open door for Satan to deceive us with his manifold tentations, by which we
suffer much harm.

My hearts desire and prayer to the Lord is, that he would give all his people
more care and diligence in watching their own hearts and ways, for the
increase of their spiritual strength and growth in grace, lest they being led
away for a time, with the error of the wicked, fall from their own
stedfastness, 2 Pet. 3. 17, 18. as many have done to their greatest grief and
loss. Beloved Brethren, you have here the labors of one of the weakest sex,
which I trust will occasion you the more to give glory to God, in that his
strength appears in weakness; were it not for the relation, I should have much
room to speak of the Author, and this Her work, but I shall only say, Let Her
works praise Her; only I have this that I cannot but say, it was not Her desire
to publish it, Her reasons She has expressed. Secondly, So far as one can
speak for another, I can say for my Wife, in this work she has had little
help from men or things, but I believe much from the Lord; and as the Lord has
owned and much assisted her in these her great labors, I trust the same power
will accompany each precious heart, into whose hand it may come, to make it
very profitable to them. At my first sight of it, which was when it was near
finished, though I believe I was the first that saw it, next Her self, I was so
surprised, knowing nothing of it before, that I knew not what to say of it; but
upon consideration, and reviewing of it, I was very much pressed in spirit to
publish it, and the more, in that the oftener I read it, the more I was engaged
to it: I can say through mercy it has been useful and profitable to me; I
hope it will be so to many more. It is no small mercy, nor low attainment, to
be indeed an experienced Christian; it is easier to have fine words than a
treasure in the heart: but seeing the kings daughter is all glorious within,
and that our treasure there does increase by the blessing of the Lord upon our
diligent using that means ordained for that end; this I trust will be a
faithful remembrancer and helper of us in this great work, in which I hope the
Lord will have much glory, and his people comfort, which has been, is, and I
trust ever shall be, the earnest desire of

Your poor unworthy Brother in the Gospel, JOHN TURNER.

To the Reader.
Reader,
Thou will find in this little Book something suitable to those various
changes, and differing conditions that ordinarily poor souls are in, both
before, in, and after conversion (only excepting a high degree of visible
profaness, and excess of riot, with heart, hand and tongue blaspheming the holy
One of Israel, in an unconverted State) The Author was kept from that great
degree of wickedness, as you will find in the beginning of Her book. If this
shall come into the hands of any that yet live in those pollutions, and
abominable corruptions, the Lord teach them to consider, that if Civility and
Morality be too low and too little to stand the Soul in any stead in that day
when God will judge the secrets of all men by Jesus Christ; Surely then sin and
profaness will be a miserable covering. This little Treatise is not intended
principally for such Ishmaelites, but rather for those who have their faces
Zion ward enquiring the way thither, as also to such as have a name and place
where the honor of God dwells, to all such I may say as an encouragement to
peruse this little Treatise, First, as to the nature of it, its that which has
been digested, and it may well be called Experience, it may be likned to the
Wine that Christ made of water at the end of the Mariage-Feast, being last it
was better than the first, though doubtless the first wine was good: So I hope
thou will find these few lines, though good at the first, yet better at the
latter end, it being the privilege of Saints to have their last works best, and
as they grow in years to grow in grace; which the Lord grant unto all his, for
his mercies sake. Amen.

JOHN TURNER.

To the Christian Reader.
I Cannot but take it as a mercy from the Lord, that I have such an opportunity
to give my testimony unto so worthy a work as this is, which indeed is a work
that is not common amongst men, being the work of a Daughter of Zion, nay I may
say a Mother in Israel, as it is said, Many Daughters have done virtuously, but
She excels them all, therefore let Her own works praise Her in the Gates of
Zion, who has opened to the view of all, not only the counsel of man's heart,
which is as the deep waters, with the deceits thereof, in which it may miscarry
through the wisdom of the flesh, and the wiles of Satan, but also the wonderful
wisdom of God, in the powerful operation of his Spirit, in the clear footsteps
of his Grace, by a large and well grounded experience in the Lords bringing of
a poor soul out of darkness into light, but in more particular thus; How far a
soul may be wrought upon before it comes to Christ, with the lets and
hindrances that keep it off from the truth. Secondly, of the true work of
Grace in the heart, and how this differs from the former. Thirdly, the souls
closing with Christ, and the sweet enjoyments of the same. And lastly, the full
establishment in the free Grace of God, and the manner how God effected this,
with the several effects of all the aforesaid degrees of Grace, with so much
variety of spiritual, soul-edifying matter, and all so full of life and delight
to a gracious experienced heart, that as to my remembrance I have not heard of
the like, together with a large discovery of the most devilish and strong
delusions of our times and the depth and danger of them, with the great
Soul-losses of such as are taken with them, and also the nature and tendency of
them, and Gods rich mercy in his recovering of his own out of them, and how by
his wisdom he makes the same work for their good. So that good Reader, if thou
would see the very inside of a gracious soul, with the largest experience of
the riches of Gods great dispensations of grace, here it is clearly presented
in this small ensuing Treatise, being so seasonable for the time we live in, and
so useful for all sorts of persons, wherein error and heretics are discovered,
the godly most sweetly edified, and the way of truth laid open for such as
desire it, and many precious principles of truth soundly asserted; All which,
with much more considered, did not only affect my soul, but caused me, with
others, to press on the author hereof to publish the same for the good of
Saints, and a glorious example for all Christians to follow, in a serious
observing the passages of Gods providence and grace, that they may be rich in
experience of his free mercies and goodness toward them, as that by which God
holds our souls in life, and forms his image in us, with deep engagements of
love and zeal for his glory, into whose bosom I commit the godly Reader, and
this good work unto his blessing upon thy heart, and remain the unworthiest of
all Saints,

John Spilsbery.

To the Reader.
READER,
THis small Volume is the fruit of private Meditations relating to the inward
man, which many neglecting have been like painted Sepulchers. It is a known
Maxim, That the serious minded Christian is the most thriving, especially when
the judgment orders the affection. Many persons are so drowned in confused
and immethodical thoughts, that all their intentions are like an untimely
birth, or the grass on the house top. This Author has obtained favor of the
Lord not only to be esteemed a Daughter of Sion, but also one that excels
in grace, and to be counted a Mother in the true Israel, of which we have not
many. I speak not this by hearsay only (though her works praise her in the
gates) but having had for some years more than ordinary experience of her clear
conceptions, and sound judgment; being more naturally given to the exercise of
godliness with sobriety than others, has stirred me up to testify some of her
spiritual worth, which has been very advantageous to many, but especially to
me. It was the great sorrow of the Jewish woman to be barren, being thereby
deprived of bringing forth Christ in his humane nature; and it is greater
sorrow to ingenious Christians to be barren in spirituals. This precious soul
has conceived and brought forth spiritual fruit, to the view of good and bad;
the matter contains a gradual narration of the Lords various dealings with
her many years, both in, and after Conversion, which speaks forth much
observance of Gods daily footsteps in the soul, the like have not commonly been
seen; few have given-themselves to be intent in discovering the beauty of
Christ in the inward man. If this may be instrumental to bring forth the
additional experiences of other Saints, it will be a good president, especially
in this age, in which Saints time has been occasionally taken up more in
building the walls of the true Sion, than in discovering the treasures of Grace
and inward Glory of Christ in the soul.

These inward Experiences are not intended to limit others, but to provoke
self-examination and spiritual quickening. They are orderly laid down, though
with brevity; a word to the wise is enough. Here is the danger of sin
discovered, the excellent safety of a soul in Christ declared, the duties of
privileged Christians manifested, and some cautions laid down to take heed of a
light and unsound Generation of men, whose deceits have been largely
experienced. Be watchful, lest you fall where others have stumbled, and are
through Grace recovered and much established. Read with diligence, consider
with patience; thy encouragements are many; that which is tendered being the
fruit of the Spirit of grace does invite and animate thee; to conclude, thy
labor shall not be in vain in the Lord, to whom I commend thee in this and all
thy spiritual labors, and remain

Dated at London the 7th day of the 7th Month 1653. Thy affectionat^ and
welwishing friend JOHN GARDNER.

A word from the Author to the READER.
THese notes in the following discourse are some of the fruits of my labors
written at several times in my Husbands absence, which may be some satisfaction
as to my spending that time. I did intend them only for my own private use, as
a remembrancer of the old loving kindness of the Lord toward me, and it was not
in the least in my thoughts that ever it should have been presented to a
public view, but after I had written the greatest part of it, showing it to my
Husband, he had some thoughts to publish it, judging it might be profitable to
some precious souls which, though it be written but in a broken, scattering
way, and I am conscious to my self of too much weakness and unworthiness to be
an Instrument for the good of souls, or to propagate the least truth of the
Lord Jesus, yet I shall be willing to submit to better Judgments, hoping
through the Blessing of God it may be useful, knowing from my own experience I
have received much from the Lord by reading: but besides the sense of my own
unworthiness, as I had some discouraging thoughts as to my writing of it at the
first, so I have met with the like as to my giving way to the publishing of it.
As first, I thought I might seem to some to walk in an untrodden path, I having
never seen any thing written before in this manner and method; but whatever
entertainment it may find with such, knowing from whom I have received it, I am
well satisfied, my footsteps will be found as for matter, so for method and
manner, among the footsteps of the flock of Christ, where I desire to feed
besides the Shepherds Tents, Cant. 1. 8, Another thought which did discourage
me was, knowing I must expect to encounter with Satan in relation to it several
ways, but believing that which way soever he appears whether to abase or exalt
me in my own thoughts, the Lord will not be wanting with strength to withstand
and resist him, and that I shall with advantage be delivered from his snares
and temptations: Thus resolving to commit my self and it to the blessing of the
Almighty, desiring it may be accepted of the Saints as the widows mite, and
that what is weak may be covered with love, is the desire of me the unworthy
Servant of Christ,

JANE TURNER.

The manner how I was put upon the writing these following lines, with the
reasons and grounds for doing the same.
THrough the good providence of God, I lived in Newcastle for some time, where
I received many precious mercies from the Lord, which I desire may never be
forgotten by me; and being under a bodily affliction, the Lord was pleased so
to visit me with his loving kindness, that I can truly say, it was a time of
joy to my soul: and indeed I never enjoyed so much sweet communion with God,
for so long a time together, as I did at that time; for, for the space of seven
or eight weeks together, I was in a continual converse and exchanging love with
God, as it were lodging and living in the bosom of Christ; and truly I do not
remember that in all that time I had one considerable interruption; which
condition was so sweet and joious to me, that it did exceedingly grieve me to
think that ever I should forget the particulars thereof, finding from sad
experience, that (though I can never forget the substance of such things, yet)
I am prone to forget the particulars, the remembrance of which I find to be
much for the glory of God, and my own comfort and profit, especially in times
of trial and temptations; upon the consideration of which I thought it might be
a good way to write them down.

And calling to mind some of the old loving kindnesses of God toward me, I
resolved to write down some of them: For I do believe I cannot remember the
hundredth part of the kind dealings of God toward me, so as to write them all:
but though I cannot remember all; yet I may remember some, and those I judge
most considerable I resolved to write them down.

But as I had many thoughts of encouragement to do it, so I had some thoughts
that did discourage me; As

First, I thought it would be very hard, if not impossible, for me to remember
that which has been so long since (so as to write it) But the Lord was pleased
to satisfy me in this; that my ends being such as were agreeable to his will,
he would according to his promise, in my endeavors, bring things to my
remembrance: and truly I was confirmed in believing he would so do, from my own
experience, for I do not remember that ever I set my self seriously to meditate
on the former kindness of God toward me, but I was much refreshed by it, and
remembered that which I seemed to have forgotten.

A Second thought which did discourage me was, fearing left through
forgetfulness as I knew I should leave out something which was, so I might
possibly write something which was not, which I would not by any means
willingly do; this I discerned to be a temptation for fear of hypocrisy, but
God was pleased to satisfy me in it, with this resolution, that what I did I
would do as in his presence, and that if there were any thing which was clear
to my remembrance, that I could not bring in without something which was
doubtful, I would rather leave out the one, than write the other, much less
write any thing which was a plain addition, and in this resolution I set upon
it, believing that God would assist and help me, desiring not to give way to
discouraging thoughts; for I have often experienced this, that if in writing,
speaking, or doing of any thing whereby God may be glorified, we should give
way to temptations and discouragements, we should do nothing at all: For Satan
and our own hearts will not be wanting to us, that way. But with grief of heart
I must confess, that the greatest discouragements that I have met with have
been from the Saints themselves (I do not mean only as to this particular, but
as to other spiritual duties also) by which I trust I have learned in some
measure to take the more heed how I discorage others; and doubtless Saints
ought to take great heed left by their giving just occasion of discouragement
they quench the Spirit of God in them, 2 These. 5. 1^. quench not the Spirit;
which that we may not do, we ought to endeavor for a Spirit of discerning, and
for such a carriage by which we may best draw forth the hearts of others in
spiritual things; not that we should draw or put persons upon that which they
have not received, or that we should encourage any who put themselves on such
things, but rather reprove them, especially those who so act in a public way,
such as the Apostle speaks of, who would be preachers of the Law, when indeed
they know not what they say, nor whereof they affirm, 1 Timothy 1. 7. the hearing
of which has been no small burden to my spirit. I wish from my soul, that not
only particular Saints may be faithful in the discharge of their duty, to
reprove such, but also that the Church would put forth their Authority for the
calling of them in, and that such brethren only whose gifts are approved of by
the Church, may exercise their gifts publicly, and no other, that the Saints
may not be burdened, nor the world blaspheme. I shall say no more as to this,
believing that the Lord will instruct those that are called to that work,
namely to judge who are fit to be teachers, desiring only to caution Saints to
take heed of casting stumbling blocks in each others way: For doubtless, though
its one of the last, yet its not the least trial, that after we have in a great
measure overcome the world, the devil, and our own hearts, we should meet with
lets and discouragements from one another.

Its that indeed which is suitable to an imperfect state in which we are, and
by which we may learn, as to live more singly on God, so also to press after,
and long for, that perfect State in which we shall be at the appearance of our
Lord Jesus Christ. I might enlarge much in this matter, but I intend only to
hint at things, desiring the Lord to stir up the hearts of some more able, to
enlarge upon it, knowing there is great need that Saints should be exhorted to
this duty, namely not to discourage but to, encourage one another in all good
things; and I desire that we may set before us that exhortation of the Apostle,
Gal. 5. 26: Let us not be desirous of vain glory, provoking one another,
envying one another; From whence I observe, that to be desirous of vain glory,
makes way for a spirit of envy, and so to provoke and grieve one another.

The consideration of that Scripture with Jam. 4. 5. may through the blessing
of God be very useful to Saints for this purpose: for questionles a slighting
of the gifts and grace of God in others, does many times arise off a desire of
vain glory, and a spirit of envy.

The first Note of Experience of the good Providence of God toward me in a
state of Ignorance and Darkness before Conversion.
IT pleased the Lord I was civilly brought up from a child, and kept from such
gross evils as persons merely civil do not allow, but otherways very vain;
and that which instrumentally kept me from such things, as I conceived, was
(together with my civil education) a desire of happiness, and a fear of misery,
having a general notion that sin was attended with misery; for I remember,
when I had done any thing that I thought was sin, I was presently under great
fear and terror; to take off which, and also to attain happiness in the end, I
thought I was to be exercised in some kind of religion, but being very
ignorant, I made no inquiry what religion was, but took it for granted that
that was religion which was then in force from King and Bishops, and so going
on I grew very superstitiously zealous in all things suitable to the service
Book, or a Cathedral kind of Worship, and I thought the more I abounded in
fasting, book prayer, and observation of days and times, mourning and
afflicting my self for sin, the better it was; so that I think I did exceed
most that I knew in that way for blind zeal, and superstitious devotion: yet at
this very time I thought my self far from Popery, and did always oppose that
with much zeal, and I am sure with much ignorance.

Then being acquainted with some who were then called Puritans, I began to
perceive that there was some difference betwixt that which I practiced, and
that which was done by them; and my observation of their carriages, and hearing
them speak such language as I was altogether a stranger to, did so far work
upon me, that I began to question my own condition, and often times when I had
done my long book prayers, though I had scarce ever heard of praying without a
book, yet I would in a poor broken manner complain to God that I was in some
fear that what I did was not according to his will, and if it were not, I did
beg of him that he would bring me to the knowledge of the truth whatever I did
undergo for attaining of it: But then sometimes I thought my condition good
enough, and though I was never given to rail or speak evil of such persons, yet
I thought they made more ado than they need to have done, and that God did not
require so much strictness as they seemed to plead for.

But hearing them speak much of knowledge, and of the danger of ignorance, and
knowing my self to be very ignorant, I began to be more frequent in reading the
Scriptures, and hearing sermons; but my understanding not being yet opened, it
was to little effect; for I remember I was at this time like a stock or stone
as to the true understanding of that which I read or heard, that I can truly
say as the Prophet in Psalm. 73. 22. So foolish was I and ignorant, even as a
Beast before thee; and yet at this time I was something in affection, as when I
heard any thing of the judgments of God against sin, I should tremble, and
when any thing of the mercy and goodness of God, or the love and sweetness of
Jesus Christ, my heart would melt (as I thought) yet I understood nothing, so
as to have it seated in the understanding and judgment.

This in general I do remember as to that state.

Some brief Observations from this note of Experience.
FIrst, concerning my being kept from sin by a desire of happiness, and fear of
misery: From thence I observe,

That in the days of ignorance, before we have received grace to restrain us
from sin, its a mercy to be restrained by something else: And truly to me its a
mercy so considerable, that I desire to bless the Lord for it as long as I live.

Secondly, concerning my seeking after and framing to my self some kind of
Religion, from thence I observe,

That its natural for persons to make after some kind of Religion, and rather
than they will worship nothing, they will worship, Samaritan like, they know
not what, John 4. 22.

Thirdly, concerning my opposing Popery, when my self lived in the practice of
the same thing for the nature of it, from thence I observe,

That a person may oppose an error, and yet live at that time in the same error
for the nature of it, though in a lower degree, and not know it; And that not
only persons totally ignorant, but Saints also, if they take not good heed: for
I have experienced this more times than once.

Fourthly, concerning my complaint and prayer to God in relation to truth, from
thence I observe,

That a person before conversion may (for ought I know) truly pray, and that
from a secret work of God upon the heart. And therefore though I cannot from
Scripture-rule exhort such to pray, so neither from ence can I forbid them, but
rather rejoice to see the hearts of any run out in such a way.

Fifthly, concerning my being so much affected with truth, though I understood
it not, from thence I observe,

That ignorant persons in hearing truth may have their reason so far touched,
that they may assent to it, and be much affected with it, and yet understand
nothing so as to have it seated in the heart and judgment; and because it is
not seated in the heart and judgment, that I conceive is the reason why
ignorant persons are so uncertain and so unconstant in their thoughts
concerning truth, and why many that live a long time under much means, yet
continue very ignorant, it may be ever learning, and never able to come to the
knowledge of the truth, 2 Ti. 3. 7. and as the seed upon the stony ground
withred away because it had no root; So truth not being rooted in the heart and
judgment, though it spring up in much affection, yet it comes to nothing. And
indeed ignorant persons many times are sooner affected, and do seem to have
more affection than others; he reason of that I conceive) is the same also with
that of the seed upon the stony ground, it sprang up suddenly, because it had
not depth of earth; so its natural for ignorant persons to spring forth in
affection, they having as it were nothing else to do but only to be affected;
their strength running all in one vein, or in one Chanel, they spend all in
affection, while others that have more understanding have many other things to
do, all the faculties of their souls being exercised, their strength is
dispersed into many veins, weighing and pondering things in the heart and
judgment, that it may have depth to root and settle there; as its said of Mary,
she pondred those things in her heart, Luke 2. 19. so they are treasuring it
up in their hearts, having in their treasury things new and old. Mat. 12. 35.
and 13. 52. and a little affection where there is judgment, is better than a
great deal without judgment; yet much affection with a sound judgment is best
of all.

The second note of Experience, How I was brought to see my self in a miserable
state by Nature, and convinced of sin by the Law, and so converted to duty,
laboring for life by doing, though at that time in my own thoughts far from
owning such a thing.
By providence hearing a Minister of the Nation who was then called a Puritan,
whom though I used often to hear, yet I could truly say as the Prophet in Dan.
10. 8. I heard, but I understood not; and as I was once hearing of him, very
suddenly I thought I did discern and understand things more clearly and more
distinctly than ever I did before that time, being much affected with it, and
did then own God in it, having many such thoughts as these, that as it was said
of Lydia, Act. 16. 14. that now the Lord had opened my understanding, and now I
hoped I should have more knowledge, and delight more in hearing and reading,
whereas before it was wearysome to me, because I did not understand any thing
but in a confused manner.

After this I had a great delight to hear this man, and though I thought it
much on any other occasion to go one mile on foot, yet to hear him I could go
three, and back again the same day frequently; and by his Ministry I was
brought to see the superstitious varity of my former zeal, and laid it aside;
and I remember that at this time I had such affectionate heart-workings toward
God and godliness, and such a hatred of all sin, according to what I then knew,
that I did many times in my serious thoughts choose rather to die than live,
merely upon that account, because I would not sin against God, knowing my self
subject thereunto.

And though I cannot say that at this time I had faith in God, so as to believe
his Love to me on Gospel grounds, for I was totally ignorant of any such thing
many years after, yet I had good thoughts of God from that glimmering light
which I then had, and which did produce in me much love to him, as I cannot but
so judge.

But no sooner was I brought to this, but Satan was ready to assault me, and
set upon me with this horrid temptation, to question the Being of God, and I
remember it usually came upon me when I was alone, but especially as I was
going by my self to hear the aforesaid Minister, insomuch that it did
exceedingly trouble me, and I then discerned it to be a temptation, and did
resist and labor against it, drawing arguments as I went in the fields from
the very works of Creation, to confirm my self in this truth, that there is a
God, that it should not be in vain for me or any to serve him; and earnestly
crying to God against it, through Grace I was not overcome by it, but had a
supply of strength until it was removed; and I was no more troubled with it in
many years after.

So I continued a constant hearer of this man, and other such like, for some
years, by which I came to see my self in a miserable State by nature, and was
convinced of sin by the Law; but being very ignorant of the Lord Jesus, and
their doctrine, being for the most part such as was suitable to the old
covenant, instead of going to Christ for life, I was brought to a great degree
of labor and travel for life and happiness, by doing (though at that time in
my own thoughts far from owning such a thing) being as exact and strict in
all my ways (I think I may say) as it was possible for a poor creature to be,
but the more strict I was, still looking through the glass of the law, the
more my bondage was increased; For I could see nothing but an addition of sin
in all that I did, the law still calling for a perfect righteousness:

Then I began to be very much troubled, and in a great amasement and perplexity
of spirit, fearing I should perish for ever; then I had thoughts to discover my
condition to some to have advise from them, but meeting with many
discouragements, did not, but kept it in my own breast, discovering no more but
what I could not hide, which was only my outward appearance much differing
from what formerly it was, which did occasion some to say that I was near a
distraction, they not knowing what condition I was in.

And truly my condition was so sad that I was afraid of a distraction my self;
for I thought it impossible to continue long in that condition, and not be
distracted, which fear did occasion me to apply my self to some means of
comfort, whereas before I was not willing to hearken to any thing that way: the
means I used was chiefly reading and prayer, by which it pleased the Lord I
came to some dark apprehensions concerning Jesus Christ, being persuaded there
was something of that nature, which if I could get a right understanding of, my
condition would be much better; but fearing left I should sink under my
burden, temptations coming on me like the waves of the Sea, I was forced as I
went about my occasions often to cry to God, like the Disciples in another
case, Lord save me, else I perish, Mat. 8. 25. I thought many times, I was even
sinking under my burden, and I did believe there was no help but only in the
Lord, and that he was able to do it, but whether he would do it, or whether he
would save or damn me at last, I knew not, neither did I think it possible for
me ever to have known that, except it were by some extraordinary way, which
very few did attain unto.

But by degrees I began to stay upon some promises through such considerations
as these; first, I thought it could not stand with the goodness of God to damn
a poor soul that had such heartworkings and desires after him as I had, having
much in my thoughts those words of Sampsons Mother, Judges 13. 23. I thought
that if he did intend to destroy me he would never have given me such desires
after him, and preserved me till now; and then that promise, Mat. 5. 6. did
much support me, for I thought that if ever poor creature did hunger and thirst
after righteousness, I did; these promises and considerations, with some
confused apprehensions that I had concerning the Lord Jesus, did much raise me;
the thoughts I had of him were such as these, I did believe that the Justice of
God must be satisfied for sin, and that nothing could satisfy his justice but a
perfect righteousness, now I thought I was to be very strict and circumspect
in all my ways, if it were possible, to perform such a righteousness, but
what I could not do, Christ had done for me, and when I had done any thing that
I thought was sin, I could not apply Christ till I had repented, that was till
I had mourned, fasted and prayed, afflicting my self in such a measure as I
thought might stand with the not destroying or prejudicing nature, for there
God would have mercy rather than sacrifice, and Jesus Christ would make up that
which was wanting: so that Christ was my stay, though it was through a very
carnal and wrong apprehension.

But though I thought I must be so qualified and fitted for Christ before I
could receive him, and be made happy by him, yet I knew there was no mercy to
be found without him, nor no life but in him: In this condition I lived some
years more, and grew very cheerful and confident (as I think it was possible to
be, under such an apprehension) but yet my confidence was always more or
less, as I was more or less strict in my ways, and sometimes though I had
been never so strict yet I was subject to fear left I had not done as much as
it was possible for me to do, for otherways I thought Christ would be nothing
at all to me; yet my hopes were greater than my fears, and I was resolved, if I
perished, I would perish here at the feet of Christ: and now I did not only see
that possible which before I thought impossible, but I had great hopes and much
confidence most times.

This apprehension, though it be that which is far below the glory of the free
grace of God in the Gospel, yet it did present Christ very lovely to me, and
did produce in me a real love to him, as I dare not but so judge, considering
how I stood affected to, and delighted in, whatever I knew to be his will:
Though I must confess I think at the first the great wheel that carried all
about, was my own good; yet I am very confident that at this time I had a real
love to, and delight in, the Lord Jesus Christ, and his commandments were not
grievous to me, but I did approve of them to be the most excellent things,
because approved of by the Lord; and I well remember I was so far taken off
from delighting in sin, that I think I may say I did hate it with a perfect
hatred, as that which was in it self the only object of hatred, as it was
against God, and all my delight was to be with those that I thought did excel
in virtue, and I could not bear wicked persons, but their ways and practices
were odious to me; yet still I say my condition at this time was a condition of
extreme bondage and below the Gospel.

I shall say no more of it, but only this, that what I have here written I
think I may say is not the hundredth part of the labors and travells of my soul
whiles I lived in that condition, and if I should go about to write it all, I
know not how nor when to make an end. But God was pleased in mercy to free me
from that bondage by the manifestation of his love and grace through his Son,
to whom be all praise and glory for ever more, Amen.

Some brief Observations from this second note of Experience.
FIrst, Concerning the person by whom my experience in these things began,
which was one (as I judge) not rightly called or sent to preach the Gospel, he
not being related to a true Church, though otherwise (I hope) a godly man
according to that measure of light he had received.

From whence I observe, That it is possible for a godly man in times of
ignorance and darkness to be a Minister of a false Church.

Secondly, I observe, That though it be not the work of a false Ministry,
neither is it the way of God to convert souls by, yet accidentally or
providentially something may be done that way by them, especially in times of
persecution, where there is not a true Ministry abroad; as indeed I am much
inclined to own the work of conversion to be begun in me at this time, and that
for these reasons.

First, because now was the day of Gods power no^ only to make me willing, but
there was some change wrought in the whole soul; and every faculty of it, which
before was dead, had now some life and motion in things relating to God and
godliness; as the understanding was opened, so the will was changed, and made
willing to submit to truth, and to embrace the ways of life, though it were
through the greatest difficulty, yet in much darkness; and then the affections
were taken, and though there were but a little glimps of truth appeared, yet
there was a love to it, and delight in it, and a great hatred of the contrary;
all which I apprehend could not be but from some seeds of the Gospel, though
through false teaching, there was not that blessed fruit of joy and peace in
believing; also the Memory was active and busy to retain truth, so that here
was some change wrought in the whole soul as aforesaid.

A second reason is, because when I lay under conviction of sin by the Law, and
was ready to sink under my burden, that which did suport and uphold my spirit
was the Lord Jesus Christ, though my apprehensions of him were not according to
the Gospel, as to the glory of the free grace therein contained.

A third reason is, from the consideration of that fruit which did appear at
that time, which was an entire love to Christ, and a conversation suitable
thereunto, according to the light then received: For there was not only a doing
good, but a love to it, and delight in it; and there was not only a forbearing
evil, but a hatred and indignation against it. It being thus with me at this
time, I cannot but much tender persons in the like condition, who do manifest
by a good conversation, a real work of God upon their hearts, though living in
a discovery below the privileges of the Gospel: yet not so to tender them, as
not to tender the glory of truth above them, being true to my principles in
keeping a strict separation from them in relation to their visible and public
worship, it being contrary to the rule of the Gospel.

Three Observations from the three foregoing reasons. First, concerning the
Change wrought in the whole soul, from thence I observe,

That there may be a Change wrought in the whole soul to life and godliness,
long before that soul comes to enjoy life by believing.

Secondly, concerning my being staid upon Christ when I was like to sink upder
my burden, from thence I observe,

That a soul may cleave to, and really stay upon Christ, through some
apprehension which presents him lovely, though it may be that which does not
present him so lovely as indeed he is.

Thirdly, concerning that entire love I had to Christ and his ways, from
thence I observe,

That though the love of Christ manifested to a soul be that which ordinarily
begets love in the soul to Christ, yet its possible there may be a real love to
him, before there is such a manifestation.

Now having minded many particulars as to my condition at that time when I did
experience these things, I cannot altogether omit the kindness of God toward
me in relation to persecutions, which though it were but small comparatively
with some others, yet it was more than some met with, and it was that indeed
which did require some strength from the Lord to undergo it with comfort, in
which he not being wanting to me, I Judge it ought not to be forgotten by me;
and as I had comfort in it at that time present, so I am still well satisfied
that I suffered not as an evil doer, because what I did then, was upon a
conscientious account, according to that light received. I could mention many
particulars, but I forbear, heartily desiring that it may never be laid to
their charge. But this book being intended by me as a remembrancer of the
former dealings of God toward me, I think it not altogether useles, as to
remember the time I was in that condition, and the manner how I was brought
from it, so also the time when J was brought from it, and that was after the
Bishops were quite taken away in the beginning of the sitting of the late
Synod. And here I desire to remember with thankfulness to God, that I was not
ensnared by the change of times and laws; For at that very time when the
Presbyterian party, so called, began to reign, and J might have reignd with
them, and enjoyed smiles from them, being convicted of a further discovery of
truth J left them, and was content to become a scorn and a byword amongst
them; Though J must confess J had much respect from some of them all along, yet
my sufferings from that party were far more than the former. J could here
mention many particulars, but J forbear, desiring, as for the former, it may
not be charged upon them; only these general hints I hope will be sufficient to
bring particulars to my remembrance, for these things ought not to be forgotten
by me, because in the remembrance of them I find my heart much engaged in
praises to God, and that several ways; one way, and that not the least, is,
that God has broken their power. For indeed I must needs say, that according
to my observation and experience, I have seen as persecuting a spirit in them
as ever I did in the former, and they did appear as bitter, if not more,
against such as were called Anabaptists, than ever the Bishops did against
those that were called Puritans, considering their time and power: For as their
time was short, so when their power was highest, there was always a party
which did a little aw them. I shall say no more of these things, but that as I
desire for ever to bless the Lord in the remembrance of them, so I do likewise
desire that God would destroy, or at least keep under, every persecuting
spirit, under what name or title soever called, till he is pleased to give them
repentance.

The third Note of Experience, How I was brought to apprehend and believe the
free Grace of God in the Gospel, and in believing to receive the assurance of
the love of God.
IN order to this experience I cannot omit to write something concerning the
reading of a book, by which as a means in the hand of God I received these
never to be forgotten mercies. After I had livd about five or six years a
strict professor, being very confident and settled upon the Lees of Legal
Righteousness, it pleased the Lord there came a man to the Town where I lived,
whom though he was generally reputed to be an honest man, yet he was much
opposed as holding gross errors in his Judgment, and hearing many speak very
bitterly against him, I did much ponder it in my heart, not da^ing (as
Nicodemus spoke concerning Christ, John 7. 50.) to judge before I heard, and
therefore I resolved to speak with him, which accordingly I did, and found him
speaking such things as I never heard before, which I then ignorantly judged to
be errors; the things he chiefly spoke of, was about Free Grace, the nature of
the Gospel, and the New Covenant; and though I was not able to gain say the
truth of what he spoke, yet for fear of those evil consequences that a carnal
heart might draw from them, I could not receive it. But after some discourse,
in much opposition, yet not bitter against him, in the close he desired to lend
me a book, in which (he said) concerning the things he spoke I might find
better satisfaction than he could give, being but weak in expression; so I took
it home with me, but being much afraid of error, I was at a great dispute in my
own spirit whether I should read it or not; but fearing lest I should seem to
shut my eyes against the light, at last I came to this result, that I would
read it, but first set a part a day by fasting and prayer to seek the Lord,
that what was truth in it I might embrace, and that he would keep and preserve
me from error (which accordingly I did) and finding the drist and scope of the
book was to exalt God, and lay low the Creature, I was much affected with it,
as also with some other particulars; but on the other hand these Ministers
(whose words were then as Oracles to me) did so much cry out against it,
charging all to take heed of it, it being full of errors of dangerous
consequences, that when I came about the middle of it I was so surprised with
fear of carnal liberty, merely by their words, that I durst read it no further,
but sent it home again, resolving to stick to my old principles, and so
resolved I was, that I judged it my duty, and accordingly did praise the Lord,
that I had escaped that snare and stumbling block which it was like to be to
me, till about half a year after, these forementioned Ministers not being
satisfied to speak against those books in private only, but brought them into
their Pulpits reading particular passages, which as they read and applied it,
was contrary to the sense of it, and sometimes I thought they spoke more than
was true, which did occasion me to desire the book again for my better
satisfaction: but they not being allowed to be sold at that time, it was hard
to get any of them, but through mercy I got one, and then I found they did not
deal faithfully, but did wrest and draw false con sequences contrary to the
drist and scope of it, all which occasioned serious thoughts in me, remembering
when I first read it I laid it aside merely from a spirit of fear and prejudice
occasioned by their words, and not that I was able to disprove it from
Scripture grounds; then remembering those words of the Apostle, I These. 5. 21.
Try all things, and hold fast that which is good, I thought it my duty to lay
aside all slavish fear and prejudice, and to try it exactly by the Scriptures,
believing that as it was Gods way to try, so he would assist me in it, which he
was pleased to do, and as I read I began to be much affected, and I thought it
was glad tidings and good news if it were true, but I thought it was too good
to be true; for I could not then believe that God was so free of his Christ, as
to give him to any other sinners but to such as were qualified, fitted, and
prepared for him, or that the way to glory was so easy as he seemed to make it,
for if it were so, then all that labor and travel which I had been a long time
in, was nothing, which I could by no means yield to at that time. For as Christ
once said to the Jews that Publicans and Harlots enter into the Kingdom before
them, Mat. 21. 31. so truly I found it so hard to lay down my own legal
righteousness, and to submit to the righteousness of God by Faith, according to
Romans 10. 3. that I was like to stick here, when such as were more profane might
receive the truth sooner. But seriously weighing these with some other such
like Scriptures, as Romans 4. 4. and 5. 8. Ephe. 2. through grace I was in a
great measure convinced and brought to see that I had been exceedingly mistaken
in my understanding and applying of Jesus Christ, and whereas I thought I had
attained a good degree of knowledge, I now saw my self to be very ignorant, and
must begin again to learn the first principles of the oracles of God, which to
suffer so much loss was very hard to me (at the first) but God was pleased by
degrees to strip me of all, and to show me such a beauty and excellency in the
Lord Jesus above it, that I was made not only willing but joyous to lay down
all at his feet, and I trust could truly say with the Apostle, That what was
gain to me, I counted loss for Christ, yea doubtless and I count all things but
loss for the excellency of the knowledge of Christ Jesus my Lord, for whom I
have suffered the loss of all things, and do count them but dung, that I may
win Christ, and be found in him, etc. Phil. 3: 7, 8, 9, etc. and as God had
exalted Christ to be a Prince and a Savior, Acts 5. 31. and had chosen him as
the only excellent one in whom he had placed life and salvation for people,
Mat. 12. 18. so my soul did approve of it to be the most excellent way, and I
trust could truly say with the Spouse, he is the chiefest of ten thousand, ye
he is one, and there is not another, Cant. 5. 10. Act. 4. 12. and the more I
came to apprehend the glory of the Gospel in the free tenders and invitations
of Christ to sinners, the more still I was affected with it, and did admire it,
and seeing the tenders of grace so free, and the invitations so general that
whosoever would come might come and take of the water of life freely, Esaias 55.
1. Revel. 22. 17. and that whosoever came to Christ he would in no wise cast
out, John 6. 37. by which word [come] I understood believing, verse. 40. and
then considering the nature of the covenant, that it is a covenant of grace
free and without all conditions on the creatures part, and that the conditions
stand only between God and Christ, as I then understood by these Scriptures,
Esaias 53. 10. Psalm. 89. Through these considerations I was not only encouraged,
but the abounding love of Christ did compel and constrain me to cast my self
upon him for life and salvation, in a way of believing, and not in a way of
working; and to the praise of his grace as I desire never to forget it. I did
at this time receive the assurance of the love of God in believing the free and
full pardon of all my sins; That God had laid them all upon Christ, and
beholding the travel of his soul, was satisfied, Esaias 53. 11. and well pleased
with me in him Mat. 3. 17. and that they were all carried into the wilderness of
forgetfulness, and buried in, Oblivion, according to that type of Christ,
Levit. 16. 21, 22. and that they were washed away in his blood, Revel. 1. 5.
and that God would remember them no more, Heb. 8. 12. and 10. 17. These
Scriptures, with some others of the like nature, were by the Spirit of God set
home so powerfully upon my heart at that time, that truly I cannot express the
joyfulness and sweetness of my condition, not being able to contain my self
from calling to others to tell them what God had done for my soul, how he had
brought me out of bondage into the glorious liberty of adoption, and filled me
with joy and peace in believing, yea with joy unspeakable and full of glory,
Romans 15. 13. 1 Pet. 1. 8. and I remember for a long time after I did delight to
be almost continually speaking or meditating of the glory of the free grace of
God in the Gospel, and of his bounty and goodness to poor sinners, and to me
the chief of sinners, for I know more evil by my self than I do by any other,
yet doubtless I can say as it was once said of the Thessalonians, The Gosspel
came not to me at that time in word only, but in power, and much assurance, and
joy in the Holy Ghost, 1 These. 1. 5. and whereas formerly I thought that to
receive such a principle was the ready way to be loose and carnal, I did
believe that as justification and sanctification are inseparable, 2 These. 2.
13. and that as one end of Christ's death was as well to redeem his people from
all iniquity and the power of sin, as from the punishment of sin, so the power
of grace was more strong and able to keep me from sin, than all the legal bands
and slavish fears in the world, Tit. 2. 11. and though possibly I might meet
with some temptations of that nature, yet to the praise of his grace, I can
truly say I never found my heart more engaged for God and godliness, and more
disingaged from sin, than now, which the Lord keep me so and all his, Amen.

Some brief Observations from this third note of Experience.
FIrst, concerning my confidence in my former condition, before I knew these
things, from thence I observe,

That persons may be very confident on false grounds,

And that it is not the confidence that makes the condition good, but the
grounds of it.

For though still I say I am inclined to own the work of conversion to be begun
in me at that time before said, by some accidental or providential scatterings
of the seed of the Gospel, yet, through false teaching, those seeds were so
buried under the ashes of legal righteousness, that there was a greater power
required to blow off those ashes, and to carry on that work, than if it had
never been begun, according to that forementioned place, Matthew. 21. 31. how
hard then must it needs be to begin that work where there is only such a
righteousness? from thence I observe,

That Legal righteousness (where the work of conversion is begun in a soul) is
a great obstruction to the carrying on, and perfecting of that work.

Secondly, Concerning the manner of the dealings of God with me in the
manifestation of his Love and Grace, which was at this time by reading, as
indeed however God is pleased to deal with others, yet with me, I cannot say
but what I have received I have always received by and through some means,
from whence J observe,

That it is good to wait on God in the use of all means; for though the holy
One of Israel is not limited, yet ordinarily he works by means, and leaves no
ground in holy Scripture to expect him out of means.

Thirdly, Concerning my idolizing those forementioned Ministers, being kept by
it from reading or hearing any other doctrine but theirs, from thence I observe,

That it is a dangerous thing to esteem of persons above what is meet, and to
be implicitly lead by them in spiritual things.

Fourthly, Concerning my not receiving the doctrine of Free Grace for fear of
carnal liberty, from thence I observe,

That such as are ignorant of the Free Grace of God are subject to this
mistake, to think it the way to sin, when indeed there is no true holiness
without it.

Fifthly, concerning its being so hard to me to lay down my own righteousness,
etc. and yet that I should do it with so much Joy, when I saw clearly the
righteousness of Christ to excel all, from thence I observe,

That though it is a very hard thing for persons (eminent in legal
righteousness) to lay it down, and submit to the righteousness of God by faith,
yet the appearance of the transcendent excellency of Christ's righteousness,
will make them do it with joy.

Sixthly, Concerning my being so much affected with the Free Grace of God at my
first receiving it, that I could not but declare it to others, from thence I
observe,

That the glad tidings of the Gospel being applied by the Spirit of Christ, so
glads the heart, that when the soul first receives it its like fire that cannot
be hid.

Seventhly, Concerning the effect of the Free Grace of God upon my heart,
engaging me more to himself, and disingaging me more from sin, from thence I
observe,

That there is no engagement so strong to keep the soul from sinning against
God, as the Free Grace of God, nor nothing more endeers the heart to God; Yet
doubtless where there is nothing but only the notion of it, there is the
greatest advantage to Satan that can be, and usually such persons are the worst
of all others.

For though Gospel bonds be the best to be tied from sin by, yet in many
respects its better to be tied by Legal bonds than none at all; yet for Saints
to be so tied is not only carnal and below their privilege, but a great
dishonor to Christ, and an undervaluing of the Free Grace of God, which above
all things ought to be exalted by us, as that alone by which we are truly
exalted, and therefore ought to ly as the strongest engagements on Saints
hearts to keep them from sin; and seeing all that we are, have, or ever shall
have as to happiness here, or glory hereafter, is all of Grace, I desire for
ever to admire it, and to live in the glory of it by faith; But this I find of
all other the hardest Lesson, yea so hard, that unto this day I have cause to
complain of an unbelieving heart in many things, and I have often experienced
that to bring over the heart to believe, and to keep it up in believing, is no
less than the mighty power and gift of God, John 6. 65. Phil 1. 29. Ephesi. 1.
19. yet in this I have strong consolation, that I am kept by his power, 1 Peter
1. 5. and he has said, I will never leave thee, nor forsake thee, Hebrews 13.
5. and as the Lord once said to Peter, Though Satan should desire to winow me
like Wheat, yet he has prayed for me, and my Faith shall not fail; and though
the very reason why some persons do not believe, is for want of a clear
understanding of the Free Grace of God in the general tenders of it to sinners,
yet all that have that understanding do not believe, John 12. 17. there were
some whose hearts were hardened that they could not believe, and Acts 13. 41. it
was said of the Jews, they should in no ways believe the Work of God, though a
man declare it to them, that is to say, though they did understand it; and as
Faith is wrought in the soul by God, so it is that by which we most honor him,
and without which it is impossible to please him. Faith works many ways, and
it is an excellent thing to be strong in faith, as we may see in those
Worthies, Hebrews 11. It is the very life of Saints, Galatians 2. 20. and
without it there is no life in them, John 6. 53. and as there is no life
without it, so there is no life above it till grace be swallowed up in glory;
For the just shall live by faith, Hebrews the 10. verse 38. but though faith
acts many ways, and about many things, yet it must always act in free grace,
and there is no room for it elsewhere: for when we go to exercise faith out of
Free Grace, it is weak, and feeble, and ready to be turned aside by the least
repulse, but being there acted, all falls before it, as Dagon before the Ark,
whether sin, law, or devil; Sin falls before it, as its an Instrument or means
by which God purifies the heart, Acts 15. 9. the law falls before it, as it
takes the righteousness of Christ by which it is perfectly fulfilled, Romans 10.
4. Satan falls before it, as it is that by which we quench all his fiery darts,
Ephesians. 6. 16. And as in this way I did at first receive the pardon of sin, and
so the knowledge of my interest in the Lord Jesus, for Justification,
Redemption and Salvation; So I have no other way (as I believe there is no
other) by which I still retain those glorious privileges, than in the same way
in which I did first receive them, namely through grace by faith, not by any
thing that is in me, or done by me, not by acts of obedience, works of
righteousness, or submission to ordinances, all which are too low and too
little to keep up my union with God; but I desire to appear in these as they
are commanded by God, and as they are fruits and effects of faith, and through
which I have communion with God and his people, which is a very great
privilege, and I desire that all Saints may so esteem of them, and by no means
slight them; but I do likewise desire that none may esteem of them above what is
meet, as to glory in them, or to place that in them which is only peculiar to
the Lord Jesus himself, who is our All in All, Colossi. 3. 11. Who of God is
made unto us wisdom, righteousness, sanctification, and redemption, that he
that glories may glory in the Lord, 1 Cor. 1. 30, 31. And doubtless it is a
great abuse to Christ, and Ordinances, to glory in them, which we are subject
to do, when we live not in the beholding of him through the riches of his grace
by Faith, which as I said before, is the highest life, and so far as I have
experienced the excellency and glory of it, I can say with the Apostle, I
desire to know nothing but Christ and him crucified, 1 Cor. 2. 2. and God
forbid that I should glory in any thing save in the cross of our Lord Jesus
Christ, Gal. 1. 14. I may further say of my experience in this matter, as David
of the Sword of Goliath, There is none like it, 1 Samuel 21. 9. or as the Apostle
said to the Corinthians, That though they had ten thousand Instructors, yet not
many Fathers; so though I had ten thousand experiments, yet I have none like
this; For all must center here, and without this all is nothing; And herein me
thinks the glory and excellency of the life of faith in Free Grace does much
appear, in that the weak and strong Christian do both meet and are satisfied in
it, the highest capacity may be exercised in learning more of it, and yet the
lowest may reach it, so as to live and have strong consolation in it, and Fools
shall not err therein, Isaiah the 35. chapter, verse 8. This is that new and
living way by the blood of Jesus, Hebrews chapter 10. verses 19, 20. the richest
and highest favor that ever was bestowed on the children of men, to him
therefore be glory and praise for evermore.

The fourth Note of Experience, how I was convinced and brought to submit to
Baptism and Church Fellowship commanded by Christ.
BEing through mercy now well satisfied in point of Justification, Redemption,
and Salvation, though I had nothing to do to be saved, yet I had much to do to
glorify God in relation to Sanctification and Obedience; but notwithstanding
all my former experience in point of Faith, I was very ignorant of Baptism, and
all other duties and Ordinances relating to the visible practice of Believers,
only I had some dark apprehensions of separation, and a Church way, by reason
of which I had thoughts to join with some who were called Independents; but
considering how I had formerly been mistaken about things of that nature, I was
not hasty to practice it, until I was better satisfied, being somewhat at a
loss about it; then after some time I heard of Baptism, though I had no
acquaintance with any that practiced it, yet knowing there were such, did
occasion me to search the Scriptures about it, and by several places in the
Acts, with that in Mat. 28. 19. I was in a great measure convinced that Baptism
of Believers was an Ordinance of Christ, and that there could be no true Church
without it, and that Baptizing of Infants is that for which I could find no
ground in Scripture; and by degrees I was so fully satisfied in it, and I
thought the Scriptures were so plain and clear for it, that I did much wonder
at my own ignorance, that I should be a professor so long, and so frequent in
reading Scripture, and yet ignorant of that which was so plainly therein
expressed; then coming to London to that end, namely to be instructed in the
ways of God more perfectly, not knowing the like means else where, I went many
times to hear in the Churches of Christ, by which, through the great blessing
of God, I was more and more satisfied about it; yet notwithstanding all this,
by harkening to the delusions of my own heart, and Satan's instruments, I met
with many interruptions and temptations that kept me from my duty, at least one
whole year after; some of those temptations were these:

First, I thought though the Saints of old did practice these things, yet as
they were now practiced it was some kind of bondage, and below the privilege of
the Gospel to be tied to a particular people, especially in relation to
hearing; for I thought I should not forbear hearing some particular men, (who
were not in the order of the Gospel) that formerly I used to hear.

A second thing that hindered me was the failings and miscarriages of some
particular persons then in the Churches.

A third hinderance was, I thought it my liberty to do or not do it.

A fourth hinderance was in relation to Persecution, I judged I should not be
fit to suffer for it (though a truth of Christ) until all those Scruples were
removed.

These, with others of the like nature, were the groundless thoughts that kept
me from my duty; but though kept back by these for a time, yet I had such
strong convictions that I could not leave it so, but was much endeavoring after
satisfaction, and in the use of means God was pleased to satisfy me; but by
reason of persecution there was no Church I knew of, but only in London, and
therefore I could not immediately do it; but being to be married soon after, I
was to live in London, and then I resolved to submit to this Ordinance of
Christ; but when I came to London, I heard all kind of preachers, one of which
preached a strange kind of doctrine much notional, which bred such a confusion
in my heart that I knew not what to do, by which I was again hindered from my
duty, being willing to try that doctrine, I not having heard the like before,
it being full of entising words of man's wisdom, which I did with as much
diligence try for some time, examining the Scriptures about it, as ever I did
any doctrine, but could find nothing in it but confusion, a mere sound of
words, some of those big swelling words of vanity spoken of Jude 16. 2 Pet.
2. 18. so, through mercy, I left it, and escaped that snare, which I desire to
remember to the praise of God. Then I resolved to prosecute my former purpose
in relation to those duties before mentioned, yet still lingering in Babylon
till the Lord was pleased by a stretched-out arm, and clear voice, to bring to
my remembrance those words in the 22. chapter of the Acts verse 6. Arise and be
baptized, why tarryest thou? and (as I remember) for some days together,
whatever I was doing, those words were much in my thoughts, then I began to
take particular notice of it, applying it to my own condition, whether I was
able to give a reason why I tarried, the Lord having removed all my scruples,
and answered all my obj^ctions, and speaking of it to my Husband, who was then
much in the same condition, I remember we had some discourse about it, and the
result was, that the next first day we would go to the Church (where we had
often heard) and declare what God had done for us in the great work of
conversion, desiring also to obey him in all his commands, which accordingly we
did, and gave them full satisfaction, and the week following were baptized and
added to the Church, being sweetly satisfied and comforted therein; and as for
my former scruples I was troubled no more with them, and in particular as to
hearing out of the Church, I never desired it since, but God was pleased, and
still is, to satisfy me with the fatness of his house, feeding me with green
pastures there; and sitting under the shadow of Christ, his Fruit is sweet to
my taste; which the LORD grant I may be found so doing, as he has commanded,
until his second coming.

Some brief Observations upon this fourth Note of Experience.
FIrst, Concerning those thoughts, that though I had nothing to do to be saved,
yet I had much to do to glorify God, etc. from thence I observe.

That as it is the duty of all that have received the Grace of God to be active
for his Glory, so it is the nature of Grace to teach and engage Saints to do
the same.

Secondly, Concerning my ignorance of Baptism, and other Ordinances,
notwithstanding all my former Experience in point of Faith, from thence I
observe,

That persons may have much Experience in point of privilege, and yet be
ignorant of their duty.

As indeed we are more apt to learn the one than the other.

Thirdly, Concerning my ignorance of that which is so plainly expressed in
Scripture, from thence I observe,

That light discovers darkness, and though Truth be never so plainly expressed,
yet ignorance cannot apprehend it.

Fourthly, Concerning those interruptions and temptations that kept me from my
duty, from thence I observe,

That naturally we are so averse to duty, that we are a long time before we
know our duties, and when we know them we are subject to be kept from doing
them by very trifles; and that it is Satan's policy, if he cannot keep us from
knowing our duties, to cast stumbling blocks in our way if possible to keep us
us from doing them.

2. I observe, That though Christ's yoke be easy, yet we are hardly brought to
put it on.

Fifthly, Concerning the first hinderance, That I thought it some Bondage to be
in a Church, from thence I observe,

That through ignorance of the nature of Christian Liberty, we are too subject
to think that Bondage which is not only Liberty but a great Privilege.

Sixthly, Concerning the second hinderance, which was the unsuitable walkings
of some particular persons then in the Church, from thence I observe.

That the Consideration of our stumbling at the failings of others, should make
us careful lest we occasion others to stumble at us.

Seventhly, Concerning the third hinderance, That it was our liberty whether we
would walk in Churches and submit to Ordinances or not, from thence I observe,

That we are naturally so addicted to liberty, that we are many times ready to
cast off all obedience, and to look on the Ordinances of Christ as indifferent
things.

Eighthly, Concerning the fourth hinderance, Fearing lest I had not faith
enough to suffer for it, from thence I observe,

That distrustful thoughts of future mercies many times keep us from improving
present mercies.

Ninethly, Concerning those Convictions, that though I was scrupled about
truth, yet could not leave it so, but endeavored after full satisfaction, from
thence I observe,

That strong Convictions are not easily put out, and where grace is
predominant, there will be an endeavor not to smother but to answer them.

Tenthly, Concerning that other hinderance by strange doctrine, from thence I
observe,

That as faith comes by hearing; so there may be a hearing that tends to the
prejudice of faith.

And such I conclude is all hearing out of the way of God, though some more,
some less; I mean public hearing out of the Church of God; and though some do
judge it their liberty and privilege so to do, I must needs confess I cannot so
judge: For though possibly glorious things may be spoken, yet what privilege
can it be for Saints to hear glorious things, where there is no promise of a
blessing from God? and therefore I may say as the Apostle, of speaking in an
unknown tongue, I had wrather hear five words from a true Ministry, or in a
Church of Christ, where he has promised his blessing and presence, than five
thousand elsewhere, though I desire in a personal way to own and embrace all or
any appearance of God where ever I find it, and can upon that account truly
say, I do much respect, love, and delight in some who are not yet come up to
the true worship of Christ in his Church, but I must be true to my principles,
I cannot see how we that are, according to the Gosspel, joined to the Lord, and
his Church, by which we hold out to the world a visible profession of his name,
and a separation from all false ways of worship which in our principles we
judge them who are not rightly constituted with us according to the appointment
and practice of Christ and his Apostles to be no other, I say I cannot see how
we can meet with them in their public worship, to hear their Ministers, or in
any other spiritual duty, but it is a crossing our own principles: As thus,
they own themselves true Churches, and Ministers of Christ, the ignorant world
knows not but they are so, we by our presence being silent do say the same,
though in our Judgment we cannot so own them, which is a plain contradiction
in our principles; we say they are not Churches and Ministers of Christ, by our
practice we say they are, as has been minded.

Secondly, As it is a contradiction of our own principles so it has had such
effects, which are too visible, and remains unto this day. I must confess, in
my most serious thoughts I have wondered what should be the reason that any in
the house of God should desire to be elsewhere: I am sure there is no reason to
be given for it, neither from Scripture, nor experience; therefore I conclude,
its either from ignorance, and so persons in their practice cross their own
principles and not know it; or else its from corrupt principles; or else they
are overcome by some violent temptations. As to the 1. of these, I trust there
are not many in the house of God so ignorant. As to the 2. it is the desire of
my soul, that God would reprove and show them the evil of such principles, and
recover them out of such snares. As to the 3. Let them take heed lest having
put their hand to the plow, and looking back, they become unfit for the Kingdom
of God, Luke 9. 62. and let them likewise take heed of pleasing men, or halting
between two opinions, but if God be God follow him, if Baal follow him, 1 Kings
28 21. This may seem harsh language to some, but I am satisfied that what I
have written has not been from a censorious spirit, to Judge of the final
State of any, or to question the grace of God in any, where it does appear in
the least measure, and therefore let none say that because I cannot own any to
be true Churches or Ministers of Christ, but such as are in the same order with
us, that therefore I say there is nothing of God or Truth in them, or that none
shall be saved but our selves, or that we love none but those of our own
Judgment, which if any do so think, or speak of us, it is a very great
mistake; for if I may speak for others, as I have already said, I do upon a
godly account love, and delight in some who are not in our Churches, and do
wait for the accomplishment of those glorious promises when they and we shall
have a pure language, and shall call upon the Lord, and serve him with one
consent, and when we shall have one heart and one way, and there shall be one
Lord, and his name one, Zeph. 3. 9. Jer. 32. 39. Zach. 14. 9. In the mean time,
Let none under a pretense of waiting for the accomplishment of such promises as
these, grow cold, and indifferent in the great things of God: For none can
truly wait for the accomplishment of Promises, but such as do wait in a close
walking with God, according to that measure of light received, and so those
that have but a little of the knowledge of God, let them follow on to know the
Lord, Hosea 6. 3. and let those that are in the faith, earnestly contend for
it, Jude 3. and such as are in Gospel Churches, let them stand fast in one
Spirit, with one mind, striving together for the faith of the Gospel, Phil. 1.
27. and let every one that names the name of Christ, depart from iniquity, 2
Timothy 2. 19. and those that love the Lord, hate evil, Psalm 97. 10. And as I
desire that none may slight, grow cold, or indifferent in the great things of
God, under a pretense of waiting for high enjoyments or discoveries, which
shall be in the later days; so I desire likewise that none may plead against
the Truth, under a pretense of Love, as many do in these days, laboring to
confound light with darkness, truth with error, and to make an agreement, where
God has made none. Let such know, that true spiritual love, as it is wrought
in the heart by the Spirit of God, so it is bounded within the limits of Truth,
Love and Truth go hand in hand; it is so fixed upon God, that it Loves all in
and for him; spiritual Love must have a spiritual object, and as the object is
more or less visible, so is that Love, it cannot love every thing alike, nay it
works as well by hatred of evil as approving that which is good, Psa. 101.
Psa. 97. 10. Rev. 2. 6. Psa. 119. 122, 128. It loves that which God loves, and
hates that which he hates; it loves the Word of God, the Ordinances of God, and
the people of God, and hates all that is in opposition to these, it rejoiceth
not in iniquity, but rejoiceth in the truth, 1 Cor. 13. 6. This is true
spiritual love, in which we are to receive every truth, and by which faith
works, 2 These. 2. 10. Gal. 5. 6. and I dare affirm, whatever persons may
pretend of spiritual love that is not of this nature, it is a mere delusion,
and that all that fear the Lord ought to take heed of it.

The fifth Note of Experience, concerning Notions, and Pretended Spiritualities,
in which Satan transforms himself into an Angel of light; and how far I was
deceived by it, and how the Lord was pleased to recover me out of it.
BEing now through much mercy brought out of Babylon into Sion, to partake of
those dainties which the Lord has prepared for his people, there Satan, that
grand Enemy of mankind, who goes about like a roaring Lion seeking whom he may
devour, 1 Pet. 5. 8. envies my happiness, and waits his opportunity to catch
me as a fish in the water, covering his hook with a bait of mystery and
spirituality, who though I had escaped him in all his former appearances as a
devil, yet now transforms himself into an Angel of light, if it were possible
for ever thereby to beguile and deceive me; knowing that those that are so
deceived are the fittest Agents to promote his Kingdom, and that many times he
prevails this way when he can prevail no other way, drawing persons to that by
degrees through corrupt principles, which they would have trembled at the
thoughts of before they had such principles; but God was pleased not only to
keep me from such things, but also discover to me the way by which persons are
brought to such things, that so to the praise of his Grace, I might avoid those
ways, and also forewarn others to avoid them likewise. But before I was
brought to discover Satan under these veiles, by harkening to the voice of the
Tempter (in the thoughts of which I desire ever to be humbled in the presence
of God) I was deceived and beguiled by him in some particular things, and that
after this manner; after we had lived some time in London, walking with the
Church, in the practice of the Gospel, it pleased God to remove our habitation
into the Country, where we had not that privilege, and after a while, (my
Husband being in the Army) it occasioned our often moving into several places,
where we found not only particular persons, but whole Churches very much
corrupted, owning and practicing strange things, though under plausible terms
and spiritual pretenses, by which a while after they were broken and scattered,
leaving the profession of truth in the practice of the Ordinances of Christ,
some under one notion, and some under another, so that it was hard to find in
those parts one particular person that had sound principles, much less a whole
Church where there was a powerful Ministry, and a wise government, by reason
of which I began by degrees to be somewhat confused in Judgment; and truly,
when I consider those things, and what temptations I was exposed to at that
time, I do not wonder I was so confused, but I rather wonder at the mercy of
God that I was not swallowed up with confusion, as many were in those days,
for though I was weak in principles, and by those things somewhat confused, yet
I do not know that in two or three years time I had received any corrupt
principles; but afterward being with a people where Satan had transformed
himself into an Angel of light, I think I may say in the highest degree, under
terms of Mystery, Spirit, waiting upon God, and such like, by them I was
beguiled and deceived in some particular things, though never in the height of
that which was practiced by them; the particulars about which I was deceived
were chiefly these three or four.

First, Concerning godliness being a mystery, that it did consist of something
within, and not of something without, and and that the Saints were to expect
life and Salvation from a Christ within, and not from a Christ without.

Secondly, that Saints were not to do duties by or from a command without, but
from a command within, and that the word Command in Scripture was not a command
to them till they had a word within them.

Thirdly, that as to the time of doing duties they were to wait for the movings
of the Spirit to carry them forth to it, and this they called waiting for a
power, and till they had such a power, they were to do nothing but sit still
and wait, and this not only in private duties, but in the Church also, not
owning any Ministry by way of gifts or office, but to come together, and there
fit and wait till they had a power, and then to speak, whether men or women.

In these particulars, which carriried such a face or show of spirituality, I
was corrupted, but did never fully own them in Judgment, nor practice; and for
such principles as (I thought) did lead to looseness, either in matter of
conve^sion, or in slighting the Churches or ordinances of Christ, I did always
oppose them, though I believe such principles do naturally follow the others,
but I did not then discern it, they being covered over with such Angel-like
appearances; And as to that principle of waiting, though I did own it in
Judgment more fully than any of these other, yet I could never come up to it
in my practice in private duties, but by reason of some convictions still
remaining in me I could not stay so long from duty till I had such a power, but
did frequently go to duty when I had it not, though sometimes I thought I had
it. But in the presence of others I did not appear in duty, but when I thought
I had that power, though I never did so appear but in one place for a short
season, in doing which I thought I had communion with God; but I do believe it
was no such thing, but a mere Spirit of delusion: First because I know no
Scripture-ground for such a practice; and secondly from the consideration of
the sad fruit I had by it, for after a little time I began to lose my peace,
and was very much troubled, having little or no communion with God, nor scarce
any thing to speak to or for God, and so confounded I was in my own spirit,
that I knew not what to do, and speaking of it to some, and those not a few,
they labored to persuade me it was a dispensation of God, and that the Saints
after they were brought out of Egypt, must be in the wilderness before they
come to Canaan, and that the end of God in bringing them there was, that he
might speak comfortably to them, and therefore I was not to be troubled, but to
be quiet, fit still, and wait, and not to stir the Lord till he pleased; this
did not at all satisfy me, but I continued in a very sad condition; and one
thing more by the way I cannot forget, and that is, that while I was in this
condition, I never was so troubled with temptations as I was at that time; One
temptation which I was troubled with many years before, I was kept from until
at this time, which now was more violent than at first, as indeed those things
naturally lead to such temptations, which temptation is the same expressed in
the beginning of the book page 25.

This was the sad fruit of my straying from the pure ways of truth, which as I
desire ever to own with shame to my self, so likewise considering the
temptations I was exposed to, and the little means I had to forewarn and keep
me from such things, I desire for ever to bless the Lord that I strayed no
further; that though in these things I had much forgotten him, yet he was
pleased to remember me, and showed me the evil and danger of these notions, and
restored me to those former joies that once I had in him, and made that which
was intended by Satan to overthrow me, to be of great advantage to me, which he
was pleased to do after this manner.

Having some occasion to undertake a passage on the Sea from London to
Newcastle, in which condition it pleased the Lord to reprove me by the raging
waves of the Sea, and tempestuous storms, then began my trouble to increase,
but not so much from that which was without, as from something within, the
waves of the Sea not beating so fast on the Ship, as the waves of temptations
did arise in my heart, being in a very much-troubled dissatisfyed condition,
not finding my heart willing to submit to God, neither indeed knowing how to
behave my self toward him in relation to the present trouble, all which was
occasioned by those corrupt principles, being at a great loss whether I should
now pray or wait for a power, not being sensible of any other power at that
time but what was from the present trouble, to put me upon it; but in this
trial I was glad to betake my self to my former principles, the Lord bringing
to my remembrance that command and promise, Psa. 50. 15. by which I was
encouraged to cry to God, as indeed I could not, nor durst not forbear; for
still owning my interest in God, by which I was made capable of prayer, I could
not answer that, with such other like Scriptures, as 1 These. 5. 17. etc. but
yet notwithstanding I was dissatisfyed about it, that notion of waiting
carrying such a show of spirituality, I could not easily let it go, but yet
this trial had so shaken it, that I did begin much to question it, and also
those other notions of the like nature; then it pleased the Lord to bring us
safe to Land, through which mercy I had some little communion with God, being
able to speak of his goodness in delivering us from that danger, but through
that dissatisfaction, which still remained in me about these notions, it was
interrupted again, and my beloved had withdrawn himself, and I was very much
troubled, not knowing where to rest, nor what to do, but notwithstanding I did
begin much to question those things from that trial I had of them on the Sea,
yet I was more inclined to them than to truth, for some time, especially to
that of prayer, and three or four times after I remember in discourse with some
friends I did a little plead for them, which though it was my sin so to do, I
did not then know it, but must needs say I did as simply and sincerely aim at
doing the will of God in all those things, as ever I did in any thing, and
therefore though Satan had so beguiled me, yet I obtained mercy, because I did
it ignorantly; but my trouble and want of communion with God did still
increase, insomuch that I was scarce able to bear my burden, and speaking of
it to my Husband, who was at that time much in the same condition, I remember,
amongst many words he spoke, some were to this purpose, That seeing we were in
such a condition, and at such a loss, it was best to speak but little, that as
we did but little good, we might do but little harm, which I did well approve
of, and after that I spoke little for or against any thing till I was better
satisfied; then being so truly in a day of adversity, according to that counsel
of the Wise man in Eccles. 7. 14. I sat down seriously to consider what might
be the cause of my being in so sad and strange a condition; Through which
consideration by degrees I came to see and conclude* that certainly there was
something amiss in my Judgment as to those notions, beginning clearly to
discern they did so oppose and contradict my former received principles, that
they could not stand together, but if one was true, the other was false, and
that I must leave the one or the other; for though I had received the new, I
could never fully quit the old, neither in Judgment nor practice. Then I was
restless in my desire for three or four days, to know which of the two were
truth, often times earnestly begging of God that he would decide the
controversy, and discover to me which was according to his mind, and which
not, being fully satisfied that but one of them could be truth; then it pleased
the Lord to put me upon a particular examination what grounds I had in
Scripture, and what experience I had of both, and in reading and examining my
Scripture-grounds, I began to discern a great inclination in my heart to the
former principles, finding (I thought) the Scripture very full and plain for
them, but nothing for the other, but what was from some dark mysterious
interpretations, which were very doubtful; and for my own experience, I did
remember, and was constrained to acknowledge, that in receiving and keeping
close to the fotmer, I had joy and peace, and much satisfaction, and communion
with God, but since I received the other, the Lord had as it were hid his face
from me, and I was filled with confusion and distraction, and the remembrance
of that trial I had of them upon the Sea did very much help me now to see the
falsity of them, that in a time of trial I durst not stick to them; as indeed I
plainly saw that I could never stick to them so as to answer them fully in my
practice, unless I should have laid aside the appearance of godliness, and have
been very profane: the consideration of which, with some other evil
consequences, which I saw clearly did naturally attend those things, was
another means by which the Lord was pleased to recover me from them, and to
discover Satan under his veil to me, how by these things he did intend, if the
Lord had not prevented him, to have stripped me of all my hopes; and in
particular as to that of being saved by a Christ within, and not by a Christ
without, the Lord was pleased to show me that it was quite another thing
differing from the Gospel, and that it was attended with this evil consequence,
even to overthrow the whole Gospel, and to deny the Lord that bought them; at
the thoughts of which my soul did tremble, and that if he should have prevailed
here, all my hopes were gone; for I could not, nor durst not rest on any thing
in my self as a ground of hope for life and salvation; but on the other hand
concerning my hope in the Lord Jesus Christ according to the Gospel, I could
truly say of that as Peter did, John 6. 68. Lord whither shall we go? thou have
the words of eternal life, so whither should I go from the Gospel? there are
the words of eternal life, there is all my rest and hopes in the Lord Jesus
through the Gospel, and therefore I resolved in the strength of Christ to stick
to this, and leave the other. Then secondly as to that of waiting for a power
to pray, and that there was no command but from within, concerning both these
the Lord was pleased to show me that it was not according to his mind, but a
mere invention of Satan, by degrees to draw me from my duties, and that it was
attended with this evil consequence, even to slight the Scriptures and commands
of God, and to expose the Soul to Satan's deceivings, to walk by the
imaginations of their own hearts, instead of the motions of the spirit, and
also it brings the soul into great uncertainties, which the truth never does;
but on the other hand to do duties in obedience to the authority and commands
of God in Scripture, and to pray at all times as we have opportunities, having
received a principle of grace by which we are made capable of prayer, I saw
this was a clear and sound truth, not being atte^ded with any evil
consequence, nor bringing the soul into straits and uncertainties, but rather
gives enlargements in every condition, and therefore I desired likewise to keep
close to these, and leave the other; but oh the joy and comfort that was in my
Soul at this return! I cannot express it, but this I say, it was to me as life
from the dead. And as I was blessing, praising, and magnifiing the Lord for his
unchangeable goodness to me, my Husband, having been some time from me, came
home, to whom I did declare my condition, and what the Lord had done for me,
who, as I have formerly hinted, was much in the same condition with me, who
also declared that he had in a measure received the like mercy, which did much
increase my joy. Then I remember he desired we might seek the Lord by prayer,
and praise his holy name for these and all his mercies; In which duty the Lord
was pleased so abundantly to manifest himself to us, thereby testifying his
acceptance of us, that for a while we sat in admiration, neither of us scarce
being able to speak for tears; and truly it was such a mercy that I trust we
shall for ever admire it, at least in these five particulars.

First, that God should deal so faithfully with us in relation to his promise,
that when we were ready to turn to the right hand or to the left, he caused us
to hear his voice behind us, saying, this is the way, walk in it, Esaias 30. 21.

Secondly, that when we were straying from truth, that the Lord should keep us
that we straied no further, that we did not, run to the hight of those notions,
denying the Churches, and Ordinances of Christ, and blaspheming the truth, as
very many did in those times, even denying the Lord that bought them.

Thirdly, that the Lord should deal so fatherly and tenderly in his restoring
of us, that it was not by any extraordinary affliction or chastisement, neither
were we at any time a trouble to the Churches, or grief to any Saint I know of.

Fourthly, that the Lord should be pleased to bring us off so clearly from
those things; for many are brought off from them, and yet there is still so
much confusion remaining upon their spirits, that it is hard to discern whether
they are brought off or no.

Fifthly, that the Lord should vouchsafe this mercy to both of us, and that at
one and the same time; and that at our return he should manifest such a sweet
acceptance of us, melting our hearts into tears of joy, to our mutual comfort
in the Lord, and in each other; and so that stream of our hearts being now
turned from running after lying vanities, the Lord was pleased to re-establish
and confirm us every day more and more in the truth, turning this sad (yet
blessed) Experience, to his praise, and our great advantage, the remembrance of
which I trust shall be a mercy that shall stand us in stead at times of need,
whiles we live; which the Lord grant it may be so, to the honor and praise of
his great name and our own peace and happiness in himself. Amen.

Some further Considerations relating to this part of my Experience, it being
that which I judge so considerable I cannot omit the reviewing of it.
AND the Lord grant I may review it daily, so as to have my heart raised to an
holy admiration of the goodness and faithfulness of God toward me in it, and
that it may allwaies lie as a strong engagement upon my heart to love and obey
him in all things, which in consideration of his unspeakable mercy is but my
reasonable service, Romans 12. 1. And as I desire for ever to bless the Lord that
he was pleased to deliver me from these deceits, so it shall be my prayer that
all the Lords people may be delivered from them, and that the rather, because I
am persuaded that errors of that nature are the worst of all others, and
doubtless they are the greatest mystery of iniquity that ever Satan had on foot
in the world. But because I am not willing to pass my sentence without grounds,
and because every thing that is reproved is made manifest by the light, and
that which does make manifest is light, Ephesians. 5. 13. I desire, according to
that light of truth which God has given to me, farther to consider, not only
in general that those kind of errors are the worst of all others, but more
particularly how they are so.

First, I conceive they are the worst of all others, in that they do naturally
tend and lead to the highest degree of evil, and that both as they take with
gracious hearts, and as they take with carnal hearts; First, as they take with
gracious hearts they do naturally interrupt the souls communion with God, and
exposes it to great temptations, bringing it to straits and extremities, and
into the greatest confusion that can be possible, so far as they prevail; and
for the truth of this, besides my own experience, I appeal to any experienced
Christian if it be not so.

Secondly, as they take with carnal hearts they lead by degrees to the greatest
evil both in a spiritual and (...)vil sense; for such hear^^ not being seasoned
wi^^ grace, they run from on^ notion to another, till they run so high as to
stand directly in opposition to Christ and his Gospel: For when they come to be
confounded and at a loss in their Judgments, and meet with such Temptations,
which those errors naturally lead to, they are overcome by them, and under a
pretense of living above Ordinances they deny the Ordinances of Christ, and by
degrees the whole Word of God, calling it literal and carnal, ^^d under a
pretense of spi^^^uality, blaspheme the name ^f Christ, calling him A fleshly
Christ, and so denying the Lord that bought them, 2 Pet. 2. 1. and going
against such strong convictions and clear manifestations of light and
knowledge, as some have done, doubtless they have fallen into that unpardonable
sin expressed in Heb. 10. and so come at last to jeer and scoff at all
appearance of godliness; and it makes way for the highest degree of wickedness
also in a civil sense, having given themselves up to work all uncleanness with
greediness, Esaias 4. 19. and so breaking all bonds, though they had escaped the
pollutions of the world through the knowledge of our Lord, yet being again
entangled therein, their latter end is worse than the beginning, 2 Pet. 2. 20.
according to that Mat. 13. 43, 44, 45. When the unclean spirit is gone out of a
man, he walks through dry places, seeking rest, and finds none, then he
returns, and takes seven other spirits more wicked than himself, and they
enter in and dwell there, and the last state of that man is worse than the
beginning; he is now far more wicked than ever: this is the nature, and these
are the effects of those kind of notions as they take with carnal hearts; and
that it is so, I appeal to the times in which we live, if we have not seen it
so with many who had escaped the pollutions of the world, and that evil spirit
seemed to be gone out of them, and they have made large professions of the
power of truth in their hearts, but they are turned with the dog to his vomit,
and with the sow that was washed to her wallowing in the mire, glorying in their
shame, and doing that without any reluctance, which they would have trembled at
the thoughts of before they had those notions, and if any should have
prophesied such things of them, they would have said as Hazael did to Elisha,
Is thy servant a dog that he should do such things? 2 Kings 8. 13. These things
considered, is a sufficient ground for me to conclude, that errors of that
nature are the worst of all others.

But secondly, as they are the worst in that they naturally lead to the highest
degree of evil, so they are the worst in that they are the greatest mystery of
iniquity, so more deceiving than others; that they are so, it will appear, if
we consider, first, how covertly, and under how many veils Satan comes in them,
beguiling and deceiving with the most plausible, spiritual, Angel-like glorious
appearances that can be expressed, and as it said of the false Prophets, Mat.
7. 15. They come in sheeps clothing, but inwardly they are ravening wolves; so
it may be truly said of those notions, they are clothd with glorious and
Christ-like appearances, but when we see to the botom of them, they differ as
much from Christ, as a ravening wolf from a sheep: for they do not only beguile
and deceive in that they are not what they seem or pretend to be, and in that
they do not give what they promise, viz. high lights, glory, perfection,
immediate communion with the father, and such like; But as a ravening wolf, so
far as they prevail, they devour and destroy by degrees all appearance of good,
and therefore the Apostle calls them perverse things, Acts 20. 30. and 2 Pet.
2. 1. they are called damnable heresies, and pernicious ways, and big swelling
words of vanity, ver. 18. words that will eat as does a Cancker, 2 Timothy 2. 17.
And because they are so apparently a mystery of iniquity, that is (I conceive)
the reason why the Apostle gives so many exhortations, and does so often
forewarn the Saints to take heed of them: for questionless they are the very
same errors which are mentioned in those Scriptures, and we may know them to be
so, in that they carry the very same badges and marks expressed in those
Scriptures, as

First, in relation to the rise of them, which was not from the false Prophets
of the world, but from false Brethren in the Church, and others such like, who
professed an opposition to those false Prophets; and the place and people among
whom they were most prevailing, was not with ignorant persons in the world, but
among knowing persons, and in the Churches of Christ; all which is the very
same expressed in the forementioned Scriptures, as Acts 29. with the rest.

A Second mark by which we may know them to be the same, is in relation to the
nature and effects of them, as is already expressed, namely, that persons have
been led by them to the highest degree of wickedness, waxen worse and worse
till they have been as vile as hell it self, and particularly denying the
resurrection of the body, and the Lord Jesus Christ, with the like.

2. they will appear to be the greatest mystery of iniquity, in that Satan
makes use of them to do his greatest works, which is to overcome the Saints,
and to encounter with such as have the greatest strength to resist him, and
such as have escaped him in all his other appearances, he now makes use of them
as things that are most strong to deceive by, as we may remember how
exceedingly he did prevail with them about five or six years since in this
nation, when it was hard to find one person, much less a whole Church, that was
not corrupted with them; at which time was the height of their reign in
general, though in some places many particular persons are enslaved by them
unto this day; some under one name, some under another; at which time
beforementioned my self did experience those expressed in p. 113, 114. which I
am persuaded I should not have done, had they not been so general, and of such
a bewitching deceiving nature; for I can truly say, so far as I did experience
them, I was merely deceived and beguiled from an apprehended worth and
excellency in them; and as it was with me, so I believe it was with many
others, whom the Lord has recovered from them. But

Thirdly, they will appear to be of a strange deceiving nature, and so the
greatest mystery of iniquity, if we consider, that many of the most eminent
Saints in those days were most incident to be deceived by them, I mean the
most eminent as to personal grace and qualifications, and as to a strict
conversation, though I cannot say as to a sound Judgment, in knowledge and
understanding of the principles of truth; for questionless there was something
of that nature wanting; for had they been as well principled in truth, as they
were really united to truth, they would have discerned Satan at a distance, and
not been so deceived by him; and that I conceive was the very reason why so
many were deceived in those days: for having been a long time in darkness and
ignorance, being but newly brought from under the Bishops and Presbyterian
yokes, they were generally weak in Judgment, though (it may be) strong in
affection, and so the more easily deceived; like children ready to catch up any
thing that has a glorious appearance, not weighing and considering whether it
be really so.

Another reason I conceive why such precious ones were so subject to be
deceived in those days, was from an extreme in minding truth as it relates to
the inward man in point of experience, and inward workings; which is in it self
very good; but being in an extreme on that hand, Satan took advantage by it,
and presented things in a plausible seeming spiritual appearance, beguiled and
deceived them before they were aware. We are subject to extremes on all hands;
some do mind truth so much in an outward way as it relates to Order and
Ordinances, as Baptism, Church Fellowship and the like, that they mind little
else as to the end of these; and some are in the extreme on the other hand, and
so while they were eagerly pursuing after the mystery of truth as to their
intentions, they were beguiled with the mystery of iniquity: much like that of
the Jews concerning the Law Romans 9. 3. They sought after righteousness, but did
not attain it, Wherefore? because they sought it not by faith: So these sought
after truth really as to their intentions, but did not attain it, wherefore?
because they sought it not in the way of God; They sought it not in his way as
it relates to the Ordinances and commands of Christ, in way of obedience and
privilege together, but only as it relates to the inward man by way of
privilege; and as the Jews were strict in legal righteousness, so these did
not run into ways of sin; neither (I believe) can many of them charge
themselves with any sin as that which occasioned it at first, but only weakness
in Judgment, not being well principled, and so not having an equal esteem of
all truth.

Another reason why many Saints were so deceived in those days, as I
apprehend, was, That they being but newly come to the faith were exposed to
great temptations, having but little means of strength against them, it may be
far from a Church, or else in a Church where were false Teachers, as in those
days there were very many, by reason of which many were deceived; whereas
others, who were as weak, if not weaker, being in Churches where there were
sound Teachers, were kept from them: which may be a caution, as to particular
persons, to take heed what and whom they hear, so to Churches, who they permit
to be Teachers, and not to suffer any unsound doctrine to be taught. It may
also be a word of remembrance to all that do enjoy this great mercy to have
sound and faithful Teachers, highly to esteem them for their works sake, and to
account such worthy of double honor, giving them all due respect and
encouragement, that they may do their work with joy, and not with grief,
according to Hebrews 13. 17. 1 Thessal. 5. 12, 13. 1 Timothy 5. 17. Other
reasons may be given for the Saints mistake in those things, but I shall
mention no more, intending only my own experience. For I can truly say, that
upon a diligent search and enquiry what might be the cause of my own mistakes,
I find them to be no other but these very things expressed. As

First I was weak in principles, as indeed I had never been under much means to
be otherwise.

Secondly, I am conscious to my self of some extreme in minding truth as it
relates to the inward man, though truly I know not that I did slight any
Ordinance or command of Christ, but that I did rather highly esteem of them;
but not to lessen sin, it is possible there may be something of that nature,
though I know it not.

Thirdly, I am sure I was exposed to great temptations of this kind, having
little means of strength against them, finding so many corrupted, though
through mercy it is better now, that breach being made up with great advantage,
for which I desire with all Saints to praise the Lord for ever; for doubtless
the Saints advantage in their enlarged experience and confirmation in the truth
is so great by these things that I cannot expres it. Again, it calls for
praise, that as the Lord has turned it to our great advantage, so he has
wonderfully disappointed the expectations of the devil, and wicked men, who
were ready to say as in Psa. 35. 25. All so would we have it, verily
concluding, that though they could not suppress us by their persecuting power,
yet now we would destroy our selves, as indeed we might have so done, had not
the Lord prevented; and we may say it was the Lords doing, and it is mavelous
in our eyes.

And whereas some by reason of those things have been ready to question our
practice, whether it be of God; Let them know, that there is no ground from
thence to question it, seeing it is no more than what has been in those
Churches in the Apostles days, and what they did foretell should be in these
days, 1 Corinthians. 15. 12. 1 Timothy 1. 19. 2 Timothy 2. 18. 2 Peter 2. 12. Acts
20. 30. But if it were a safe ground to judge of truth by what has appeared in
relation to those things, then there is more ground of confirmation that what
we practice is of God, seeing that notwithstanding those things we have been so
wonderfully preserved as we are unto this day; but though these things may be
something as to the ignorant, yet yet the rule by which we judge of our
practice, is only as it has its ground and rise in holy Scripture, being built
upon the foundation of the Apostles and Prophets, Jesus Christ himself being
the chief Corner Stone: Therefore it has never been any scruple at all to me;
for though some have denied the Churches, and turned their ears from hearing
the truth, and have turned to fables, yet the Churches and truth is the same,
as God is the same.

Now as for the grounds or reasons why some of the Saints themselves have so
done, I shall say nothing, because, as I said before, I intend no more but my
own experience, and through the mercy of God I was never so far corrupted as to
question either the Scriptures, Churches, or Ordinances of Christ, much less to
withdraw from them, or to give any just occasion to be withdrawn from by them;
yet notwithstanding I do not in the least question the reality of those poor
souls who have been so far overcome, and are through mercy again returned: and
as for such as never return, I shall leave them to be judged by the Lord, who
only is the judge of those that are without, 1 Cor. 5. 13. Having thus far
considered of these allegorical notions, how they are the worst of all errors,
and the greatest mystery of iniquity, in that they are more deceiving than
others, promising the greatest good, but leading directly to the greatest evil,
and having given some reasons, as I judge, why the Saints in these days have
been so generally deceived by them; I shall further proceed to consider what
may be the end of God in permitting it so to be.

First, I conceive it may be in general, that such as were approved may be made
manifest, agreeable to 1 Cor. 11. 9. which accordingly has been; many by those
things were made manifest to be approved, though others that were not, have
appeared to be what they are. But

Secondly, and more particularly, I believe the Lord had many good ends in it,
both in relation to himself, in relation to them, and in relation to others of
his people, it may be some that are yet unborn.

First, In relation to himself, for the exaltation of his praise, that when
they should come to see how great their deliverance was, and what an addition
to all their former mercies, they might admire his goodness, and break forth
into the high praises of his name, and that all the days of their lives, when
this mercy comes into their thoughts. For my own particular I can truly say,
that the mercy of God to me in relation to those things, I look upon it as the
greatest mercy that ever I received from the Lord, next the manifestation of
his Love in Jesus Christ through the Gospel. But

Secondly, In relation to them so deceived, that they should have enlarged
experience of the fullness of God, and of their own nothingness, and of the
sweetness and excellency of truth above error, how it does excel it as far as
light excells darkness, and live more upon God, and less upon themselves, in
faith and humility, and in the increase of all grace, in more cleerness of
understanding and knowledge of the Truth, for doubtless through the goodness of
the Lord, who has promised to do his people good by every thing, they do gain
by it in all these in some measure; for my own particular, I must needs say,
though I am still but weak, yet through mercy my gain by those things is so
great, that I would not be without it, though I desire not to purchase any more
at that rate.

Thirdly, In relation to others, that through their experience, they might be
the more able to forewarn others, who may meet with the like temptations; for
certainly had the Saints in those days had that experience of Satan's workings
in that nature, which now they have, and had the Mouth of truth been so open
against it as it is at this day, it would doubtless have prevented much; and
therefore by the way I must needs say, I am persuaded it will be a great
aggravation of sin, for any to be taken or held by those things when there is
so much means to avoid them, as through the mercy of God there is in these
days almost in every place. Now the Lord having these and other such like ends
in permitting those things, I desire that my self with others, who have
experienced them in any measure, may be careful to answer those ends; for
doubtless if our deliverance be of God, and that we are clearly brought off
from those confusions, we shall answer all those ends of God in some measure.

In the next place, as to the way and means by which the Lord has been pleased
to recover his people from these things, I shall say little, because I believe
it has been various, some by one means, some by another, as they were in
various Conditions; for my own particular I have declared at large how it was
with me, only these General heads I shall again remind.

First, I was brought into great straits and much confusion in Judgment.

Secondly, the Lord was pleased to withdraw his presence from me.

Thirdly, Being sensible of that confusion, and want of communion with God, I
was put upon enquiry into my own heart, what might be the reasons of it.

Fourthly, It pleased the Lord to make me willing to be informed, and to
examine things by the Scriptures.

Fifthly, he was pleased to draw forth my heart with much earnestness to seek
to him by prayer, which through great mercy was largely answered.

And thus I doubt not, but by what I have written it will appear that I have
not, without good grounds both from Scripture and experience, Judged those
things to be the greated mystery of iniquity, and the most dangerous, and worst
of all errors.

And here I cannot but mind something further, as to the continuation of those
things, which is, as they are the worst of all others, so their time is short;
for according to my most serious observation, wherever they come, and where
they continue longest, their rise, reign, and ruin, is all accomplished in a
few years; for in a short time generally persons have been so confounded that
they have either come to see themselves deluded, and so have turned from them,
or else they have run to absolute Atheism, and so ended there.

I shall now only answer one objection, as to my own experience, and so end
this discourse.

Some have said that I cannot judge of these things by experience, because,
according to what I have declared I never had but little experience of them,
but only in three or four things, and those I could never fully come up to
neither, in Judgment, nor practice, neither could I leave these outward
things, which all must leave before they can see the glory of the inward. And
those that have not put themselves on such things, but were led to them by the
Father, have and do see that glory.

This Objection has specious words, but weighed in the balance of the
Sanctuary, will be found lighter than vanity, with the rest of the like nature,
which, I hope, is already made manifest, only I shall add a few words by way of
Answer.

First, for my Experience as to my self in particular, I confess through the
mercy of God it was far short of that which many precious ones in those days
fell into, yet I can truly say it was so much as did clearly discover to me the
nature and tendency of them all, to be so vile, that I I do not know any thing
that ever I did since I knew God that I can own with more shame to my self than
those things.

Secondly, for my experience as to others, I have seen and known that
sufficiently to satisfy me, that there is no such glory in them but a mere
delusion; but I desire to judge by experience no otherwise than as it has
relation to the holy Scriptures; for though I do very highly esteem of
Christian experience as to the operations and effects of truth in the soul, as
indeed it is the very life of Christianity, yet as to rule I value one word of
Scripture more than all experience, and I am sure the Scriptures will not own
them, which are the rule and touchstone by which I desire to try and judge all
things; For that which the Scripture sets up, they throw down, and that which
the Scripture forbids, they set up; for instance, the Scripture exalts the Lord
Jesus Christ in all his Actions, Offices and Ordinances, they set up something
else in opposition to this, calling it fleshly, carnal, and outward things, and
for the fathers leading persons to them, which words carry indeed a seeming
show of excellency, but its a mere delusion, There is no such thing; for the
Father and Christ are one, and what was appointed by Christ was appointed by
the Father, John 10. 3. and 14. 24. and he does not lead from his own
appointments, but those that continue in them he will love, and he will send
his Spirit to them, which shall abide with them for ever, Joh. 14. 16. and the
Father and Christ will come to them, and make their abode with them, verse 23.
I having already written that which may more fully answer this objection, shall
say no more, but desire that all the Lords people may be delivered and kept
from such deceivings.

The sixth Note of Experience in relation to Qualifications, the habits of Grace
or fruits of the Spirit, how and by what means I have and do daily find an
increase or decrease in those things.
TO make way for me to lay down my thoughts as to gracious qualifications, I
shall first consider the several kinds of qualifications, which I conceive may
be three, 1. Moral, 2. Legal, 3. Gospel.

By Moral I mean such as are from Moral dictates merely from nature, Civility,
breeding or education.

By Legal I mean such as are from legal dictates, merely from fear of wrath,
without any clear apprehensions of the free grace of God in the Gospel. But
here I desire to be very tender, judging that it is possible there may be some
seeds of the Gospel sown in such hearts, by which those qualifications may be
wrought, though as yet it may not appear, neither to themselves nor others,
that they have received the Gospel; this only as to possibilities, for
ordinarily it is not so.

But thirdly, by Gospel qualifications, I mean such as are from Gospel
dictates, from a clear apprehension of the free grace of God therein, being
constrained from the Love of Christ, and in obedience to the commands and
authority of Christ, the soul giving up it self in all things to be like him,
such as are wrought by the Gospel and spirit received they and they only are
the fruits of the spirit; but as for those other qualifications, persons that
are ignorant of the Gosspel, and have not received the Spirit, may be eminent
in them which indeed for that they have such a resemblance of the fruits of the
Spirit, are great ornaments as to appearance, though as to inward glory they do
many times prove miserable ornaments, being props and stays that keep such
persons from coming to Christ, and as it was said of the Pharisees, Mat. 21.
31. Publicans and Harlots do enter into the Kingdom rather than they; and this
I have experienced, that as to my receiving Christ upon Gosspel terms, there
was nothing so hard to me as to lay aside all those qualifications as I have
already expressed in my third and fourth notes of experiences.

Now for the fruits of the spirit what they are, is expressed both in general
and particular terms, in general Ephesians. 5. 9. the fruits of the spirit is in
all goodness, righteousness and truth, more particularly Gal. 5. 22, 23. the
fruit of the spirit is Love, Joy, Peace, Long suffering, Gentleness, Goodness,
Faith, Meekness, Temperance, etc. also there are other things expressed in
other terms in Scriptures which doubtless are likewise fruits of the spirit,
though I think with submission to better Judgments all others are included in
these, whether it be self denial, patience, humility, or the like, These things
are excellent ornaments which do adorn Christians in the eyes of men, and do
redound much to the glory of God, and therefore very considerable for Saints to
press after them by all means.

I must confess that in the viewing of my own heart I have many times been much
grieved to see how short I come in all these things, but especially in some of
them, yet through grace I can say I have received a measure of them all, and by
experience do know, if my heart deceive me not, wherein I am weak, and wherein
strong, and though I am sure in those in which I am strongest I am but weak,
considering how I ought to be.

Now I shall speak a little how and by what means according to my experience,
and as I judge according to Scripture rule, these things do increase or
decrease in Saints.

First, I conceive they increase and are strengthened by a close walking with
God in all spiritual duties, especially private duties, meditation,
self-examination, self-watching, self-judging, selfhumbling and prayer, which
are indeed such duties, as no hypocrite can truly do, not that these private
duties are above public but that they prepare for public, and by these we are
acquainted with our own hearts, and come to know wherein we are weak, and
wherein strong, what we have received, and what we want, and so how to apply our
selves to God in public and private, for the subduing of such a corruption, or
for the supply of such or such a grace, and this according to my experience, as
I have walked more or less close with God in these private duties, so is my
profit in public duties, and my strength in qualifications, the habits of
grace more or less, and I am confident, that such persons as are strangers to
these private duties, are also strangers to their own hearts, and will not make
any great progress in Christianity; for in the omission of these we are subject
to be exercised in things contrary, which do very much interrupt our communion
with God, and so weaken the power of every grace in us, or rather weaken the
power of grace in all its effects: for these things are not properly graces,
but the effects of grace, which are various, and so improperly called graces,
as when we do not daily humble our selves before the Lord, we are subject to
exalt our selves before men, and when we do not watch our own hearts and judge
our selves, we are subject to be judging others, and to watch over them in an
evil way, and when we do not daily meditate on those excellent qualifications
that were in Christ himself, we are subject to see little loveliness in them,
and so having a light esteem of them, not to press after them, whereas we are
to imitate him in all these things, according to Mat. 11. 28, 29. But secondly,
The habits of grace, or fruits of the spirit do increase or decrease as we do
more or less exercise that measure of them already received, and every
particular grace is increased by the exercise of it self, and so by much
exercise (I mean by daily acts) they do as it were become natural, as it is
said of Timotheus Phi. 2. 20. and the exercise of faith does directly lead us
to the fountain of grace, in beholding of which glory of God we are changed
into the same image, 1 Cor. 3. 18. there is such a transforming nature in it,
that the very beholding of it transforms us into the same likeness, Romans 12. 2.
and I can truly say from blessed experience, that in the exercise of that
measure of grace I have received, thus leading me to behold the Lord Jesus in
what he has done for me, I have found it more advantageous for the destroying
of corruption and for the strengthening me in those things, than in any other
means whatsoever; and the reason why many persons do sit a long time in the
profession of truth, and yet continue weak, ignorant, barren, and fruitless
branches, it is because as they are remiss in private duties, so they do not
exercise that measure of grace received, and so by a heedless, careless,
carnal walking, the heart grows carnal, and their is rather a decrease than
increase in all spiritual strength.

But some will say, can any do these things of themselves? and does not God
give grace freely both in and after conversion?

To which I answer, yea, but in the work of conversion we are passive, I mean
as to inward spiritual activity, we can do nothing being dead, according to
Ephesians. 2. 1. 2 Cor. 5. 14. Joh. 5. 25. not excluding those duties which God
requires from all, as hearing the Gospel, reading, etc. through which God has
promised to convey spiritual life, Esaias 55. 3. Romans 10. 17. but after
conversion we are active, and therefore commanded to keep our selves in the
love of God* Jude 12. To add to our faith, virtue, to virtue knowledge, etc. 2
Pet. 1. 5. with many other such like Scriptures, Not that we are sufficient of
our selves to do any thing as of our selves, but our sufficiis of God, 2 Cor.
3. 5. who is pleased to give in daily supplies, and in the daily exercise of
what we have to give us more, yet all of grace, freely, and so grace for grace,
as appears in the 1. of John 6. yet notwithstanding all that I have written, I
judge that its possible some Saints may be very diligent in the use of all
means, for the subduing of some particular corruptions, and for the supply of
some particular grace, and yet not attain it, but God is pleased to withhold it
from them, and lest they should be to much exalted, to leave some corruption
for them to strive, and struggle with, it may be as long as they live, which
for ought I know was Paul's very case 2 Cor. 12. 8. and the Lord may exercise
one grace in us by the want of another, yea all by the want of one, not that
Saints are without all in their nature, but as to a greater measure in some
particulars; and so far as I have experienced, this though I am still subject
to suspect my own diligence in the use of means, I can truly say, That God is
never wanting in such cases, with supports from himself, saying, my grace is
sufficient for thee, my power is made manifest in weakness, 2 Cor. 12. 9. and
though sin be in you, it shall shall not reign there, neither shall it have
dominion over you, because yea are not under the law, but under Grace, Romans 6.
11, 12, 1^. I shall say no more now of these things, but beg of God that my
self with all Saints may press more after them.

The Conclusion.
HAving thus far writtenof my Experience in several general heads, which do
include many particular Experiments, I had some thoughts to have written of
many other things, but my Book being almost full, I shall conclude with a few
lines as to Experience it self, what it is, how, and by what means it is
attained.

There be various things about which persons may be exercised in way of
Experience, yet all may be divided under one of these two heads, its either in
relation to the world, or in relation to God; as to that of the World, its all
but vanity and vexation of spirit, Eccl. 1. 14. and he that uncreaseth
knowledge in those things, increases sorrow, verse 18. and though there may be
something of that nature convenient for Saints to know upon a natural or civil
account, its but perishing at best, and therefore too low for them to spend
much of their precious time and thoughts about: Its their privilege to have
enlarged experience in the great things of God, things that are lasting and
durable to eternity; and as godly persons may have experience in some things of
the world, so carnal persons may have experience of the dealings of God in some
things, as to many outward blessings and deliverances by a common hand of
providence, in which they do many times so bless themselves, as if they were
highly in favor with God, when the Lord knows it is no such thing, but it may
be they have their portion in this life, and are delivered from a lesser, to be
reserved to a greater destruction.

But as to Experience from a truesanctified knowledge, or special work of the
Spirit of God, they are altogether strangers to it, 1 Cor. 2. 14. its only the
privilege of Saints to be eminent in that; and indeed its a privilege so great,
that I desire for ever to bless the Lord that he has made me, who am so
unworthy, in any measure to partake of it; for things merely historical or
traditional will vanish and come to nothing, and so far as we partake of truth,
not only in its principles as to the understanding of it from Scripture rule,
but also in its experience as to the effects and operations of it in our
hearts, so far it will stand us instead, and so far do we attain true wisdom,
and no farther; and indeed as to the effects and operations of it in the heart,
it is the very life of Christianity; yet as to rule for the receiving of any
principle one word of Scripture is more worth than all our experience, and as
to the avoiding of evil its better to learn that any way, than by the
experience of it, for so its the school of fools; yet wise men have so learned
in some things; now according to my understanding, experience is more than a
bare knowledge, it is either a begetter, or an effect of knowledge, and has
always relation to some rule, whether it be in natural or spiritual things; if
in natural things, it must answer a rule of nature, if in spiritual, it must
answer a spiritual rule, and the holy Scripture is that rule, by which all
Christian experience must be tried, according to the Lords own appointment,
Esa. 8. 20. and all must answer some rule therein expressed or employed; by rule
in this sense I mean the Scriptures, declaring the same thing; and as it must
answer a rule in it self, so answerable to that knowledge and understanding
which persons have in the rule, so is the measure of their experience: For
though some persons have much knowledge as to principles, and but little
experience, yet none can have experience of that they do not understand, either
in a principle before they had that experience, or else they have learned that
principle by experience; for (as I said before) all experience is either an
effect of knowledge, or by it we learn knowledge, otherwise it cannot be
experience; this I mind the rather, because some persons do please themselves
with a conceited experience, though ignorant in the principles of truth, when
there cannot be such a thing. I must confess I have been grieved to hear such
persons speak of their experience, when it does appear to me, as it is said of
some that would be Preachers of the Law, 1 Timothy 1. 7. they know not what they
say, nor whereof they affirm, and these are two sorts of persons, first, such
as through ignorance of the Scriptures do imagine that to be Christian
experience, which does not answer a rule of Scripture, but is contrary thereto.
2. Such as from corrupt principles will set up their experience above or equal
to the authority of Scripture, as to give a being to institutions, or to make
it a rule to judge and try all things, yea the very Scripture it self, when
both it and they must be judged thereby Romans 2. 16. There is much corrupt
experience in the world, and persons have been as much mistaken in their
experience, especially in these days, as in any thing I know, and no marvel,
when they leave the Scriptures as to rule and walk by the uncertain rule of
their own experience, which many times is nothing but the vision of their own
brains; yet notwithstanding the great mistakes of many through corrupt
experience, yet true Christian experience is as excellent as ever, and that as
I said before is more than a bare knowledge, it is truth brought home to the
heart with life and power, by the Spirit of God conforming the soul in all
things to the will of God, being united to Christ by faith, and so by it we
learn many things; First, by experience we find the word of God daily
accomplished in us, and are confirmed in our faith and hope, for experience
works hope, Romans 5. 4. by it we come to be acquainted with our own hearts,
and are not so easily deceived by them; by experience we learn how to use our
spiritual armor, Ephesians. 6. 12, 13, 14. for offense and defense against the wiles
of the devil, not being ignorant of his devises, 2 Cor. 2. 11. by it we learn
wisdom as to the exercise of all spiritual gifts, and do know what we have
received, and what we want in a measure, and what will help or hinder a
gracious frame in us; also by it we learn wisdom as to the profiting by all
conditions, and as to the answering of all relations, and in all these persons
do many times do that for want of experience, which after they have more, they
are ashamed of what they have done; and according to that measure of it which
through grace I have attained, I have often thought that a large experienced
Christian does as far excel and differ from such as have but little
experience, as a man differs from a child, and may say as Job did, I have heard
of thee by the hearing of the ear, but now mine eyes see thee, Job 42. 5. and
because experience is a thing so excellent, every one would be eminent in it,
or at least they would be thought to be so, when the truth is there are but few
that do take a right course to attain it. Now for the way and means by which it
is attained, I shall give my thoughts, 1. I conceive its the fruit of much
Christian labor after long continuance in the truth and being (...) various
conditions. But 2. and chiefly I apprehend it is attained by serious
observation and meditation: for though persons may have much knowledge as to
the principles of truth, and may continue long in the profession of it, and may
be exercised under many changes, yet if they are not serious in their
observations, but things come and go with them, and they not regard it, they
will never attain to much experience; whereas it may be some that are more
serious and observing, that have not bin so long in the truth, or so exercised,
(...) have more (...) than they, as some children will learn more in a month
than others in a year, but this is not ordinary; for though persons may be long
in the truth, and have but little experience, yet such as are newly come to the
faith cannot have much, though never so observing; for which cause young
Christians are not to be chosen Church Officers, being subject to be soon
overcome by temptations; also let young Christians especially, Be swift to
hear, and slow to speak, Iam. 1. 19. and be more swift to hear than to offer
the sacrifice of fools, Eccle. 5. 1. Seeing it is so that Christian (...) in
its place is a thing so excellent, and that the means by which its attained is
by serious observation, I desire with all Saints to give up my self to a
serious observation of the dealings of God with us in all conditions, that we
may not receive mercies in vain, but that we may treasure them up in our
Christian experience, having in our treasury things new and old, that we may be
ready upon all occasions to bring it forth, Mat. 13. 52. to the glory and
praise of God, and to the profit and comfort of our selves and others, as its
our duty so to do, till the coming of our Lord, to (...) and glory for e(...)


