A SERMON Preached before the KING AT WHITE HALL, November 5. 1684.

BY FRANCIS Lord Bishop of ELY, and Almoner to His Majesty.

Published by His Majesty's Special Command.

LONDON, Printed for Benj. Took, at the Ship in S. Paul's Churchyard. M DC
LXXXV.

ROMANS cap. III. ver. viij. And not rather as we be slanderously reported, and
as some affirm that we say, Let us do Evil that Good may come? Whose damnation
is just.


IF ever that grievous complaint, which in the foregoing Chapter S. Paul makes
of the Jews, might be also made of some that call themselves Christians, The
name of God is Blasphemed among the Gentiles through you, perhaps from the time
of S. Paul's writing this Epistle to the time when the fifth of November, was
first a Day of Note in our English Calendar, neither the Jewish nor Christian
story can point out a more remarkable Instance of a great scandal given to all
the World, than was that foul Conspiracy which gave us occasion of Celebrating
this as a Festival Day; yes, I may safely, that is, truly say, this was the
greatest scandal on the Christian name within that compass of time: from S.
Paul's Preaching the Gospel of Peace, to the opening of this bloody scene,
there happened nothing like this; nothing so ignominious not only to Religion
and to pretenses of Piety, but to humane Nature it self, nothing so full of
black Diabolical malice: For the first good Friday, (as I may call it) was
before that period of time which I set from S. Paul's Apostleship; then for the
other Judas's and the later Pilates that occasioned our setting apart the 30th
of January for our solemn Fast, they lived and flourisht a great while after
these goodly forerunners and worthy Leaders of theirs the Powder-Traitors.

But what shall we say when S. Paul himself is forced to enter his Protestation
in my Text, and make his appeal to all the World in a case of scandal, which
though never given by him, yet was taken up against him by some either Jews or
Judaizing Christians, or Gnostick Heretics, by such men as these was the name
of Christ Blasphemed among the Gentiles through him, through S. Paul the
Apostle of the Gentiles, these striving to fasten it upon him and his
fellow-helpers in the Gospel, so as by consequence to fix it upon Christ
himself, as if it were a part of that Gospel, and a piece of true Christian
Divinity, Preached up as a good Principle, Let us do evil that good may come of
it; a Principle which if granted may serve to justify any malicious wickedness,
nay even to glorify those that acted in the Prodigious Wickedness of this Day.
Now after such a Calumny as this, that any should affirm this, as if S. Paul
had said it or did approve it, what Man, or what order of Men can expect or
hope to escape being slanderously reported?

But how was this occasion taken if none were given to defame this glorious
Saint and Servant of Jesus Christ, and through his sides to strike at the
Honor of his Master? Be pleased to observe that Saint Paul had upon all
occasions magnified the goodness of God in sending the Gospel to those, who
could least expect such an unspeakable Gift of a Divine Revelation, since they
had offended all manner of ways against the Dictates of Nature and right
Reason, as well as against the sufficient Grace vouchsaf't them: But upon this
very score does S. Paul extol the Mercy of God to them, that where sin had
abounded, there Grace had superabounded. But from this saying of His, this
Great saying, some took advantage to raise an odious lie upon him, as if he had
declared himself in the case of the Pagans having the Gospel preached to them;
that since the greatness of their sins did make God's mercy appear the more
visibly great and glorious in sending the Gospel to such, therefore it was
lawful to live vicious heathenish Lives, the more to illustrate the glory of
that Grace in the forgiveness of such monstrous foul offenses. For answer to
this Calumny, though he can scarce afford to answer it, but with indignation
rejects it as a wicked slander; he that in another place had showed so much
charity as to wish himself an Anathema for his Brethren, the deluded Jews, on
condition they might be converted; yet he denounces here an Anathema upon those
Slanderers, who (it may be supposed) wilfully had perverted the Doctrine of
Christianity: their Damnation, he declares, is Just and Righteous, if they
persevere in charging not only him but his Blessed Gospel with admitting so
cursed a Principle, as if it were lawful to do any one known Evil, though with
an eye to the best and noblest Designs, and with an aim at no other
consequences but such as were most beneficial to the Public; nay though the
Glory of God, the propagating of his Gospel, the settling of his Church, be the
studied end and intent of that one forbidden Action: it must not be allowed in
contemplation of all the good in the World.

But since the Apostle has said enough to vindicate himself, that this was no
Apostolical Canon of his Making, but rather a Maxim from Hell (and thither he
sends it again) I shall now consider it apart, and drawing off from the
particular case of S. Paul, I shall proceed by these steps which will come
extremely home to the case of these sinners against their own Souls, whose
burden it is to be arraigned every fifth of November.

First I shall show that this Principle, of doing Evil that good may come of
it, does indeed afford a color (though a false deceitful color) to those that
do Evil to call it Good, and so to go on as if they did no Evil.

Secondly, that this is a most unchristian heathenish Principle, Let us do evil
that good may come of it: accordingly the Apostle has read their sentence,
whosoever they are that hold it, their damnation is Just; and still the more
just their damnation, as they justify the more impious Practices upon this
Principle; where I shall have occasion to show how those that acted in this
hellish Conspiracy proceeded upon this Principle, and by consequence, how
justly they fell into condemnation.

Thirdly, That it is a wicked Slander, to charge any that are not guilty, as if
they held this Principle, or proceeded upon it in their Practices: Now, whereas
we of the Church of England do charge some others that are not of the Roman
Communion, and whereas we our selves are charged by some, as if we also were
serving Turns upon this same Principle, I shall endeavor to make it appear,
who are, and who are not slanderously Reported.

First, I shall show, that this Principle, of Doing Evil, that Good may come of
it, does indeed afford a Color (though a false deceitful Color) to those that
do Evil to call it Good, and so to go on as if they did no Evil.

Woe unto them that call Evil Good, and Good Evil (says the Prophet Isaiah)
then Woe unto them that take up this Principle, of Doing Evil that Good may come
of it; for Evil when it is called by its own Name, and when it appears in its
own shape, is so frightful a thing, few can endure the sight of it in
themselves, till they have borrowed for it a Mask from Goodness. Now of all the
Disguises capable of Cheating the Judgment, none is so proper as this, a great
Design seemingly for the Glory of God; an End so good, as to be thought a
sufficient Apology, a fair Excuse for the bad Means used to attain it. This is
so forcible a Motive to do Evil that Good may come of it, that in the Heat of
such a Temptation, as comes but once, and unexpectedly, a Man of true Goodness,
(when to use the words of the Prophet Ezekiel, God lays a stumbling block
before him, either for his Trial, or his Punishment) even one that walks warily
with God, may make a false step sometimes in some more Difficult and more
Disputable Cases, though upon second thoughts and cooler Debates, he presently
sees his Error: So S. Austin in his Treatise De Mendacio, where he does very
rationally conclude all manner of Serious Officious Lying, to be absolutely
unlawful, though it were to preserve a Life, (the Life of a Saint whom a Tyrant
sought to discover and put to death) nay, though it were to save a soul, yet he
does acknowledge his own want of Resolution in some hard Cases and surprising
Exigences, when his Truth happens to stand in Competition with his Compassion,
and he cannot do some great Good, or avoid some desperate Evil, without
admitting that, which he ingeniously calls Quasi Compensativum Peccatum, a sin
that seems to make amends for it self. It does but seem to do so. But then if
the best men have been prevailed withal to transgress upon this account in
lesser Instances, no wonder if the worst men do Evil with both hands, the
greatest Evil, when they have it in their prospect, or, which is all one, in
their fancy, to compass by so doing the greatest Good; when they have an
Enthusiasm upon them, and are possessed, that as they Act for God and his Glory,
so they Act like Him too, and gloriously as He does: they mean to bring Light
out of Darkness, even out of their own deeds of Darkness; when they are
consulting and contriving to raise a New World of Order and Beauty, out of that
Chaos and Confusion, to which they must first reduce all things. This is the
Principle still that is at the bottom of all that Evil under the Sun committed
by such as S. Paul foretells there shall come in these last days, in these
perilous times, men that are Traitors, heady, high-minded. Such Traitors as
are Elevated and even Transported with the Glory (though it be but vain Glory)
of some high flying Design in their present management; such Traitors as
propose some vast Undertaking as a Common Benefaction: Such are apt to conceit
they have made themselves necessary, as if God Almighty could not do his Work
without them: then they conclude, they are so much beforehand with Him; that
He is indebted to them an Indulgence for the grossest Prevarications of His
Laws; then to contradict the Revealed Will of God is Greatness and Privilege,
not Sin: So I have heard, that the Case of Jacob wrestling with God, was
Preached upon to our late great Usurper from that Text, Let me go, for the day
breaks: and he said, I will not let thee go except thou bless me; whence
there was raised this Doctrine most comfortable for him, That Gods Jacobs, or
Glorious Wrestlers with God, might for great Ends do some things contrary to
His Declared Will, which things might yet be Acceptable to His Secret Will, and
procure a Blessing. Then they grow Masters or Learned in Wickedness (as the
Prophet Jeremy speaks) they are Illuminated with so Extraordinary Notions of
Justice and Charity, that they have no Charity for other men's Understandings,
but count them Tenderhearted Fools that oppose their Expedient, and therefore
Meritorious Cruelties, with any Scruples of Pity. Ye know nothing at all (it
was very Magisterially spoken by Caiaphas the High Priest) nor consider that it
is Expedient for us, that One Man should Dye for the People, and that the whole
Nation Perish not. Now if I can destroy this fundamentally Erroneous Principle
of Expedience instead of that which is Just and Right, I shall plow up the very
ground upon which the Architects of what ever Sect or Party do build almost all
their Treasonable Designs. I wish I could sow it with Salt too, and that none
might dare to build upon it hereafter, for fear of the Curse that S. Paul has
left on the Ground.

I proceed then in the Second Place to show, That this is a most Unchristian
Heathenish Principle, Let us Do Evil that Good may come of It.

And First, I shall make it appear, That whoever Act on this Principle, do but
Abuse themselves and others, if they suppose that they Act for the Glory of God.

Secondly, I shall Expose the necessary but extreme ill Consequence of this
Principle, that it naturally leads from one great Sin and Mischief to another.

First, That they do not Act for the Glory of God:

For what can more tend to lessen the Glory of an Omnipotent Being, and of
purer Eyes than to behold Iniquity, than to break his most Holy Commandments
upon pretense of doing Him Honor and Service; as if He could not Govern the
World, but by Conniving at their Violation of His Precepts? But it may be
answered for them, that perhaps they judge it no Iniquity, while they Intend
all for his Glory: But it is easily replied, they do not sincerely Intend it:
They may think indeed that they do Intend it; they may not only to others seem
to do so (which is as easy as winking to counterfeit sleeping) but to
themselves; they may be men of that strange Composition and Contradiction which
S. Paul describes, Deceivers and being deceived: They may be bloody Hypocrites,
and yet imagine themselves the blessed Instruments of God, and Workers for His
Glory. Such were they of whom the Prophet Isaiah gives this account, Your
Brethren that hated you and cast you out for my Name sake, said, Let the Lord
be Glorified. But notwithstanding all this Deceitfulness of the Heart, we must
come at last to this resolution of the Case, That as the Stoic Philosophy
concludes all Evildoers to be Fools and Ignorant, though the violence of their
Affections has wrought them up to the height of Persuasion that they do well;
so the Christian Philosophy supposes all such Fools, to be Knaves; all
Christians that are Ignorant of such plain necessary Practical Doctrines, as to
do no Murder on pretense of Doing God Service, must be supposed to be
willingly Ignorant, as S. Peter speaks: Willingly, that is, wilfully Ignorant
if they be Christians: For the works of the Flesh are manifest, says S. Paul:
and amongst those works is Murder as well as Adultery: so that the Case of
those Offenders who pretend to believe S. Paul's Gospel, is altogether
different from the Case of S. Paul himself, though his was bad enough too,
while he was a Persecutor of the Church, out of Zeal to the Glory of God, but
yet he did it ignorantly in Unbelief.

But Secondly, (To join together both those Considerations which I proposed) A
Principle that opens a Gap to let in Sin upon Sin, and Mischief upon Mischief,
can never be a Means to advance the Glory of God, or set forward the welfare of
Mankind, unless the way to either of those be to turn the World upside down.
That it opens a Gap, did I say, to let in Sin? Yes, it sets the very
Floodgates of Hell wide open, to pour upon the Earth a black Inundation of the
most Practical Atheism, to which God alone can speak, as He does to the Sea,
Hitherto shall thou go, and no farther. To prove it upon these Conspirators of
the Fifth of November, proceeding still upon this same ground; How did they, as
David said of other wicked men, go from one wickedness to another? From
conspiring a Horrible Massacre of so many reputed Heretics, but most falsely
so called, they soon Resolved it as Lawful to Murder many whom they judged to
be altogether Innocent and Good Catholics; yet even such were Condemned to
Fall with the Guilty Heretics. It was determined by Garnet the Provincial,
That even this was Lawful, if so much Good would come of it, as would
Recompense the Lives of so many Guiltless Persons. So they supported themselves
on the same ground still, Onmia metiri ex commodo Sanctae Matris Ecclesiae, to
Measure all things by the Benefit would Accrue to their Holy Mother Church.
Their Design they thought was Catholic, therefore it must be Christian, though
it were attended throughout with the most Sacrilegious Abuses of their Holy
Things, Oaths, Confessions and Sacraments.

And upon this account I called it a Hellish Conspiracy, for their Owning and
Avowing a Doctrine so Damnable as this; (for so does S. Paul call it) the
Wisdom, or rather the Infernal Subtlety of Traitors; a Wisdom, which to be
sure, descended not from Above: it is short to call it Earthly and Sensual,
unless I add the Apostles last Epithet, and call it Devilish. For, allowing
them their utmost Rigours, their most unreasonable Prejudices to our Communion;
yet to Attempt our Reduction through a Sea of Blood, I must still call it
Devilish: This Restoring us (as they call it) to the Church, by Hurrying Kings
and Princes out of the World, and Involving a whole Senate in Dust and Blood;
the Remedy is worse than they can imagine the Disease: the Prescription is as
Unnatural as Detestable, as was the Advice of some Physicians, or rather
Magicians to the Royal Constantine, (if there be truth in the Story, however
the Moral is good) that He might be cured of his Leprosy, if He would bathe
Himself in the Lifeblood of Infants: it is said, He abhorred the Medicine: and
I wish that Bishop of Rome, who they pretend cured this Emperor of his
Leprosy when he Baptized Him (though the Lie be long ago rejected and derided
by the Learned of their own Church, I wish he) could have Entailed but so much
Tenderness upon all his Successors in that See, that they should not have
thought of Purging us to Death, when we were in so good health; then would they
not by their Deposing or Excluding Bulls have given Life to such a Design as
this, of washing us, by shedding the Royal Blood.

I have showed how those that Acted in this Conspiracy, proceeded upon this
Principle of Doing Evil that Good may come of it, and by consequence, how
justly they fell into Condemnation: But now, whereas we our selves of the
Church of England charge some others that are not of the Roman Communion, and
whereas we our selves are charged by some, as if we also were serving Turns
upon this same Principle; I shall in the Third and last Place, and that very
briefly, endeavor to make it appear, who are, and who are not slanderously
Reported.

Since I undertook to show the spreading malignant Influence of this Principle,
can I avoid reflecting on another Party? when ever they Heard or Read the Story
of the Powder-Traytors, sure they must needs Reflect upon themselves in such
words as those which immediately follow my Text, What then? are we better than
they? no, in no wise. I mean the Party that openly Voted and Acted in
Westminster Hall the Unparalled Villainy, which they Executed at
White-Hall-Gate: And perhaps it were an Excess of Charity, to suppose that any
of them ever Imagined or Intended any Good to come of it, but only to set up
themselves, which was another Insupportable Evil.

But I must needs add, Has not the same restless Party gone on still, either
upon the same Principle, or none at all? Should they not in all Reason and
Conscience, when ever they talk of these Regicides of the Fifth of November,
ask themselves the same plain Question, and give themselves the same Answer?
What then? are we better than they? no, in no wise. For sure the Crime is much
alike, whether a King be Destroyed at Westminster, or the Rye, whether by so
many Barrels of Powder or so many Blunderbusses.

But farther yet: Must we not sadly Acknowledge, that there is a Numerous
Party, who, though I hope and believe, they are none of the Conspirators, yet
by following the grain of this Principle, Doing Evil that Good may come of it,
they are in a fair way to be any thing, rather than Christians? Is it not come
to that pass, that many will rather forswear themselves, than Act against their
Conscience (as they call it) or which is all one with them, against their
Party? Is not Casuistical Divinity grown even in this Age and Nation, as One
ingeniously defined it, Ars litigandi cum Deo, an Art of trying Causes with God
Almighty; a study to make every thing that men have a mind to do, as Lawful as
they can? God has given us ten Commandments, and we return Him ten Expedients,
and twenty Shifts, instead of Obeying Him. It Is commonly said among those that
know how to Adapt and Apply the Jesuits Salvo's according to any present
Exigency, That a Man of Wit never sins against his Conscience; for he can show
the Case in such Lights, as to make it look fairly to himself. But are the
Jesuits the only Favorable Casuists to themselves? Was there not published, and
that not long ago, a Treatise on Occasional Communion? and then another
Treatise, stating that Question about taking the Oaths and Sacrament, to
Qualify Dissenters for Public Trusts? Who ever reads those Pieces, and
remembers what Excellent use was made of that Doctrine, must needs confess,
that there are men in the World, who cry the Protestant, the Protestant, as
loud as ever the Jews did the Temple of the Lord, the Temple of the Lord; or as
the Jesuits do the Church, the Catholic Church; and yet these True
Protestants, (as they love to style themselves) are truly and thoroughly
Jesuited in the Arts of Evasion, destructive to the End of our Laws, and
contrary to the meaning of our Lawgivers.

Thus all men would do something to save their Souls, (as we say,) or they
would at least say something to save their Credit with themselves as well as
with others: Some Device they would gladly find out to ease themselves, while
they play with that little of Natural Conscience they have left them. They do,
like one that forged a Will, then took up the Dead Body out of the Grave, put a
Pen into the Dead man's Hand, guided the Hand to sign the Will, and then took
his Oath, that he had seen it signed by the Hand of the Testator. To what
purpose was all this Pageantry? Had not downright Perjury been as easily
swallowed? No; Drowning men will catch at Straws: Such is the force of
Religion, that it can scarce be absolutely stifled in the minds of men; they
would gladly retain some faint color or shadow of Innocence, that their faults
may not appear too ugly, but that they may flatter themselves in their own
sight, until their Abominable Sin be found out.

But what do we of the Church of England complain of others, if that be true
which some would fain insinuate, that we are Betraying our selves? Why do we
still thank God for Discovering and Defeating the Powder Plot, if we are
Undermining the Several of Mr. Pryn's Pieces, Apostasia Laudensium. Patronus
Bonae Fidei, etc.
Church? for we are so Reported, whether slanderously or no, must be tried:
What Volumes have been Published heretofore, and some Pamphlets but lately, to
make it appear, that Archbishop Laud had bred us up for Popery? What a noise
has been made with this, as if they meant to stop the Cry of his Innocent Blood
with their Clamours, that he Lived and Died in the Design of Introducing
Popery? Nay more, that the Governing part of the present Clergy, have made what
Advances they could, treading in his footsteps, and in the same Broad Way, with
their Faces toward the Vatican. The Clergy of England are more than Ten
Thousand Men; that most of this vast Number, (whether they Lead or Drive)
should be marching so fast toward Rome, is exceeding strange. It puts me in
mind of the Story of the Eleven Thousand Virgins, who, as the Legend would make
us believe, went out of England in Pilgrimage, and Perished in the way. But the
Wisest and Learnedest Writers for that Fable, would be contented to strike out
their thousands at first dash; that they confess was an Error of some Monkish
Transcriber; they would gladly compound for Eleven, nor can they prove even
those few: So may not I challenge all our Accusers, that reflect on so great a
Body as the Clergy, which consist (as I said) of ten thousand at least; To name
but ten of the whole Clergy; ten men of any Note, either for their Dignity or
Learning, who in the worst of Times, under the greatest Temptations, fell from
the Church of England to that of Rome? But since we are so Defamed, as if we
still went on with the same Intrigue, where that Great Prelate was forced to
leave off, in Vindicating Him, I shall make a Defense for our selves, and to
Justify Him and His Administration, I shall make such an Appeal to Rome it
self, as will be in no danger of a Praemunire. And first I refer my self to a
Voluminous Italian Writer of Universal History, he Qualified himself very long
ago with the Title of Historian to the Most Christian King: His Name I spare,
because I think he is Living still, though he spares not the Memory of the
Dead, and of one that Died a Martyr. This Author is pleased to conclude in
these words the Tragical Story of that Great Prelate, Laying down his Head upon
the Block, it was (says he) severed from his Shoulders by the Executioner at
one Blow, Rendendo l'anima a Satanasso, i. e. while he gave up his Soul to the
Great Devil, to whom (says he) he belonged in his life time, with his Damnable
Doctrine of Calvin, whose follower he was. While I live I shall think the
better of our Charity in the Church of England, as often as I Reflect upon this
most Uncharitable Expression: In the mean time, with what Justice is He still
branded by our Dissenting Protestants for a Papist, when the other Adverse
Party at the same time Damn Him for a Calvinist? But I add further, with what
Justice does this Romanist tax Him for a Calvinist, when there is another far
more Authentic Writer, a Romanist too, but Spondanus, Anno 1605.
of a more Christian temper, (for he speaks with Detestation of the
Powder Plot, and ascribes the Discovery of it to the Hand of God:) and this
Author clearly acquits that Renowned Prelate both from Popery and Puritanism? I
mean the Pope's own Historian (as I may style him) the Continuator of the Great
Cardinals Annals, who gives this Account, the Primate of England (says
Spondanus, Anno 1645.
he) without the Tents of the Roman and Apostolic Church, after he had been
Imprisoned in the Tower of London for many Months, is Beheaded by the Command
of those that stood for the Parliament, for his standing up in defense of the
Kings Just Rights, and for Advising his Majesty against the Puritans: then it
follows, Catholica Religio ei Morienti defuit, quod dolendum, He wanted the
Catholic Religion when he died, which (says my Author, partial to his own
Faction) was to be lamented. By the Catholic, we are sure he means the Roman.
After two such Testimonies as these, who ever can believe that Great and Good
Man a Romanist, can, I suppose, believe whatever he has a mind to believe, and
he may in good time believe the Relation of a Third Author, a Lutheran German,
who in the Body of a large Continuat. Pezelii pars 4. Mellif. Hist. Anno 1645.
General History tells us gravely, that the Archbishop being Convicted to have
Accepted the Title of a Cardinal sent him by the University of Oxford, and to
have Corrupted Religion, was put to Death.

And we are just as Guilty as he was: It Is true indeed, we refused to Close and
Comply with this Doctrine of Expedients; some of them not unlike Sampson's
Desperate Expedient to Destroy the Philistines, by pulling a vast Fabric upon
his own head, as we must have done the Monarchy upon ours; or rather, like
Fawx's Expedient to prevent the Death he apprehended, but to prevent it, by
Blowing up the Parliament House and himself and all, which he much regretted he
had not done then when they seized upon him: It Is very true, we believed it a
preposterous way of securing our Religion, by giving up the peculiar Honor of
our Church, the Doctrine of Obedience unto Kings: And we judged it a strange
Means of Barring out Popery, by letting in the Doctrine of Translating and
Disposing of Kingdoms: It Is most true, we Abhorred that Association, which
naturally and directly lead to the second Powder Plot, as I must have leave to
call it: All this is true, and because we in none of these Instances, would Do
Evil for fear of suffering it, therefore we are Reported to be Doing or
Designing so ill a thing, as it is hard to conceive, what Good we should Intend,
even to our private Interests, by hurting the public: And therefore we may
truly say with S. Paul in my Text, that we are slanderously Reported. And they
that are Guilty of the Slander do an Extreme ill thing, whatever their Ends be:
they might expect some Good to come of it, if they could teach the Party, cum
Ratione insanire, that is, When they had frighted them with Fears and
Jealousies out of their Wits, then to make them Act like Reasonable Creatures.
But if the Association had broken out into a furious Rebellion, (and that was
just breaking out, as it is most clear and Evident, from many Credible
Witnesses, and Dying Confessions long ago, nay, from Hands and Seals taken but
very lately) then how could the Greatest Evil have been avoided? (even as Great
as any that Piercy and Catesby intended) unless Well-meaning Rebels could have
given every Bullet its Commission, whom to hit or miss, and could have directed
their Shot as well as their Intentions.

Soon after that Execrable Assassination of King Henry the Fourth of France,
one of that Great Prince's Servants, one of that Incomparable Learning, as made
him justly esteemed one of the Glories of his Time, coming over into England to
divert his Melancholy, and to wait upon King James, the Patron of the Learned,
he writes Causabon. Epist. 1612. Dan. Heins.
from hence to another Eminent Scholar in these words, That he was come (...),
into the Island of the Happy, where I enjoy (says he) this Consolation, that I
am not Tormented with the sight of those wicked Fiends and Parricides; those he
means, who, he supposed, had Animated the Murder of his Royal Master, and then
(says he) I have this Comfort too, that in this Kingdom I see that Face of the
Primitive Church, which I learned to know from the Writings of the Ancient
Fathers. But had that Worthy Stranger Lived and Conversed with us here until
these Times, he must have endured, not only the Aspect, but the almost Twenty
Years Tyranny of as Cursed Furies among us, as any he left behind him in his
own Country: and he must have beheld another Woeful Spectacle, the Church which
he so much admired, in a manner Defaced, or at least, most sadly Deformed by
them. And yet by the Mercy of God, neither the black Traitors of the
Powder Plot, nor the scarlet Traitors of the High Court of Justice, (though these
latter prevailed for a time) were able to Compass their utmost Hellish Ends and
Purposes; but we are once again, the Island of the Happy, if we but knew our
Happiness; and we are a Kingdom again, where there is now to be seen the same
Venerable Face of the Ancient Church, Restored together with the King, and
Restored by the King under God. As long as our Church deserves that Glorious
Character, which that Great Man bestowed upon it, while it bears the likeness
of the Primitive Church, it has a Just Title to a full share in that Gracious
Promise made to the Catholic Church, Isa. 54. and the last Verse, No Weapon
that is formed against thee shall prosper, this is the Inheritance of the
servants of the Lord; and may we not justly say with Joyful Thanks, that the
Lot is fallen to us in a fair Ground, and that this is a Goodly Inheritance?
May we not with an Humble Greatness call such a Church, the place of the
Vineyard that His right hand has planted; and the Branch that He made so
strong for Himself? O let it never be said, that Her Hedge is broken down, that
all they that go by pluck off her Grapes, that the Wild Boar out of the Wood
does Root it up, and the Wild Beasts of the Field devour it. And after this
Prayer for the Church, let us also pray for the King, as it follows in that
Psalm, Let thy Hand be upon the Man of thy Right Hand; or in the plainer words
of another Psalm, O continue thy Loving Mercies, that they may preserve Him! So
will we always give praise unto thy Name, that we may daily perform our Vows.

Now unto the King Eternal, etc.

FINIS.

