Nunquam CHRISTO Charior quam sub Cruce (...): (...)


A Dissuasive FROM POPERY TO THE PEOPLE OF ENGLAND AND IRELAND.

Together with II. Additional Letters to Persons changed in their Religion.

I. The first written to a Gentlewoman newly seduced to the Church of Rome.

II. The second to a Person newly converted to the Church of England.

By JEREMY Lord Bishop of Down.

LONDON,

Printed for R. Royston, at the Angel in Amen-Corner, MDCLXXXVI.

THE PREFACE TO THE READER.
WHen a Roman Gentleman had, to please himself, written a Book in Greek, and
presented it to Cato; he desired him to pardon the faults of his Expressions,
since he wrote in Greek, which was a Tongue in which he was not perfect Master.
Cato told him he had better then to have let it alone and written in Latin, by
how much it is better not to commit a fault, than to make apologies. For if the
thing be good, it needs not to be excused; if it be not good, a crude apology
will do nothing but confess the fault, but never makes amends. I therefore make
this Address to all who will concern themselves in reading this Book, not to
ask their pardon for my (...) in doing of it; I know of none; for if I had
known them I would have mended them before the Publication; and yet though I
know not any, I do not question but much fault will be found by too many; I
wish I have given them no cause for their so doing. But I do not only mean it
in the particular Periods, (where every man that is not a Son of the Church of
England or Ireland, will at least do as Apollonius did to the Apparition that
affrighted his company on the Mountain Caucasus, he will revile and persecute
me with evil words) but I mean it in the whole Design, and men will reasonably
or capriciously ask, Why any more Controversies? Why this over again? Why
against the Papists, against whom so very many are already exasperated, that
they cry out (...) of Persecution? And why can they not be (...) to enjoy their
share of peace, which has returned in the hands of His Sacred Majesty at his
blessed Restoration? For as much of this as concerns my self I make no excuse,
but give my reasons, and hope to (...) this procedure with that modesty which
David used to his angry brother, saying, What have I now done? Is there not a
cause? The cause is this:

The Reverend Fathers my Lords the Bishops of Ireland in their circumspection
and watchfulness over their Flocks having espied grievous Wolves to have
entered in, some with Sheeps-clothing, and some without, some secret enemies,
and some open, at first endeavored to give check to those enemies which had
put fire into the bed-straw; and though God has very much prosper'd their
labors, yet they have work enough to do, and will have, till God shall call
them home to the land of peace and unity. But it was soon remembered, that when
King James of blessed memory had discerned the spirits of the English
Non-conformists, and found them peevish and (...), unreasonable and imperious;
not only unable to govern, but as inconsistent with the Government, as greedy
to snatch at it for themselves; resolved to take off their disguise, and put a
difference between Conscience and Faction, and to bring them to the measures
and rules of Laws; and to this the Council and all wise men were consenting,
because by the King's great wisdom, and the conduct of the whole Conference and
Inquiry, men saw there was reason on the King's side, and (...) on all sides.
But the Gunpowder Treason breaking out, a new Zeal was (...) against the
Papists, and it shined so greatly, that the Non-conformists escaped by the
light of it, and quickly grew warm by the heat of that flame, to which they
added no small increase by their Declamations and other acts of insinuation:
insomuch that they being neglected, multiplied until they got power enough to
do all those mischiefs which we have seen and felt. This being remembered and
spoken of, it was soon observed that the Tables only were now turned, and that
now the public zeal and watchfulness against those men and those persuasions,
which so lately have afflicted us, might give to the Emissaries of the Church
of Rome leisure and opportunity to grow into numbers and strength to debauch
many Souls, and to (...) the safety and peace of the Kingdom. In Ireland we saw
too much of it done, and found the mischief growing too fast, and the most
intolerable inconveniences, but too justly apprehended, as near and imminent.
We had reason at least to cry Fire when it flamed through our very Roofs, and
to interpose with all care and diligence when Religion and the eternal Interest
of Souls was at stake, as knowing we should be greatly unfit to appear and
account to the great Bishop and Shepherd of Souls if we had suffered the
enemies to sow tares in our fields, we standing and looking on. It was
therefore considered how we might best serve God, and rescue our charges from
their danger, and it was concluded presently to run to arms, I mean to the
weapons of our warfare, to the armor of the Spirit, to the works of our
calling, and to tell the people of their peril, to warn them of the enemy, and
to lead them in the ways of truth and peace and holiness: that if they would be
admonished, they might be safe; if they would not, they should be without
excuse, because they could not say but the Prophets have been amongst them.

But then it was next enquired who should minister in this affair, and put in
order all those things which they had to give in charge: It was easy to choose
many, but hard to choose one; there were many fit to succeed in the vacant
Apostleship, and though Barsabas the Just was by all the Church named as a fit
and worthy man, yet the lot fell upon Matthias; and that was my case, it fell
to me to be their Amanuensis, when persons most worthy were more readily
excused; and in this my Lords the Bishops had reason, that (according to S.
Paul's rule) If there be 1 (...). 6. 4.
judgments or controversies amongst us, they should be employed who are least
esteemed in the Church; and upon this account I had nothing left me but
Obedience; though I confess that I found regret in the nature of the
employment, for I love not to be (as S. Paul calls it) one of the (...),
Disputers of this world. For I suppose skill in Controversies (as they are now
used) to be the worst part of Learning, and time is the worst spent in them,
and men the least benefited by them; that is, when the Questions are curious
and impertinent, intricate and inexplicable, not to make men better, but to
make a Sect. But when the Propositions disputed are of the foundation of Faith,
or lead to good life, or naturally do good to single persons or public
societies, then they are part of the Depositum of Christianity, of the Analogy
of faith; and for this we are by the Apostle commanded to contend earnestly,
and therefore Controversies may become necessary; but because they are not
often so, but oftentimes useless and always troublesome; and as an ill diet
makes an ill habit of body, so does the frequent use of controversies baffle
the understanding, and makes it crafty to deceive others, it self remaining
instructed in nothing but useless notions and words of contingent signification
and distinctions without difference, which minister to pride and contention and
teach men to be pertinacious, troublesome and uncharitable, therefore I love
them not.

But because by the Apostolical Rule I am tied to do all things without
murmuring, Phil. 2. 14.
as well as without disputings, I considered it over again, and found my self
relieved by the subject matter, and the grand consequent of the present
Questions. For in the present affair, the case is not so as in the others; here
the Questions are such that the Church of Rome declares them to reach as far as
eternity, and damn all that are not of their opinions; and the Protestants have
much more reason to fear concerning the Papists, such who are not excused by
ignorance, that their condition is very sad and deplorable, and that it is
charity to snatch them as a brand from the fire; and indeed the Church of Rome
maintains Propositions, which, if the Ancient Doctors of the Church may be
believed, are apt to separate from God. I instance in their super addition of
Articles and Propositions, derived only from a pretended tradition, and not
contained in Scripture. Now the doing of this is a great sin, and a great
danger. Adoro Scripturae plenitudinem; Si non est scriptum timeat vae illud
adjicientibus and detrahentibus destinatum, said Tertullian: I adore the
fullness of Scripture, and if it be not written, let Hermogenus fear Contra
(...).
the woe that is destined to them that detract or add to it.

S. Basil says, Without doubt it is a De verae fide and Moral. reg. 72. c. 1
and reg. 80. c. 22.
most manifest argument of infidelity, and a most certain sign of pride, to
introduce any thing that is not written (in the Scriptures;) our blessed
Savior having said, My sheep hear my voice, and the voice of strangers they
will not hear; and to detract from Scriptures, or add any thing to the Faith
that is not there, is most vehemently forbidden by the Apostle, saying, If it
be but a man's testament, nemo superordinat, no man adds to it. And says also,
This was the Will of the Testator. And Theophilus Alexandrinus Epist. Pasch. 2.
says plainly, It is the part of a Devilish spirit to think any thing to be
Divine, that is not in the authority of the holy Scriptures: and therefore S.
Athanasius affirms, that the Catholics De incarn. Christi.
will neither speak nor endure to hear any thing in Religion that is a stranger
to Scripture; it being immodestiae vaecordia, an evil heart of immodesty, to
speak those things which are not written. Now let any man judge whether it be
not our duty, and a necessary work of charity, and the proper office of our
Ministry, to persuade our Charges from the immodesty of an evil heart, from
having a Devilish spirit, from doing that which is vehemently forbidden by the
Apostle, from infidelity and pride, and lastly from that eternal Woe which is
denounced against them that add other words and doctrines than what is
contained in the Scriptures, and say, Dominus dixit, The Lord has said it, and
he has not said it. If we had put these (...) censures upon the Popish
doctrine of Tradition, we should have been thought uncharitable; but because
the holy Fathers do so, we ought to be charitable, and snatch our Charges from
the ambient slame.

And thus it is in the question of Images; (...). 2. cap. de Origin. error.
Dubium non est, quin Religio nulla sit, ubicunque simulacrum est, said
Lactantius; Without all peradventure Lib. 7. (...).
where ever an Image is, (meaning for worship) there is no Religion: and that
we ought rather to die than pollute our Faith with such impieties, said Origin.
It is against the Law of Nature, it being expressly forbidden by the second
Commandment, as Irenaeus (...), Tertullian, Cyprian, and S. Augustine; and
therefore is it not great (...) should contend sor that Faith which (...) all
worship of (...), and oppose the superstition of such Guides who do teach their
(...) to give them veneration, to prevaricate the Moral Law, and the very Law
of Nature, and do that which whosoever does has no Religion? We know Idolatry
is a damnable sin, and we also know that the Roman Church with all the
artifices she could use, never can justify her self, or acquit the common
practices from Idolatry, and yet if it were but suspicious that it is Idolatry,
it were enough to awaken us; for God is a jealous God, and will not endure any
such causes of suspicion and motives of jealousy. I instance but once more.

The Primitive Church did excommunicate Can. comperimus de consecr.
them that did not receive the holy Sacrament in both kinds, and S. Ambrose
did. 2. in 1 Cor. 11.
says, that he who receives the Mystery other ways than Christ appointed, (that
is, but in one kind, when he has appointed it in two) is unworthy of the Lord,
and he cannot have Devotion. Now this thing we ought not to suffer, that our
people by so doing should remain unworthy of the Lord, and for ever be
indevout, or cozened with a false show of devotion, or fall by following evil
Guides into the sentence of Excommunication. These matters are not trisling,
and when we see these errors frequently taught (...) owned as the only true
Religion, and (...) are such evils, which the Fathers say are the way of
damnation, we have reason to hope that all wise and good men, lovers of souls,
will confess that we are within the circles of our duty, when we teach our
people to decline the crooked ways, and to walk in the ways of Scripture and
Christianity.

But we have observed amongst the generality of the Irish, such a declension of
Christianity, so great credulity to believe every superstitious story, such
confidence in vanity, such groundless pertinacy, such vicious lives, so little
sense of true Religion and the fear of God, so much care to obey the Priests,
and so little to obey God; such intolerable ignorance, such fond Oaths and
manners of swearing, thinking themselves more obliged by swearing on the
Mass Book, than the four Gospels, and S. Patrick's Mass Book more than any new
one; swearing by their Fathers soul, by their Godsips hand, by other things
which are the product of those many Tales are told them; their not knowing upon
what account they refuse to come to Church, but only that now they are old and
never did, or their Countrymen do not, or their Fathers or Grandfathers never
did, or that their Ancestors were Priests, and they will not alter from their
Religion; and after all, can give no account of their Religion what it is: only
they believe as their Priest bids them, and go to Mass which they understand
not, and reckon their Beads to tell the number and the tale of their prayers,
and abstain from Eggs and Flesh in Lent, and visit Saint Patrick's Well, and
leave Pins and Ribbons, Yarn or Thread in their holy Wells, and pray to God, S.
Mary and S. Patrick, S. Columbanus and S. Bridget, and desire to be buried with
S. Francis's Cord about them, and to fast on Saturdays in honor of our Lady.
These and so many other things of like nature we see daily, that we being
conscious of the infinite distance which these things have from the spirit of
Christianity, know that no charity can be greater than to persuade the people
to come to our Churches, where they shall be taught all the ways of godly
wisdom, of peace and safety to their souls: whereas now there are many of them
that know not how to say their prayers, but mutter like Pies and Parrots words
which they are taught, but they do not pretend to understand. But I shall give
one particular instance of their miserable superstition and blindness.

I was lately within a few months very much troubled with Petitions and earnest
Requests for the restoring a Bell, which a Person of Quality had in his hands
in the time of, and ever since, the late Rebellion. I could not guess at the
reasons of their so great and violent importunity, but told the Petitioners, If
they could prove that Bell to be theirs, the Gentleman was willing to pay the
full value of it; though he had no obligation to do so (that I know of) but
charity: but this was so far from satisfying them, that still the importunity
increased, which made me diligently to inquire into the secret of it. The first
cause I found was, that a dying person in the Parish desired to have it rung
before him to Church, and pretended he could not die in peace if it were denied
him; and that the keeping of that Bell did anciently belong to that family from
father to son: but because this seemed nothing but a fond and an unreasonable
superstition, I enquired further, and at last found that they believed this
Bell came from Heaven, and that it used to be carried from place to place, and
to end Controversies by Oath, which the worst men durst not violate if they
swore upon that Bell, and the best men amongst them durst not but believe him;
that if this Bell was rung before the Corpse to the grave, it would help him out
of Purgatory; and that therefore when any one died, the friends of the deceased
did, whilst the Bell was in their possession, hire it for the behoof of their
dead, and that by this means that Family was in part maintained. I was troubled
to see under what spirit of delusion those poor souls do lie, how infinitely
their credulity is abused, how certainly they believe in trifles, and perfectly
rely on vanity, and how little they regard the truths of God, and how not at
all they drink of the waters of Salvation. For the numerous companies of
Priests and Friars amongst them take care they shall know nothing of Religion,
but what they design for them, they use all means to keep them to the use of
the Irish Tongue, lest if they learn English they might be supplied with
persons fitter to instruct them; the people are taught to make that also their
excuse for not coming to our Churches, to bear our advices, or converse with us
in religious intercourses, because they understand us not, and they will not
understand us, neither will they learn that they may understand and live. And
this and many other evils are made greater and more irremediable by the
affrightment which their Priests put upon them by the issues of Ecclesiastical
Jurisdiction, by which (they now exercising it too publicly) they give them
Laws, not only for Religion, but even for Temporal things, and turn their
Proselytes from the Mass, if they become Farmers of the Tithes from the
Minister or Proprietary without their leave. I speak that which I know to be
true by their own confession and unconstrained and uninvited Narratives; so
that as it is certain that the Roman Religion, as it stands in distinction and
separation from us, is a body of strange Propositions, having but little relish
of true primitive and pure Christianity, (as will he (...) manifest, if the
importunity of our (...) extort it) so it is here amongst us a Faction and a
State-party and design to recover their old Laws and barbarous manner of
living, a device to enable them to dwell alone, and to be Populus unius labii,
a people of one language and unmingled with others. And if this be Religion, it
is such a one as ought to be reproved by all the severities of Reason and
Religion, lest the people perish, and their souls be cheaply given away to them
that make merchandise of souls, who were the purchase and price of Christ's
blood.

Having given this sad account, why it was necessary that my Lords the Bishops
should take care to do what they have done in this affair, and why I did
consent to be engaged in this Controversy, otherwise than I love to be, and
since it is not a love of trouble and contention, but charity to the souls of
the poor deluded Irish, there is nothing remaining but that we humbly desire of
God to accept and to bless this well-meant Labor of Love, and that by some
admirable ways of his Providence, he will be pleased to convey to them the
notices of their danger, and their sin, and to de-obstruct the passages of
necessary truth to them, for we know the arts of their Guides, and that it will
be very hard that the notice of these things shall ever be suffered to arrive
to the common people, but that which hinders will hinder until it be taken
away: however we believe and hope in God for remedy.

For although Edom would not let his brother Israel pass into his Country, and
the Philistims would stop the Patriarchs Wells, and the wicked Shepherds of
Midian would drive their Neighbors Flocks from the watering troughs, and the
Emissaries of Rome use all arts to keep the people from the use of Scriptures,
the Wells of salvation, and from entertaining the notices of such things which
from the Scriptures we teach; yet as God found out a remedy for those of old,
so he will also for the poor misled people of Ireland; and will take away the
evil minds, or the opportunities of the Adversaries hindering the people from
Instruction, and make way that the Truths we have here taught may approach to
their ears, and sink into their hearts, and make them wise unto salvation.

Amen.
THE CONTENTS Of the Three several CHAPTERS.
THE Introduction. Page 1. CHAP. I.
The Doctrine of the Roman Church in the Controverted Articles is neither
Catholic, Apostolic, nor Primitive. 4. CHAP. II.
The Church of Rome, as it is at this day disordered, teaches Doctrines and
uses Practices, which are in themselves, or in their true and immediate
Consequences, direct Impieties, and give warranty to a wicked life. 101. CHAP.
III.
The Church of Rome teaches Doctrines, which in many things are destructive of
Christian Society in general, and of Monarchy in special: Both which the
Religion of the Church of England and Ireland does by her Doctrines greatly and
Christianly support. 207.

IMPRIMATUR.

Carolus Alston R. P. D. Hen. Episc. Land. a Sacris.



A DISSUASIVE FROM POPERY To the PEOPLE of IRELAND.
The Introduction.
THE Questions of difference between Our Churches and the Church of Rome have
been so often disputed, and the evidences on both sides so often produced, that
to those who are strangers to the present constitution of affairs, it may seem
very unnecessary to say them over again: and yet it will seem almost impossible
to produce any new matter; or if we could, it will not be probable, that what
can be newly alleged can prevail more than all that which already has been so
often urged in these Questions. But we are not deterred from doing our duty by
any such considerations: as knowing, that the same medicaments are with success
applied to a returning or an abiding Ulcer; and the Preachers of God's word
must for ever be ready to put the People in mind of such things, which they
already have heard, and by the same Scriptures and the same reasons endeavor
to destroy their sin, or prevent their danger; and by the same word of God to
extirpate those errors, which have had opportunity in the time of our late
disorders to spring up and grow stronger, not when the Keepers of the field
slept, but when they were wounded, and their hands cut off, and their mouths
stopped lest they should continue, or proceed to do the work of God thoroughly.

A little warm Sun, and some indulgent showers of a softer rain, have made many
weeds of erroneous Doctrine to take root greatly, and to spread themselves
widely: and the Bigots of the Roman Church by their late importune boldness and
indiscreet frowardness in making Proselytes have but too manifestly declared to
all the World, that if they were rerum potiti, Masters of our affairs, they
would suffer nothing to grow but their own Colocynths and Gourds. And although
the Natural remedy for this were to take away that impunity, upon the account
of which alone they do increase, yet because we shall never be Authors of such
Counsels, but considently rely upon God, the Holy Scriptures, right reason, and
the most venerable and prime Antiquity, which are the proper defensatives of
truth for its support and maintenance; yet we must not conceal from the People,
committed to our charges, the great evils to which they are tempted by the
Roman Emissaries, that while the King and the Parliament take care to secure
all the public interests by instruments of their own, we also may by the word
of our proper Ministry endeavor to stop the progression of such errors, which
we know to be destructive of Christian Religion, and consequently dangerous to
the interest of souls.

IN this procedure, although we shall say some things which have not been
always placed before their eyes, and others we shall represent with a
sittingness to their present necessities, and all with Charity too, and zeal
for their souls; yet if we were to say nothing but what has been often said
already; we are still doing the work of God, and repeating his voice, and by
the same remedies curing the same diseases, and we only wait for the blessing
of God prospering that importunity which is our duty: according to the advice
of Solomon, In the Eccl. 11. 6.
Morning sow thy seed, and in the Evening withold not thy hand, for thou
know not whether shall prosper, either this, or that, or whether they both
shall be alike good.

CHAP. I.
The Doctrine of the Roman Church in the Controverted Articles is neither
Catholic, Apostolic, nor Primitive.

SECT. I.
Scripture the foundation of our faith, which was preserved entire in the first
Ages of the Church. Roman Doctrines unheard of then, being innovations. They
pretend a power to make new articles of Faith. Their expurgatory Indices show
that they dare not trust the Fathers till they be purged. Instances of their
dealing with their writings.

IT was the challenge of St. Augustine to De unit. Eccles. c. 6.
the Donatists, who (as the Church of Rome does at this day) enclosed the
Catholic Church within their own circuits: [ Ye say that Christ is Heir of no
Lands, but where Donatus is Coheir. Read this to (...) out of the Law and the
Prophets, out of the Psalms, out of the Gospel it self, or out of the Letters
of the Apostles. Read it thence and we believe it.] Plainly directing us to the
Fountains of our Faith, the Old and New Testament, the words of Christ, and the
words of the Apostles. For nothing else can be the foundation of our Faith,
whatsoever came in after these, foris est, it belongs not unto Christ Ecclesia
ex sacris and canonicis Scripturis (...) est, (...) ex illis ostendi non
potest, Ecclesia non est, S. Aug. de uni. Eccles. c. 4. etc. 3. (...)
Ecclesiam, ibi decernamus causam nostram.
.

To these we also add, not as Authors or Finishers, but as helpers of our
Faith, and Heirs of the Doctrine Apostolical, the Sentiments and Catholic
Doctrine of the Church of God, in the Ages next after the Apostles. Not that we
think them or our selves bound to every private opinion, even of a Primitive
Bishop and Martyr; but that we all acknowledge that the whole Church of God
kept the Faith entire, and transmitted faithfully to the after-Ages the whole
Faith, (...), the form of Doctrine, and sound words, which was at first
delivered to the Saints, and was defective in nothing that belonged unto
salvation; and we believe that those Ages sent millions of Saints to the bosom
of Christ, and sealed the true faith with their lives and with their deaths,
and by both, gave testimony unto Jesus, and had from him the testimony of his
Spirit.

AND this method of procedure we now choose, not only because to them that know
well how to use it, to the Sober and the Moderate, the Peaceable and the Wise,
it is the best, the most certain, visible and tangible, most humble and
satisfactory, but also because the Church of Rome does with greatest noises
pretend her Conformity to Antiquity. Indeed the present Roman Doctrines, which
are in difference, were invisible and unheard of in the first and best
antiquity, and with how ill success their quotations are out of the Fathers of
the first three Ages, every enquiring Man may easily discern. But the noises
therefore which they make are from the Writings of the succeeding Ages; where
secular interest did more prevail, and the writings of the Fathers were vast
and voluminous, full of controversy, and ambiguous senses, sitted to their own
times and questions, full of proper opinions, and such variety of sayings, that
both sides eternally and inconfutably shall bring sayings for themselves
respectively. Now although things being thus, it will be impossible for them to
conclude from the sayings of a number of Fathers, that their doctrine, which
they would prove thence, was the Catholic Doctrine of the Church; because any
number that is less than all, does not prove a Catholic consent; yet the clear
sayings of one or two of these Fathers truly alleged by us to the contrary,
will certainly prove that what many of them (suppose it) do affirm, and which
but two or three as good Catholics as the other do deny, was not then matter
of faith or a Doctrine of the Church; for if it had, these had been Heretics
accounted, and not have remained in the Communion of the Church. But although
for the reasonableness of the thing we have thought fit to take notice of it;
yet we shall have no need to make use of it; since not only in the prime and
purest Antiquity we are indubitably more than Conquerors; but even in the
succeeding Ages, we have the advantage both numero, pondere and mensura, in
number, weight and measure.

WE do easily acknowledge that to dispute these questions from the sayings of
the Fathers is not the readiest way to make an end of them; but therefore we do
wholly rely upon Scriptures as the foundation and final resort of all our
persuasions, and from thence can never be confuted; but we also admit the
Fathers as admirable helps for the understanding of the Scriptures, and as good
testimony of the Doctrine delivered from their forefathers down to them of
what the Church esteemed the way of Salvation: and therefore if we sind any
Doctrine now taught, which was not placed in their way of Salvation, we reject
it as being no part of the Christian faith, and which ought not to be imposed
upon consciences. They were wise unto salvation, and fully instructed to every
good work; and therefore the faith which they professed and derived from
Scripture, we profess also; and in the same faith, we hope to be saved (...) as
they. But for the new Doctors; we understand them not, we know them not: Our
faith is the same from the beginning, and cannot become new.

BUT because we shall make it to appear that they do greatly innovate in all
their points of controversy with us, and show nothing but shadows instead of
substances, and little images of things instead of solid arguments; we shall
take from them their armor in which they trusted, and choose this sword of
Goliath to combat their errors; for non est alter talis; It is not easy to find
a better than the word of God, expounded by the prime and best Antiquity.

THE first thing therefore we are to advertise is, that the Emissaries of the
Roman Church endeavor to persuade the good People of our Dioceses from a
Religion that is truly Primitive and Apostolic, and divert them to
Propositions of their own, new and unheard of in the first ages of the
Christian Church.

FOR the Religion of our Church is therefore certainly Primitive and
Apostolic, because it teaches us to believe the whole Scriptures of the Old
and New Testament, and nothing else as matter of faith; and therefore unless
there can be new Scriptures, we can have no new matters of belief, no new
articles of faith. Whatsoever we cannot prove from thence, we disclaim it, as
not deriving from the Fountains of our Savior. We also do believe the Apostles
Creed, the Nicene, with the additions of Constantinople, and that which is
commonly called, the Symbol of Saint Athanasius: and the four first General
Councils are so entirely admitted by us, that they together with the plain
words of Scripture are made the rule and measure of judging Heresies amongst
us: and in pursuance of these, it is commanded by our Church that the Clergy
shall never teach any thing as matter of Faith religiously to be observed, but
that which is agreeable to the Old and New Testament, and collected out of the
same Doctrine by the Ancient Fathers and Catholic Bishops of the Church Lib.
Candiscip.
This was undoubtedly the Faith of the Primitive Church, they admitted Eccl.
Angl. and injunct.
all into their Communion, that were of this faith; they condemned no Man that
Regin. Elis. A. D. 1571 Can. de (...).
did not condemn these; they gave letters communicatory by no other cognizance,
and all were Brethren who spoke this voice. [ Hanc legem sequentes,
Christianorum Catholicorum nomen jubemus amplecti, reliquos vero dementes,
vesanosque judicantes (...) dogmatis infamiam sustinere] said the Emperors,
Dat. 3. Calen. Mart. (...).
Gratian, Valentinian and Theodosius, in their Proclamation to the People of C.
P. All that believed this Doctrine were Christians and Catholics, viz. all
they who believe in the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, one Divinity of equal
Majesty in the Holy Trinity; which indeed was the sum of what was decreed in
explication of the Apostles Creed in the four first General Councils.

AND what faith can be the foundation of a more solid peace, the surer
ligaments of Catholic Communion, or the (...) basis of a holy life and of the
hopes of Heaven hereafter, than the measures which the Holy Primitive Church
did hold, and we after them? That which we rely upon is the same that the
Primitive Church did acknowledge to be the adaequate foundation of their hopes
in the matters of belief: The way which they thought sufficient to go to Heaven
in, is the way which we walk: what they did not teach, we do not publish and
impose; into this faith entirely and into no other, as they did theirs; so we
baptize our Catechumens: The Discriminations of Heresy from Catholic Doctrine
which they used, we use also, and we use no other: and in short, we believe all
that Doctrine which the Church of Rome believes, except those things which they
have superinduced upon the Old Religion, and in which we shall prove that they
have innovated. So that by their confession, all the Doctrine, which we teach
the People, as matter of Faith, must be confessed to be Ancient, Primitive and
Apostolic, or else theirs is not so: for ours is the same, and we both have
received this faith from the fountains of Scripture and Universal Tradition;
not they from us, or we from them, but both of us from Christ and his Apostles.
And therefore there can be no question whether the Faith of the Church of
England be Apostolic or Primitive; it is so, confessedly: But the Question is
concerning many other particulars which were unknown to the Holy Doctors of the
first ages, which were no part of their faith, which were never put into their
Creeds, which were not determined in any of the four first General Councils,
revered in all Christendom, and entertained every where with great Religion and
veneration, even next to the four Gospels and the Apostolical writings.

OF this sort, because the Church of Rome has introduced many, and has
adopted them into their late Creed, and imposes them upon the People, not only
without, but against the Scriptures and the Catholic Doctrine of the Church of
God; laying heavy burdens on Men's consciences, and making the narrow way to
Heaven yet narrower by their own inventions; arrogating to themselves a
dominion over our faith, and prescribing a method of Salvation which Christ and
his Apostles never taught; corrupting the faith of the Church of God, and
teaching for Doctrines the Commandments of Men; and lastly, having derogated
from the Prerogative of Christ, who alone is the Author and Finisher of our
faith, and has perfected it in the revelations consigned in the Holy
Scriptures; therefore it is, that we esteem our selves obliged to warn the
People of their danger, and to depart from it, and call upon them to stand upon
the ways, and ask after the old paths, and walk in them; lest they partake of
that curse which is threatened by God to them, who remove the Ancient Landmarks
which our Fathers in Christ have set for us.

NOW that the Church of Rome cannot pretend that all which she imposes is
Primitive and Apostolic, appears in this; That in the Church of Rome, there is
pretense made to a power, not only of declaring new articles of faith, but of
making new Symbols or Creeds, and imposing them as of necessity to Salvation.
Which thing is evident in the Bull of Pope Leo the Tenth against Martin Luther,
in which, amongst other things, he is condemned for saying, [ It is certain
that it is not in the power of the Church or Pope to constitute Articles of
Faith.] We need not add that this power is attributed to the Bishops of Rome by
Turrecremata Quod sit metrum, and regula, ac scientia (...). (...) de Ecclesia,
l. 2. c. (...).
, Augustinus Triumphus de Ancona Novum Symbolum condere solum ad Papam spectat,
quia est caput sidei Christian, cujus authoritate omnia quae ad fidem spectant
(...) and roborantur. q. 59. a. 1. and art. 2. sicut potest novum symbolum
condere, ita potest novos articulos supra alios multiplicare.
, Petrus de Ancorano Papa potest facere novos articulos fidei, id est, quod
modo credi oporteat, cum sic (...) non oporteret. In cap. cum Christus. de
(...). n. 2.
, and the Famous Abbot of Panormo Papa potest inducere novum articulum (...).
In idem.
, that the Pope cannot only make new Creeds, but new Articles of Faith; that he
can make that of necessity to be believed, which before never was necessary;
that he is the measure and rule, and the very notice of all credibilities; That
the Canon Law is the Divine law; and whatever law the Pope promulges, God,
whose Vicar he is, is understood to be the promulger. That the souls of Men are
in the hands of the Pope; and that in his arbitration Religion does consist:
which are the very words of Hostiensis Super 2. Decret. de jurejur. c. nimis.
n. 1.
, and Ferdinandus ab Inciso Apud Petrum (...). 2. instit. per. ca. 69.
, who were Casuists and Doctors of Law, of great authority amongst them and
renown. The thing it self, is not of dubious disputation amongst them, but
actually practiced in the greatest instances, as is to be seen in the Bull of
Pius the Fourth at the end of the Council of Trent; by which all Ecclesiastics
are not only bound to swear to all the Articles of the Council of Trent for the
present and for the future, but they are put into a new Symbol or Creed, and
they are corroborated by the same decretory clauses that are used in the Creed
of Athanasius: that this is the true Catholic Faith; and that without this no
Man can be saved.

NOW since it cannot be imagined that this power, to which they pretend, should
never have been reduced to act; and that it is not credible they should publish
so inviduous and ill-sounding Doctrine to no purpose, and to serve no end; it
may without further evidence be believed by all discerning persons, that they
have need of this Doctrine, or it would not have been taught, and that
consequently without more a-doe, it may be concluded that some of their
Articles are parts of this new Faith; and that they can therefore in no sense
be Apostolical, unless their being Roman makes them so.

To this may be added another consideration, not much less material, that
besides what Eckius told the Elector of Bavaria that the Doctrines of Luther
might be overthrown by the Fathers, though not by Scripture; they have also
many gripes of conscience concerning the Fathers themselves, that they are not
right on their side; and of this, they have given but too much demonstration by
their Expurgatory Indices. The Serpent by being so curious a defender of his
head, shows where his danger is, and by what he can most readily be destroyed.
But besides their innumerable corruptings of the Fathers writings, their
thrusting in that which was spurious, and, like Pharaoh, killing the legitimate
Sons of Israel Jobannes Clemens aliquot folia Theodoretilaceravit and abjecit
in focum, in quibus contra transubstantiationem praeclare disseruit. Et cum non
it a pridem Originem excuderent, totum illud caput sextum Jobannis and quod
commentabatur Origines omiserunt, and mutilum ediderunt librum propter candem
causam.
; though in this, they have done very much of their work, and made the
Testimonies of the Fathers to be a record infinitely worse, than of themselves
uncorrupted, they would have been (of which diverse Learned Persons have made
public complaint and demonstration) they have at last fallen to a new trade,
which has caused more dis-reputation to them, than they have gained advantage,
and they have virtually confessed, that in many things, the Fathers are against
them.

FOR first, the King of Spain gave a commission to the Inquisitors to purge all
Catholic Authors; but with this clause, iique ipsi privatim, nullisque
consciis apud se indicem expurgatorium habebunt, quem eundem neque aliis
communicabunt, neque ejus exemplum ulli dabunt: that they should keep the
expurgatory Index privately, neither imparting that Index, nor giving a copy of
it to any. But it happened, by the Divine providence, so ordering it, that
about thirteen years after, a copy of it was gotten and published by Johannes
Pappus and Franciscus Junius, and since it came abroad against their wills,
they find it necessary now to own it, and they have Printed it themselves. Now
by these expurgatory Tables what they have done is known to all Learned Men. In
St. Chrysostom's Works printed at Basil, these words, [ The Church is not built
upon the Man, but the Faith] are commanded to be blotted out: and these [ There
is no merit, but what is given us by Christ,] and yet these words are in his
Sermon upon Pentecost, and the former words are in his first homily upon that
of St. John, Ye (...) my friends, etc.] The like they have done to him in many
other places, and to S. Ambrose, and to St. Austin, and to them all Sixtus
Senensis epist. dedicat. ad. Pium Quin. laudat (...) in (...) verba, Expurgari
and emaculari curasti omnium Catholicorum Scriptorum, ac praecipue veterum
(...) scripta.
, insomuch that Ludovicus Saurius the Corrector of the Press at Lions showed
and complained of it to Junius, that he was forced to cancellate or blot out
many sayings of S. Ambrose in that Edition of his Works, which was Printed at
Lions, 1559. So that what they say on occasion of Bertram's book [ In the old
Catholic Writers we suffer very many errors, and extenuate and excuse them,
and finding out some commentary, we feign some convenient sense when they are
opposed in disputations] they do indeed practice, but esteem it not sufficient;
for the words which make against them they wholly leave out of their Editions.
Nay they correct the very Tables or Indices made by the Printers or Correctors;
insomuch that out of one of Froben's indices they have commanded these words to
be blotted [ The use of Images forbidden] The Eucharist no sacrifice, but the
memory of a sacrifice] Works, although they do not justify, yet are necessary
to Salvation] Marriage is granted to all that will not contain] Venial sins
damn] The dead Saints, after this life cannot help us] nay out of the Index of
St. Austin's Works by (...) Chevallonius at Paris 1531. there is a very strange
deleatur [ Dele, Index expurgator. Madr. 1612. in Indice libror. expurgatorum,
page 39.
Solus Deus adorandus] that God alone is to be worshipped, is commanded to be
blotted out, as being a dangerous Doctrine. These instances may serve instead
of multitudes, which might be brought of their corrupting the witnesses and
razing the records of antiquity, that the errors and Novelties of the Church of
Rome might not be so easily reproved. Now if the Fathers were not against them,
what need these arts? Why should they use them thus? Their own expurgatory
indices are infinite testimony against them, both that they do so, and that
they need it.

But besides these things, we have thought it fit to represent in one aspect,
some of their chief Doctrines of difference from the Church of England, and
make it evident that they are indeed new, and brought into the Church, first by
way of opinion, and afterward by power, and at last, by their own authority
decreed into Laws and Articles.

SECT. II.
The Church has no power to make new Articles. The Roman Church has many ready
for the stamp. Council of Trents new Article against the necessity of
Communicating Infants, against the Sense of diverse Fathers.

FIRST, we allege, that this very power of making new Articles is a Novelty,
and expressly against the Doctrine of the Primitive Church; and we prove it,
first, by the words of the Apostle, saying, If we, or an Angel Gal. 1. 8.
from Heaven shall preach unto you any other Gospel ( viz. in whole or in part,
for there is the same reason of them both) than that which we have preached,
let him be Anathema: and secondly, by the sentence of the Fathers in the third
General Council, that at Ephesus. [ That it should not be lawful for Part. 2.
act. 6. c. 7.
any Man to publish or compose another Faith or Creed than that which was
defined by the Nicene Council: and that whosoever shall dare to compose or
offer any such to any Persons willing to be converted from Paganism, Judaism,
or Heresy, if they were Bishops or Clerks, they should be deposed, if Laymen,
they should be accursed.] And yet in the Church of Rome Faith and Christianity
increase like the Moon; Bromyard complained of it long since, and the mischief
increases daily. They have now a new Article of Faith, ready for the stamp,
which may very shortly become necessary to salvation; we mean that of the
immaculate conception of the Blessed Virgin Mary. Whether the Pope be above a
Council or no; we are not sure, whether it be an article of faith amongst them
or not: It is very near one if it be not. Bellarmine would (...) have us
believe that the Council of Constance approving the Bull of Pope Martin the
fifth, declared for the De potest. Eccles. Council. (...).
Pope's Supremacy. But John Gerson, who was at the Council, says, that the
Council did abate those heights to which flattery had advanced the Pope; and
that before that Council they spoke such great things of the Pope, which
afterward moderate Men durst not speak; but yet some others spoke them so
confidently before it, that he that should then have spoken to the contrary
would hardly have escaped the note of Heresy: and that these Men continued the
same pretensions even after the Council. But the Council of Basil decreed for
the Council against the Pope; and the Council of Lateran under Leo the tenth,
decreed for the Pope against the Council. So that it is cross and pile; and
whether for a penny, when it can be done; it is now a known case it shall become
an Article of Faith. But ofr the present it is a probationary Article, and
according to Bellarmine's expression, is fere de fide, it is almost De Council.
author l 2. c. 17. S. 1.
an Article of Faith; they want a little age, and then they may go alone. But
the Council of Trent has produced a strange new Article; Sess. 21. c. 4.
but it is sine controversia credendum, it must be believed, and must not be
controverted: that although the Ancient Fathers did give the Communion (...)
Infants, yet they did not believe it necessary to Salvation. Now this being a
matter of fact whether they did or did not believe it, every man that reads
their writings can be able to inform himself: and besides that it is strange
that this should be determined by a Council, and determined against evident
truth (it being notorious, that diverse of the Fathers did say it is necessary
to salvation;) the decree it self is beyond all bounds of modesty, and a
strange pretension of Empire over the Christian belief. But we proceed to other
instances.

SECT. III.
The Roman doctrine of Indulgences an Innovation. No mention of them in the
CanonLaw of Gratian, or in P. Lombard. What Indulgences the Old Church gave to
Penitents. What they signify in the New Roman; the value of them disputed; but
the Merchandise and abuses continue.

THE Roman Doctrine of Indulgences was the first occasion of the great change
and Reformation of the Western Churches, begun by the Preachings of Martin
Luther and others; and besides that it grew to that intolerable abuse, that it
became a shame to it self and a reproach to Christendom, it was also so very an
Innovation, that their great Antoninus confesses that concerning them we Part.
1. Sum. tit. 10. c. 3.
have nothing expressly, either in the Scriptures, or in the sayings of the
Ancient Doctors: and the same is affirmed by Sylvester Prierias. Bishop Fisher
of Rochester says, that in the In art 18. (...).
beginning of the Church there was no use of Indulgences; and that they began
after the people were awhile affrighted with the torments of Purgatory; and
many of the Schoolmen confess that the use of Indulgences began in the time of
Pope Alexander the third, toward the end of the 12 th. Century: but Agrippa
imputes the beginning of them to Boniface the VIII. who lived in the Reign of
King Edward the first of England, 1300 years after Christ. But that in his time
the first Jubilee was kept we are assured by Crantzius. This Pope Intravit ut
vulpes, regnavit, ut leo, (...) ut canis, de eo (...) dictum.
lived and died with very great infamy, and therefore was not likely from
himself to transfer much honor and reputation to the new institution. But that
about this time indulgences began, is more than probable; much before, it is
certain they were not. For in the whole Canon Law written by Gratian, and in
the sentences of Peter Lombard there is nothing spoken of Indulgences: Now
because they lived in the time of Pope Alexander III. if he had introduced
them, and much rather if they had been as ancient as S. Gregory (as some vainly
and weakly pretend, from no greater authority than their own Legends) it is
probable that these great Men writing Bodies of Divinity and Law, would have
made mention of so considerable a point, and so great a part of the Roman
Religion, as things are now ordered. If they had been Doctrines of the Church
then, as they are now, it is certain they must have come under their cognizance
and discourses.

Now lest the Roman Emissaries should deceive any of the good Sons of the
Church, we think it fit to acquaint them, that in the Primitive Church, when
the Bishops imposed severe Tertul. 1. ad Martyr. c. 1. S. Cyprian lib. 3. Ep.
15. (...) (...) 11. Council. Nicen. 1. can. 12. Conc. (...). c. 5. Council.
Laodicen. c. 2. S. Basil. in Ep. canonicis habentur in Nomocanone Photii, can.
73.
penances, and that they were almost quite performed, and a great cause of pity
intervened, or danger of death, or an excellent repentance, or that the Martyrs
interceded, the Bishop did sometimes indulge the Penitent, and relax some of
the remaining parts of his penance; and according to the example of S. Paul, in
the case of the incestuous Corinthian, gave them ease, lest they should be
swallowed up with too much sorrow. But the Roman Doctrine of Indulgences is
wholly another thing; nothing of it but the abused name remains. For in the
Church of Rome they now pretend that there is an infinite of degrees of Christ's
merits and satisfaction beyond what is necessary for the salvation of his
servants: and (for fear Christ should not have enough) the Saints have a
surplusage of merits, Communis opinio D. D. tan Theologorum, quam Canonicorum,
quod sunt ex abundantia meritorum quae ultra mensuram demeritorum suorum sancti
sustinuerunt, and Christi, Sum. Angel. v. Indulg. 9.
or at least of satisfactions more than they can spend, or themselves do need:
and out of these the Church has made her a treasure, a kind of poor-mans box;
and out of this, a power to take as much as they list to apply to the poor
Souls in Purgatory; who because they did not satisfy for their venial sins, or
perform all their penances which were imposed, or which might have been imposed
and which were due to be paid to God for the temporal pains reserved upon them,
after he had forgiven them the guilt of their (...) sins, are forced sadly to
roar in pains not inferior to the pains of hell, excepting only that they are
not eternal. Lib. 1. de indulgent. c. 2. and 3.
That this is the true state of their Article of Indulgences, we appeal to
Bellarmine.

Now concerning their new foundation of Indulgences, the first stone of it was
laid by Pope (...) VI. in his extravagant Vnigenitus, de poenitentiis and
remissionibus, A. D. 1350. This constitution was published Fifty years after
the first Jubilee, and was a new device to bring in customers to Rome at the
second Jubilee, which was kept in Rome in this Popes time. What ends of profit
and interest it served, we are not much concerned to enquire; but this we know,
that it had not yet passed into a Catholic Doctrine, for it was disputed
against by Franciscus de Mayronis In 4. l sen. did. 19 q. 2.
and Durandus Ib did. 20 q. 3.
not long before this extravagant; and that it was not rightly formed to their
purposes till the stirs in Germany, raised upon the occasion of Indulgences,
made Leo the Tenth set his Clerks on work to study the point and make something
of it.

BUT as to the thing it self: it is so wholly new, so merely devised and forged
by themselves, so newly created out of nothing, from great mistakes of
Scripture, and dreams of shadows from antiquity; that we are to admonish our
charges, that they cannot reasonably expect many sayings of the Primitive
Doctors against them, any more than against the new fancies of the Quakers,
which were born but yesterday. That which is not cannot be numbered, and that
which was not could not be confuted. But the perfect silence of antiquity in
this whole matter, is an abundant demonstration that this new nothing was made
in the later laboratories of Rome. For as Durandus said, the Holy Vbi supra.
Fathers, Ambrose Hilary, Hierom, Augustine speak nothing of Indulgences. And
whereas it is said that S. Gregory DC. years after Christ, gave Indulgences at
Rome in the stations; Magister Angularis who lived about 200. years since,
says, he never read of any such any where; and it is certain there is no such
thing in the writings of S. Gregory, nor in any history of that age or any
other that is Authentic: and we could never see any History pretended for it
by the Roman writers, but a Legend of Ledgerus brought to us the other day by
Surius: which is so ridiculous and weak, that even their own parties dare not
avow it as true story; and therefore they are fain to make use of Thomas
Aquinas upon the Sentences, and Altisiodorensis for story and record. And it
were strange that if this power of giving Indulgences to take off the
punishment, reserved by God after the sin is pardoned, were given by Christ to
his Church, that no one of the ancient Doctors should tell any thing of it:
insomuch that there is no one Writer of Authority and credit, not the more
ancient Doctors we have named, nor those who were much later, Rupertus
Tuitiensis, Anselm or S. Bernard ever took notice of it; but it was a Doctrine
wholly unknown to the Church for about MCC. years after Christ: and Cardinal
Cajetan told Pope Adrian VI. that to him that reads the Decretals it plainly
appears, that an indulgence is nothing (...) but an absolution from that
penance which the Confessor has imposed; and therefore can be nothing of that
which is now adays pretended.

TRUE it is, that the Canonical (...) were about the time of Burchard lessened
and altered by commutations; and the ancient Discipline of the Church in
imposing penances was made so loose, that the Indulgence was more than the
Imposition, and began not to be an act of mercy but remisness, an absolution
without amends: It became a trumpet, and a levy for the Holy War, in Pope Urban
the Second's time; for he gave a plenary Indulgence and remission of all sins
to them that should go and fight against the Saracens: and yet no man could
tell how much they were the better for these Indulgences: for concerning the
value of indulgences, the complaint is both old and In lib. 4. sent.
doubtful, said Pope Adrian; and he cites a famous gloss, which tells of four
Opinions all Catholic, and yet vastly differing Verb. Indulgentia.
in this particular: but the Summa Angelica reckons seven Opinions concerning
what that penalty is which is taken off by Indulgences: No man could then tell;
and the point was but in the infancy, and since that, they have made it what
they please: but it is at last turned into a Doctrine, and they have devised
new propositions, as well as they can, to make sense of it; and yet it is a
very strange thing; a solution, not an absolution (it is the distinction of
Bellarmine) that is, the sinner is let to go free without punishment in this
world, or in the world to come; and in the end, it grew to be that which
Christendom could not suffer: a (...) of Doctrines without Grounds of
Scripture, or Catholic Tradition; and not only so, but they have introduced a
way of remitting sins, that Christ and his Apostles taught not; a way
destructive of the repentance and remission of sins which was preached in the
Name of Jesus: it brought into the Church, false and fantastic hopes, a hope
that will make men ashamed; a (...) that does not glorisie the merits and
perfect satisfaction of Christ; a doctrine expressly dishonorable to the full
and free pardon given us by God through Jesus Christ; a practice that supposes
a new bunch of Keys given to the Church, besides that which the Apostles
received to open and shut the Kingdom of Heaven; a Doctrine that introduces
pride among the Saints, and advances the opinion of their works beyond the
measures of Christ, who taught us, That when we have done all that is Vt quid
non praevides tibi in die judicii, quando nemo (...) per alium excusari, vel
defendi; sed unusquisque sufficiens (...) sibi ipsi: Tho. (...) l. 1. de imit.
c. 24.
commanded, we are unprofitable servants, and therefore certainly cannot
supercrogate, or do more than what is infinitely recompensed by the Kingdom of
Glory, to which all our doings and all our sufferings are not worthy to be
compared, especially, since the greatest. Saint cannot but say with David,
Enter not into judgment with thy servant; for in thy sight no flesh living can
be justified; It is a practice that has turned penances into a Fair, and the
Court of Conscience into a Lombard, and the labors of Love into the labors of
pilgrimages, superstitious and useless wanderings from place to place; and
Religion into vanity, and our hope in God to a confidence in man, and our fears
of hell to be a mere scar-crow to rich and confident sinners: and at last, it
was frugally employed by a great Pope to raise a portion for a Lady, the Wife
of France schetto Cibo bastard Son of Pope Innocent viii. and the merchandise
it self became the stakes of Gamesters, at Dice and Cards, and men did vile
actions that they might win indulgences; by gaming making their way to heaven
easier.

NOW although the Holy Fathers of the Church could not be supposed in direct
terms to speak against this new Doctrine of Indulgences, because in their days
it was not: yet they have said many things which do perfectly destroy this new
Doctrine and these unchristian practices. For besides that they teach a
repentance wholly reducing us to a good life; a faith that entirely relies upon
Christ's merits and satisfactions; a hope wholly depending upon the plain
promises of the Gospel, a service perfectly consisting in the works of a good
conscience, a labor of love, a religion of justice and piety, and moral
virtues: they do also expressly teach that pilgrimages to holy places and such
like inventions, which are now the earnings and price of indulgences, are not
required of us, and are not the way of salvation, as is to be seen in an
Oration made by S. Gregory Nyssene wholly against pilgrimages to Jerusalem; in
S. Chrysostom Homil. 1. in ep. ad Philom.
, S. Augustine Sermon. de Martyrib. Sermon. 1. de Advent.
, and S. Bernard: The sense of these Fathers is this, in the words of S.
Augustine: God said not, Go to the East, and seek righteousness; sail to the
West that you may rcceive indulgence. But indulge thy brother, and it shall be
indulged to thee: you have need to inquire for no other indulgence to thy sins;
if thou will retire into the closet of thy heart, there thou shall find it.
That is, All our hopes of Indulgence is from GOD through JESUS CHRIST, and is
wholly to be obtained by faith in Christ, and perseverance in good works, and
entire mortification of all our sins.

To conclude this particular: Though the gains which the Church of Rome makes
of Indulgences, be a heap almost as great as the abuses themselves, yet the
greatest Patrons of this new Doctrine could never give any certainty, or
reasonable comfort to the Conscience of any person that could inquire into it.
They never durst determine, whether they were Absolutions, or Compensations;
whether they only take off the penances actually imposed by the Confessor, or
potentially, and all that which might have been imposed; whether all that may
be paid in the Court of men; or all that can or will be required by the Laws
and severity of God. Neither can they speak rationally to the Great Question,
Whether the Treasure of the Church consists of the Satisfactions of Christ
only, or of the Saints? For if of Saints, it will by all men be acknowledged to
be a defeisible estate, and being finite and limited, will be spent sooner than
the needs of the Church can be served; and if therefore it be necessary to add
the merits and satisfaction of Christ, since they are an Ocean of infinity, and
can supply more than all our needs, to what purpose is it to add the little
minutes and droppings of the Saints? They cannot tell whether they may be
given, if the Receiver do nothing, or give nothing for them: And though this
last particular could better be resolved by the Court of Rome, than by the
Church of Rome, yet all the Doctrines which built up the new Fabric of
Indulgences, were so dangerous to determine, so improbable, so unreasonable, or
at best so uncertain and invidious, that according to the advice of the Bishop
of Modena, the Council of Trent left all the Doctrines, and all the cases of
Conscience quite alone, and slubber'd the whole matter both in the question of
Indulgences and Purgatory in general and recommendatory terms; affirming, that
the power of giving Indulgence is in the Church, and that the use is wholesome:
And that all hard and subtle questions ( viz.) concerning Purgatory, (which
although (if it be at all) it is a fire, yet is the fuel of Indulgences, and
maintains them wholly;) all that is suspected to be false, and all that is
uncertain; and whatsoever is curious and superstitious, scandalous, or for
filthy lucre, be laid aside. And in the mean time, they tell us not what is,
and what is not Superstitions; nor what is Scandalous, nor what they mean by
the general term of Indulgence; and they establish no Doctrine, neither
curious, nor incurious, nor durst they decree the very foundation of this whole
matter, The Churches Treasure: Neither durst they meddle with it, but left it
as they found it, and continued in the abuses, and proceed in the practice, and
set their Doctors, as well as they can, to defend all the new, and curious and
scandalous questions, and to uphold the gainful trade. But however it be with
them, the Doctrine it self is proved to be a direct Innovation in the matter of
Christian Religion, and that was it which we have undertaken to demonstrate.

SECT. IV.
The Doctrine of Purgatory, which is the Mother of Indulgences, an Innovation.
Of punishment due when the guilt is removed. The Ancients prayers for the dead,
respected not Purgatory. Their fire of Purgation not kindled till the day of
Judgment. Purgatory no Doctrine of the Church in Saint Austin's time. The new
Purgatory depends upon Legends and apparitions. The Ancients knew but of two
states after death, of the just and unjust.

THE Doctrine of Purgatory is the Mother of Indulgences, and the fear of that
has introduced these: For the world happened to be abused like the Countryman
in the Fable, who being told he was likely to fall into a delirium in his feet,
was advised for remedy to take the juice of Cotton: He feared a disease that
was not, and looked for a cure as ridiculous. But if the Parent of Indulgences
be not from Christ and his Apostles; if upon this ground the Primitive Church
never built, the Superstructures of Rome must fall; they can be no stronger
than their Supporter. Now then in order to the proving the Doctrine of
Purgatory to be an Innovation,

1. We consider, That the Doctrines upon which it is pretended reasonable, are
all dubious, and disputable at the very best. Such are,

1. THEIR distinction of sins Mortal and Venial in their own nature.

2. THAT the taking away the guilt of sins, does not suppose the taking away
the obligation to punishment; that is, That when a man's sin is pardoned, he may
be punished without the guilt of that sin, as justly as with it; as if the
guilt could be any thing else but an obligation to punishment for having
sinned: which is a Proposition, of which no wise man can make sense; but it is
certain, that it is expressly against the Word of God, who promises upon our
repentance, so to take away our sins, that he (...). 18. 22.
will remember them no more: And so did Christ to all those to whom he gave
pardon; for he did not take our faults and guilt on him any other way, but by
curing our evil hearts, and taking away the punishment Neque ab iis quos sanas
lent languor abscedit, sed illico quem restituis ex integro convalescit, quia
consummatum est quod facis, and perfectum quod largiris. S. Cyprian de coena
Domini: vel potius Arnoldus. P. Gelasius de vincul. anathem negat (...) deberi
(...) si culpa corrigatur.
. And this was so perfectly believed by the Primitive Church, that they always
made the penances and satisfaction to be undergone before they gave absolution;
and after absolution they never imposed or obliged to punishment, unless it
were to sick persons, of whose recovery they despaired not: of them indeed, in
case they had not finished their Canonical punishments, they expected they
should perform what was enjoined them formerly. But because all sin is a blot
to a man's soul, and a foul stain to his reputation; we demand, in what does
this stain consist? In the guilt, or in the punishment? If it be said that it
consists in the punishment; then what does the guilt signify, when the
removing of it, does neither remove the stain nor the punishment, which both
remain and abide together? But if the stain and the guilt be all one, or always
together, then when the guilt is taken away, there can no stain remain; and if
so, what need (...) gratiae finalis peccatum veniale in ipsa dissolutione (...)
and animoe. Hoc ab antiquis dictum est. Albert. Mag. in compend. Theolog.
verit. l. 3. c. 13.
is there any more of Purgatory? For since this is pretended to be necessary,
only lest any stained or unclean thing should enter into Heaven; if the guilt
and the pain be removed, what uncleanness can there be left behind? Indeed
Simon Magus (as (...) reports, Haeres. 20.) did teach, That after the death of
the body there remained (...), a purgation of souls: But whether the Church of
Rome will own him for an Authentic Doctor, themselves can best tell.

3. IT relies upon this also, That God requires of us a full exchange of
penances and satisfactions, which must regularly be paid here or hereafter,
even by them who are pardoned here: which if it were true, we were all undone.

4. THAT the Death of Christ, his Merits and Satisfaction do not procure for us
a full remission before we dye, nor (as it may happen) of a long time after.
All which being Propositions new and uncertain, invented by the School Divines,
and brought ex (...), to dress this opinion, and make it to seem reasonable;
and being the products of ignorance concerning remission of sins by Grace, of
the righteousness of Faith, and the infinite value of Christ's Death, must needs
lay a great prejudice of novelty upon the Doctrine it self, which but by these,
cannot be supported. But to put it past suspicion and conjectures;

Roffensis and Polydore Virgil affirm, That Art. 18. con. Luther Invent. rerum.
l. (...). c. 1.
who so searches the Writings of the Greek Fathers, shall find that none, or
very rarely any one of them, ever makes mention of Purgatory; and that the
Latin Fathers did not all believe it, but by degrees came to entertain opinions
of it: But for the Catholic Church, it was but lately known to her.

BUT before we say any more in this Question, we are to premonish, That there
are Two great causes of their mistaken pretensions in this Article from
Antiquity.

THE first is, That the Ancient Churches in their Offices, and the Fathers in
(...) Writings, did teach and practice respectively, prayer for the dead. Now
because the Church of Rome does so too, and more than so, relates her prayers
to the Doctrine of Purgatory, and for the souls there detained, her Doctors
vainly suppose, that when ever the Holy Fathers speak of prayer for the dead,
that they conclude for Purgatory; which vain conjecture is as false as it is
unreasonable: For it is true, the Fathers did pray for the dead, but how? That
God would show them mercy, and hasten the resurrection, and give a blessed
sentence in the great day. But then it is also to be remembered, that they made
prayers, and offered for those, who by the confession of all sides, never were
in Purgatory; even for the Patriarchs and Prophets, for the Apostles and
Evangelists, for Martyrs and Confessors, and especially for the blessed Virgin
Mary: So we find it in (...). 75.
Epiphanius, Cateches. mystag. 5.
S. Cyril, and in the Canon of the Greeks, and so it is acknowledged by their
own De (...), lib. 2. c. 35.
Durantus; and in their Mass Book anciently they prayed for the soul of S. Leo:
Of which because by their latter doctrines, they grew ashamed, they have
changed the prayer for him, into a prayer to God by the intercession of S. Leo,
in behalf of themselves; so by their new doctrine, making him an Innocent. P.
de celeb. Miss. cap. cum Martha.
Intercessor for us, who by their old doctrine was supposed to need our prayers
to intercede for him; of which Pope Innocent being asked a reason, makes a most
pitiful excuse.

UPON what accounts the Fathers did pray for the Saints departed, and indeed
generally for all, it is not now seasonable to discourse; but to say this only,
that such general prayers for the dead as those above reckoned the Church of
England never did condemn Apologia confessions (...) express approbat (...)
illam (...), (...) dat ci pacatam (...), (...) resurrectionem.
by any express Article, but left it in the middle, and by her practice
declares her Faith of the Resurrection of the dead, and her interest in the
Communion of Saints, and that the Saints departed are a portion of the
Catholic Church, parts and members of the Body of Christ; but expressly
condemns the Doctrine of Purgatory, and consequently all prayers for the dead
relating to it: And how vainly the Church of Rome from prayer for the dead,
infers the belief of (...), every man may satisfy himself, by seeing the
Writings of the Fathers, where they cannot meet with one Collect or Clause for
praying for the delivery of souls (...) of that imaginary place. Which thing is
so certain, that in the very Roman Offices, we mean, the Vigils said for the
dead, which are Psalms and Lessons taken from the Scripture, speaking of the
miseries of this World, Repentance, and Reconciliation with God, the bliss
after this life of them that die in Christ, and the Resurrection of the Dead;
and in the Anthems, Versicles and Responses, there are prayers made
recommending to God the Soul of the newly defunct, praying, he may be freed
from hell, and eternal death, that in the day of Judgment he be not judged and
condemned according to his sins, but that he may appear among the Elect in the
glory of the Resurrection; but not one word of Purgatory, or its pains.

THE other cause of their mistake is, That the Fathers often speak of a fire of
Purgation after this life; but such a one that is not to be kindled until the
day of Judgment, and it is such a fire that destroys the Doctrine of the
intermedial Purgatory. We suppose that Origin was the first that spoke plainly
of it; and so S. Ambrose follows him in the opinion (for it was no more;) so
does S. Basil, S. Hilary, S. Hierom, and Lactantius, as their words plainly
prove, as they are cited by Sixtus Senensis, affirming, (...). S. l. 5. Annot.
(...). Vide etiam (...) l. a. de Purgat. sect. c. 1. (...).
that all men, Christ only excepted, shall be burned with the fire of the
worlds conflagration at the day of Judgment; even the Blessed Virgin her self
is to pass through this fire. There was also another Doctrine very generally
received by the Fathers, which greatly destroys the Roman Purgatory: Sixtus
Senensis says, and he says very true, that Justin Martyr, Tertullian,
Victorinus Martyr, Prudentius, S. Chrysostom, Arethas, Euthymius and Lib. 6.
Bibl. Sanct. annol. 345. Bernardum excusandum arbitror ob (...) numerum
illustrium Ecclesie Patrum. qui ante ipsum huic dogmati autboritatem suo
testimonio visi sunt proebuisse; (...) citatos, (...) S. Jacobum Apostolum,
Irenaeum, Clementem Romanum, Augustinum, Thcodoretum, Oecumenium,
Theophylactum, and Johannem 22 pontif. Romans quam sententiam non modo docuit,
and (...), sed ab omnibus teneri mandavit, ut ait Adrianns P. in 4 lib. sent.
in flne quoest. de sacram. confirmationis.
S. Bernard, did all affirm, that before the day of Judgment the souls of men
are kept in secret receptacles, reserved unto the sentence of the great day,
and that before then, no man receives according to his works done in this life.
We do not interpose in this opinion to say that it is true or false, probable
or improbable; for these Fathers intended it not as a matter of Faith or
necessary belief, so far as we find. But we observe from hence, that if their
opinion be true, then the Doctrine of Purgatory is false. If it be not true,
yet the Roman Doctrine of Purgatory, which is inconsistent with this so
generally received opinion of the Fathers, is at least new, no Catholic
Doctrine, not believed in the Primitive Church; and therefore the Roman Writers
are much troubled to excuse the Fathers in this Article, and to reconcile them
to some seeming concord with their new Doctrine.

BUT besides these things, it is certain, that the Doctrine of Purgatory,
before the day of Judgment, in S. Augustin's time, was not the Doctrine of the
Church; it was not the Catholic Doctrine; for himself did doubt of it: [
Whether it be so or not, it Enchirid. c. 69 lib. 21. de civit. Dei. c. 26.
may be inquired, and possibly it may be found so, and possibly it may never:]
so S. Augustine. In his time therefore it was no Doctrine of the Church, and it
continued much longer in uncertainty; for in the time of Otho Frisingensis, who
lived in the year (...). 8.
1146. it was gotten no further than to a Chron. cap. 26.
Quidam asserunt: [some do asfirm, that there is a place of Purgatory after
death.] And although it is not to be denied, but that many of the ancient
Doctors, had strange opinions concerning Purgations, and Fires, and Intermedial
states, and common receptacles, and liberations of Souls and Spirits after this
life; yet we can truly affirm it, and can never be convinced to err in this
affirmation, that there is not any one of the Ancients within five hundred
years, whose opinion in this Article throughout, the Church of Rome at this day
follows.

BUT the people of the Roman Communion have been principally led into a belief
of Purgatory by their fear, and by their credulity; they have been softened and
(...) into this belief by perpetual tales and legends, by which they love to be
abused. To this purpose, their Priests and Friars have made great use of the
apparition of S. Hierom after death to Eusebius, commanding him to lay his sack
upon the corpse of three dead men, that they arising from death, might consess
Purgatory, which formerly they had denied. The story is written in an Epistle
imputed to S. Cyril; but the ill luck of it was, that S. Hierom outlived S.
Cyril, and wrote his life, and so confuted that story; but all is one for that,
they believe it never the less: But there are enough to help it out; and if
they be not firmly true Haec descripsimus, ut tamen in iis nulla veluti
Canonica constituatur authoritas. l. de 8. quaest. Dulcitii. c. 1. Did. 3
exem. 3. exempl. 60.
, yet if they be firmly believed, all is well enough. In the speculum
exemplorum it is said, That a certain Priest in an ecstasie saw the soul of
Constantinus Turritanus in the eves of his house tormented with frosts and cold
rains, and afterward climbing up to heaven upon a shining pillar. And a
certain Monk saw some souls roasted upon spits like Pigs, and some Devils
basting them with scalding lard; but a while after they were carried to a cool
place, and so proved Purgatory. But Bishop Theobald Histor.
standing upon a piece of ice to cool his Lomb.
feet, was nearer Purgatory than he was aware, and was convinced of it, when he
heard a poor soul telling him, that under that ice he was tormented: and that
he should be delivered, if for thirty days continual, he would say for him
thirty Masses: and some such thing was seen by Conrade Legend. 185.
and Uldric in a Pool of water: For the place of Purgatory was not yet resolved
on, till S. Patrick had the key of it delivered to him; which when one Nicholas
borrowed of him, he saw as strange and true things there, as ever Virgil
dreamed of in his Purgatory, or Cicero in his dream of Scipio, or Plato in his
Gorgias, or Phaedo, who indeed are the surest Authors to prove Purgatory. But
because to preach false stories was forbidden by the Council of Trent, there
are yet remaining more certain arguments, even revelations made by Angels, and
the testimony of S. Odilio himself, who heard the Devil complain (and he had
great reason surely) that the souls of dead men were daily snatched out of his
hands, by the Alms and Prayers of the living; and the sister of S. Damianus
being too much pleased with hearing of a Piper, told her brother, that she was
to be tormented for fifteen days in Purgatory.

WE do not think that the wise men in the Church of Rome believe these
Narratives; for if they did, they were not wise: But this we know, that by such
stories, the People were brought into a belief of it; and having served their
turn of them, the Master Builders used them as false arches and centries,
taking them away when the parts of the building were made firm and stable by
Authority. But even the better sort of them do believe, or else they do worse,
for they urge and cite the Dialogues of S. Gregory, the Oration of S. John
Damascen de Defunctis, the Sermons of Saint Augustine upon the Feast of the
Commemoration of All Souls (which nevertheless was instituted after S.
Augustin's death) and diverse other citations, which the Greeks in their Apology
call (...), The Holds and the Castles, the corruptions and insinuations of
Heretical persons. But in this they are the less to be blamed, because better
arguments than they have, no men are tied to make use of.

BUT against this way of proceeding we think fit to admonish the people of our
charges, that, besides that the Scriptures expressly Dcut. 18. 11, etc.
forbid us to enquire of the dead for truth; the Holy Doctors of the Church,
Isa. 8. 19.
particularly, (...). S. Athanasius, S. Chrysostom. Vide Maldonat. in 16. cap. S.
Lucae.
I sidor. and Theophylact, deny that the souls of the dead ever do appear; and
bring many reasons to prove, that it is unfitting they should; saying, if they
did, it would be the cause of many errors, and the Devils under that pretense,
might easily abuse the world with notices and revelations of their own: And
because Christ would have us content with Moses and the Prophets, and
especially to hear that Prophet, whom the Lord our God has raised up amongst
us, our Blessed Jesus, who never taught any such Doctrine to his Church.

BUT because we are now representing the Novelty of this Doctrine, and proving,
that anciently it was not the Doctrine of the Church, nor at all esteemed a
matter of faith, whether there was or was not any such place or state, we add
this, That the Greek Church did always dissent from the Latins in this
particular, since they had forged this new Doctrine in the laboratories of
Rome; and in the Council of Basil, published an Apology directly disapproving
the Roman Doctrine of Purgatory. How afterward they were pressed in the
Council of Florence by Pope Eugenius, and by their necessity; how unwillingly
they consented, how ambiguously they answered, how they protested against
having that half consent put into the Instrument of Union; how they were yet
constrained to it by their Chiefs, being obnoxious to the Pope; how a while
after they dissolved that Union, and to this day refuse to own this Doctrine,
are things so notoriously known, that they need no further declaration.

WE add this only, to make the conviction more manifest: We have thought sit to
annex some few, but very clear testimonies of Antiquity, expressly destroying
the new Ad Demetrian. sect. 16.
Doctrine of Purgatory. S. Cyprian says, Quando istinc excessum fuerit, nullus
jam locus poenitentiae est, nullus satisfactionis effectus: [When we are gone
from hence, there is no place left for repentance, and no effect of
satisfaction.] S. Dionysius calls the extremity Eccles. (...). c. 7.
of death, (...) The end of all our agonies, and affirms, That the Holy men of
God rest in joy, and in never failing hopes, and are come to the end of their
holy combats S. Justin Martyr affirms, That when the soul is departed from the
body, (...), presently there is a separation Quaest. and respons. ad oribod.
qu. 75. Justino imputat.
made of the just and unjust: The unjust are by Angels born into places which
they have deserved; but the souls of the just into Paradise, where they have
the conversation of Angels and Archangels. S. Ambrose De bono mortis, cap. 4.
says, that Death is a haven of rest, and makes not our condition worse, but
according as it finds every man, so it reserves him to the judgment that is to
come. The same is affirmed by In Psalm. 2.
S. Hilary, Hom. 22.
S. Macarius, and diverse others; they speak but of two states after death, of
the just and the unjust: These are placed in horrible Regions reserved to the
judgment of the great day; the other have their souls carried by Quires of
Angels into places of rest. S. Gregory Nazianzen Orat. 5. in Plagam grandinis,
and orat. 42. in Pascha. De Eccles. dogmat. c. 79.
expressly affirms, that after this life there is no purgation: For after
Christ's ascension into Heaven, the souls of all Saints are with Christ, says
Gennadius, and going from the body, they go to Christ, expecting the
resurrection of their body, with it to pass into the perfection of perpetual
bliss; and this he delivers as the Doctrine of the Catholic Church: [ In what
place soever a In Eccles. c. 11.
man is taken at his death, of light or darkness, of wickedness or virtue,
(...), in the same order, and in the same degree; either in light with the
just, and with Christ the great King; or in darkness with the unjust, and with
the Prince of Darkness,] said Olimpiodorus. And lastly, we recite the words of
S. Leo, one of the Popes of Rome, speaking of the Penitents Epist. 59.
who had not performed all their penances [ But if any one of them for whom we
pray unto the Lord, being interrupted by any obstacles, falls from the gift of
the present Indulgence (viz. of Ecclesiastical Absolution) and before he arrive
at the appointed remedies (that is, before he has performed his penances or
satisfactions) ends his temporal life, that which remaining in the body he has
not received, when he is divested of his body, he cannot obtain.] He knew not
of the new devices of paying in Purgatory, what they paid not here; and of
being cleansed there, who were not clean here: And how these words, or of any
the precedent, are reconcilable with the Doctrines of Purgatory, has not yet
entered into our imagination.

To conclude this particular, We complain greatly, that this Doctrine which in
all the parts of it is uncertain, and in the late additions to it in Rome is
certainly false, is yet with all the faults of it passed into an Article of
Faith by the Council of Trent. But besides what has been said, it will be more
than sufficient to oppose against it these clearest words of Scripture, Blessed
are the dead which die in the Lord, from Rev. 14. 13.
henceforth, even so says the Spirit, that they may rest from their labors.
If all the dead that die in Christ be at rest, and are in no more affliction or
labors, then the Doctrine of the horrible pains of Purgatory is as false as it
is uncomfortable: To these words we add the saying of Christ, and we rely upon
it [ He that hears my word, and Joh. 5. 24.
believes on him that sent me, has eternal life, and comes not into
judgment, but passes from death unto life.] If so, then not into the judgment
of Purgatory: If the servant of Christ passes from death to life, then not
from death to the terminable pains of a part of Hell. They that have eternal
life, suffer no intermedial punishment, judgment or condemnation after death;
for death and life are the whole progression, according to the Doctrine of
Christ, and Him we choose to follow.

SECT. V.
Transubstantiation a Novelty. Their Doctors confess it is not necessarily
proved from Scripture. A disputable question in the 9, and 10. Ages: made first
an Article of faith, 1215. in the Lateran Council. P. Lombard a little before,
doubted of a Substantial change. Durandus afterward maintained, that the matter
of bread after consecration might remain without absurdity. What Berengarius
owned in his recantation, is now renounced. Plain Testimonies of the Fathers
against it. Horrid questions it has occasioned. It implies many contradictions.

THE Doctrine of Transubstantiation is so far from being Primitive and
Apostolic, that we know the very time it began to be owned publicly for an
opinion, and the very Council in which it was said to be passed into a public
Doctrine, and by what arts it was promoted, and by what persons it was
introduced.

FOR all the world knows that by their own parties, by In 4. lib. sont. d. 11.
q. 3.
Scotus, Ibid. q. 6.
Ocham, Lect. 40. in can. missae.
Biel, Fisher Bishop of Cap. I. contr. captiv. Babyl.
Rochester, and diverse others, whom Dc Euchar. l. 3. cap. 23. sect. sccundo
dicit.
Bellarmine calls most learned and most acute men, it was declared, that the
Doctrine of Transubstantiation is not expressed in the Canon of the Bible; that
in the Scriptures there is no place so express (as without the Churches
Declaration) to compel us to admit of Transubstantiation, and therefore at
least, it is to be suspected of novelty. But further, we know it was but a
disputable question in the ninth and tenth ages after Christ; that it was not
pretended to be an Article of faith till the Later an Council in the time of
Pope Innocent the Third, MCC. years and more after Christ; that since that
pretended Vencre tum quidem multa in consultationem, nec decerni tamen quicquam
aperte potuit. Platina in vita Innocen. III.
determination, diverse of the chiefest teachers of their own side have been no
more satisfied of the ground of it, than they were before, but still have
publicly affirmed, that the Article is not expressed in Scripture,
particularly, Johannes de Bassolis, Cardinal Apud Suar. Tom: 3. disp. 46. sect.
3.
Cajetan, and Melchior Loc. com. l. 3. c. 3. fund. 2.
Canus, besides those above reckoned: And therefore, if it was not expressed in
Scripture, it will be too clear, that they made their Articles of their own
heads, for they could not declare it to be there, if it was not; and if it was
there but obscurely, then it ought to be taught accordingly; and at most, it
could be but a probable doctrine, and not certain as an Article of Faith. But
that we may put it past argument and probability, it is certain, that as the
Doctrine was not taught in Scripture expressly: so it was not at all taught as a
Catholic Doctrine, or an Article of the Faith by the Primitive ages of the
Church.

Now for this, we need no proof but the confession and acknowledgment of the
greatest Doctors of the Church of Rome. Scotus says, that before the Lateran
Council, L. (...). (...) Euch. cap. 23. sect. (...) Sum. 1. 8. c. 20.
Transubstantiation was not an Article of Faith, as Bellarmine confesses; and
Henriquez affirms, that Scotus says, it was not ancient, insomuch that
Bellarmine accuses him of ignorance, saying, he talked at that rate, because he
had not read the Roman Council under Pope Gregory the VII. nor that consent of
Fathers which (to so little purpose) he had heaped together. Rem Discurs.
modest. p. 13.
transubstantiationis Patres ne attigisse quidem, said some of the English
sesuits in Prison: The Fathers have not so much as touched or meddled with the
matter of Transubstantiation; and in Peter Lombard's time it was so far from
being an Article of Faith, or a Catholic Doctrine, that they did not know
whether it were true or no: And after he had collected the sentences of the
Fathers in that Article, he confessed, He could not tell whether there was any
substantial change or no. His words are these, [ If it be inquired Lib. 4.
sent. did. 11. lit. a.
what kind of conversion it is, whether it be formal or substantial, or of
another kind? I am not able to define it: Only I know that it is not formal,
because the same accidents remain, the same color and taste. To some it seems
to be substantial, saying, that so the substance is changed into the substance,
that it is done essentially. To which the former authorities seem to consent.
But to this sentence others oppose these things, If the substance of bread and
wine be substantially converted into the body and blood of Christ, then every
day some substance is made the body or blood of Christ, which before was not
the body; and to day something is Christ' s body, which yesterday was not; and
every day Christ' s body is increased, and is made of such matter of which it
was not made in the conception:] These are his words, which we have remarked,
not only for the arguments sake (though it be unanswerable) but to give a plain
demonstration that in his time this Doctrine was new, not the Doctrine of the
Church: And this was written but about fifty A D. M C L X.
years before it was said to be decreed in the Lateran A. D. MCC XV.
Council, and therefore it made haste, in so short time to pass from a
disputable opinion, to an Article of Faith. But even after the Council, A. D.
MCCLXX secund. Buchol. sed secundum Volaeterranum MCCCXXXV. In lib. 4. sent.
did. 11. qu. 1. (...), propter tertium.
Durandus, as good a Catholic, and as famous a Doctor as any was in the Church
of Rome, publicly maintained, that even after consecration, the very matter of
bread remained; and although he says, that by reason of the Authority of the
Church, it is not to be held, yet it is not only possible it should be so, but
it implies no contradiction that it should be Christ's body, and yet the matter
of bread remain; and if this might be admitted, it would salve many
difficulties, which arise from saying that the substance of bread does not
remain. But here his reason was overcome by authority, and he durst not affirm
that of which alone (...) was able to give (as he thought) a reasonable
account. But by this it appears, that the opinion was but then in the forge,
and by all their understanding they could never accord it, but still the
questions were uncertain, according to that old Distich,

Corpore de Christi lis est, de sanguine lis est,
Deque modo lis est, non habitura modum.
And the opinion was not determined in the Lateran, as it is now held at Rome;
but it is also plain, that it is a stranger to antiquity. De
Transubstantiatione panis in corpus Christi rara est in antiquis scriptoribus
De haeres. 1.8 Verbo (...).
mentio, said Alphonsus a Castro. There is seldom mention made in the ancient
writers of transubstantiating the bread into Christ's body. We know the modesty
and interest of the man; he would not have said it had been seldom, if he could
have found it in any reasonable degree warranted; he might have said and
justified it, There was no mention at all of this Article in the primitive
Church: and that it was a mere stranger to Antiquity, will not be denied by any
sober person, who considers, That it was with so much uneasiness entertained,
even in the corruptest and most degenerous times, and argued and unsettled
almost 1300 years after Christ.

And that it was so, will but too evidently appear by that stating and
resolution of this question which we find in the Canon Cap. Ego Berengarius de
Consecrat. did. 2.
Law. For Berengarius was by P. Nicolaus, commanded to recant his error in
these words, and to affirm, Verum corpus and sanguinem Domini nostri Jesu
Christi sensualiter, non solum in sacramento, sed in veritate manibus
sacerdotum tractari, frangi and fidelium dentibus atteri: That the true body
and blood of our Lord Jesus Christ sensually, not only in Sacrament, but in
truth is handled by the Priests hands, and broken and grinded by the teeth of
the faithful. Now although this was publicly read at Rome before an hundred
and fourteen Bishops, and by the Pope sent up and down the Churches of Italy,
France and Germany, yet at this day it is renounced by the Church of Rome, and
unless it be well expounded (says the Gloss) will lead into a heresy, greater
than what Berengarius was commanded to renounce; and no interpretation can make
it tolerable, but such an one, as is in another place of the Canon Law,
statuimus, i. e. abrogamus; nothing but a plain denying it in the sense of Pope
Nicolas. But however this may be, it is plain they understood it not, as it is
now decreed. But as it happened to the Pelagians in the beginning of their
heresy, they spoke rudely, ignorantly, and easily to be reproved; but being
ashamed and disputed into a more sober understanding of their hypothesis, spoke
more warily, but yet differently from what they said at first; so it was and is
in this question; at first they understood it not; it was too unreasonable in
any tolerable sense, to make any thing of it; but experience and necessity has
brought it to what it is.

But that this Doctrine was not the doctrine of the first and best ages of the
Church, these following testimonies do make evident. The words of Tertullian
are these. The bread being taken and distributed to his Adver.
Disciples, Christ made it his body, saying, (...). 1.4.0. 40.
This is my body, that is, the figure of my body.

The same is affirmed by Justin Martyr. Contr. (...). (...).
The bread of the Eucharist was a figure which Christ the Lord commanded to do
in remembrance of his passion. Origin In dialog. cont. Marcion. (...) ex
Maximo, tempore Commodi and S very Imp. in Mat. 13.
calls the bread and the chalice, the images of the body and blood of Christ:
and again, That bread which is sanctified by the word of God, so far as belongs
to the matter (or substance) of it goes into the belly, and is cast away in the
secession or separation; which to affirm of the natural or glorified body of
Christ, were greatly blasphemous: and therefore the body of Christ which the
Communicants receive, is not the body in a natural sense, but in a spiritual,
which is not capable of any such accident, as the Elements are.

Eusebius says, that Christ gave to his Disciples Demonst. (...). lib. I. cap.
I.
the Symbols of Divine Occonomy, commanding the image and type of his own body
to be made: and cap ult.
and that the Apostle received a command according to the constitution of the
New Testament, to make a memory of this sacrifice upon the Table by the symbols
of his body and healthful blood.

S. Macarius says, that in the Church is Homil. 27.
offered bread and wine, the antitype of his flesh and of his blood, and they
that partake of the bread that appears, do spiritually eat the flesh of Christ.
By which words the sense of the above cited Fathers is explicated. For when
they affirm, that in this Sacrament is offered the figure, the image, the
antitype of Christ's body and blood, although they speak perfectly against
Transubstantiation, yet they do not deny the real and spiritual presence of
Christ's body and blood; which we all believe as certainly, as that it is not
transubstantiated or present in a natural and carnal manner.

THE same thing is also fully explicated by the good S. Ephrem, The body of
Christ De sacris (...). legibus apad Photium l. I. c. 229.
received by the faithful, departs not from his sensible substance, and is
undivided from a spiritual grace. For even baptism being wholly made spiritual,
and being that which is the same, and proper, of the sensible substance, I
mean, of water, saves, and that which is born, does not perish.

S. Gregory Nazianzen spoke so expressly Orat. 2. in Pasch.
in this Question, as if he had undertaken on purpose to confute the Article of
Trent. Now we shall be partakers of the Paschal supper, but still in figure,
though more clear than in the old Law. For the Legal Passover (I will not be
afraid to speak it) was a more obscure figure of a figure.

S. Chrysostom affirms dogmatically, that Ep ad Caef. cont. haeres.
Apollinarii, cit. per Damascen. and per collect. senten. Pp. cont. Severianos,
edit. per turrianum.
before the bread is sanctified, we name it bread, but the Divine grace
sanctifying it by the means of the Priest, it is freed from the name of bread,
but it is esteemed worthy to be called the Lords body, although the nature of
bread remains in it. And again: As thou eatest the body of the Lord: so they
(the faithful in the old Testament) did eat Manna; as thou drinkest blood, so
they the water of the rock. For though the things which are made be sensible,
Homil 23. (...) 1. Cor.
yet they are given spiritually, not according to the consequence of Nature,
but according to the grace of a gift, and with the body they also nourish the
soul, leading unto faith.

To these very many more might be added; but instead of them, the words of St.
Austin may suffice, as being an evident conviction what was the doctrine of the
primitive Church in this question. This great Doctor brings in Christ thus
speaking as to his Disciples, [ You are not to eat this body In Psalm. 98.
which you see, or to drink that blood which my crucifiers shall pour forth. I
have commended to you a sacrament, which being spiritually understood shall
quicken you:] And again; Christ brought them to a banquet, in which he Cont
Adimantium. cap. 12.
commended to his Disciples the figure of his body and bloud] For he did not
doubt to say, This is my body, when he gave the sign of his body] and, That
which by all men is called Lib. 10. cont. Faust. Manicb.
a sacrifice, is the sign of the true sacrifice, in which the flesh of Christ
after his assumption is celebrated by the sacrament of remembrances.]

BUT in this particular the Canon Law it self, and De consecrat. did. 2. cap.
Qui manducant, and cap. Prima quidem, and cap. Non hoc (...), and cap. Vt quid
paras. Sentent. l. 4. did. 11. Dialog. 1. c. 8.
the Master of the Sentences are the best witnesses; in both which collections
there are diverse testimonies brought, especially from S. Ambrose and S. Austin,
which whosoever can reconcile with the doctrine of Transubstantiation, may
easily put the Hyaena and a Dog, a Pigeon and a Kite into couples, and make
fire and water enter into natural and eternal friendships.

Theodoret and P. Gelasius speak more emphatically, even to the nature of
things, and the very philosophy of this Question. [ Christ honored the symbols
and the signs (says Theodoret) which are seen with the title of his body and
blood, not changing the nature, but to nature adding grace. Dial. 2. 0. 24.
For neither do the mystical signs recede from their nature; for they abide in
their proper substance, figure and form, and may be seen and touched, etc. And
for a testimony that shall be esteemed infallible, we allege the words of Pope
Gelasius, [Truly the sacraments of the body and blood De duabus naturis contra
Eutych. and Nestor (...) in dissert. de Missae and expositione verborum
inslitutionis (...) Domini.
of Christ, which we receive, are a Divine thing; for that by them we are made
partakers of the Divine nature; and yet it ceases not to be the substance or
nature of bread and wine. And truly an image and similitude of the body and
blood of Christ are celebrated in the action of the mysteries.

NOW from these premises we are not desirous to infer any odious consequences
in reproof of the Roman Church, but we think it our duty to give our own people
caution and admonition; 1. That they be not abused by the rhetorical words and
high expressions alleged out of the Fathers, calling the Sacrament, The body or
the slesh of Christ. For we all believe it is so, and rejoice in it. But the
question is, after what manner it is so; whether after the manner of the slesh,
or after the manner of spiritual grace, and sacramental consequence? We with
the Holy Scriptures and the primitive Fathers, affirm the latter. The Church of
Rome against the words of Scripture, and the explication of Christ Joh. 6. 63.
, and the doctrine of the primitive Church, affirm the former. 2. That they be
careful not to admit such Doctrines under a pretense of being Ancient; since,
although the Roman error has been too long admitted, and is ancient in
respect of our days, yet it is an innovation in Christianity, and brought in by
ignorance, power and superstition, very many Ages after Christ. 3. We exhort
them, that they remember the words of Christ, when he explicates the doctrine
of giving us his flesh for meat, and his blood for Vbi suprae.
drink, that he tells us, The flesh profits nothing, but the words which be
speaks are spirit, and they are life.

4. THAT if those ancient and primitive Doctors above cited, say true, and that
the symbols still remain the same in their natural substance and properties,
even after they are blessed, and when they are received, and that Christ's body
and blood are only present to faith and to the spirit, that then whoever tempts
them to give Divine honor to these symbols or elements (as the Church of Rome
does) tempts them to give to a creature the due and incommunicable propriety of
God; and that then, this evil passes further than an error in the
understanding; for it carries them to a dangerous practice, which cannot
reasonably be excused from the crime of Idolatry. To conclude,

THIS matter of it self is an error so prodigiously great and dangerous, that
we need not tell of the horrid and blasphemous questions which are sometimes
handled by them concerning this Divine Mystery. As, if a Priest going by a
Baker's shop, and saying with intention, Hoc est corpus meum, whether all the
Bakers bread be turned into the body of Christ? Whether a Church mouse does eat
her Maker? Whether a man by eating the consecrated symbols does break his fast?
For if it be not bread and wine, he does not: and if it be Christ's body and
blood naturally and properly, it is not bread and wine. Whether it may be said,
the Priest is in some sense the Creator of God himself? Whether his power be
greater than the power of Angels and Archangels? For that it is so, is expressly
affirmed Gloria mundi 4. number. 6.
by Cassenaeus. Whether (as a Bohemian Priest said) that a Priest before he say
his first Mass, be the Son of God, but afterward he is the Father of God and
the Creator of his body? But against this blasphemy a book was written by John
Huss, about the time of the Council of Constance. But these things are too bad,
and therefore we love not to rake in so filthy channels, but give only a general
warning to all our Charges, to take heed of such persons, who from the proper
consequences of their Articles, grow too bold and extravagant; and, of such
doctrines, from whence these and many other evil Propositions (...), frequently
do issue. As the tree is, such must be the fruit. But we hope it may be
sufficient * to say, That what the Church of Rome teaches of
Transubstantiation, is absolutely impossible, and implies contradictions very
many, to the belief of which no faith can oblige us, and no reason can endure.
For Christ's body being in heaven, glorious, spiritual and impassible, cannot
be broken. And since by the Roman doctrine nothing is broken, but that which
cannot be broken, that is, the color, the taste, and other accidents of the
elements; yet if they could be broken, since the accidents of bread and wine
are not the substance of Christ's body and blood, it is certain that on the
Altar, Christ's body naturally and properly cannot be broken. * And since they
say that every consecrated This is my body which is broken: because at that
time Christ's body was not broken naturally and properly, the very words of
Institution do force us to understand the Sacrament in a sense not natural, but
spiritual, that is, truly sacramental. * And all this is besides the plain.
demonstrations Capernaum, and called them to a spiritual understanding; the
natural sense being not only unreasonable and impossible; but also to no
purpose of the spirit, or any ways perfective of the soul; as has been clearly
demonstrated by many learned men against the fond hypothesis of the Church of
Rome in this Article.

SECT. VI.
Half Communion though confessed to be otherwise in Christ's institution and
primitive practice, required upon pain of Excommunication. The Question now is
not so much whether it be a new, as a better practice, than what Christ
instituted. Council of Constance, Cassander, Aquinas, etc. acknowledge the
Novelty. Pope Gelasius calls it sacrilege. Greek Church communicates the people
in the Chalice.

OUR next instance of the novelty of the Roman Religion in their Articles of
division from us, is that of the half Communion. For they deprive the people of
the Chalice, and dismember the institution of Christ, and praevaricate his
(...) law in this particular, and recede from the practice of the Apostles; and
though they confess it was the practice of the primitive Church, yet they lay
it aside, and cur so all them that say they do amiss in it; that is, they curse
them who follow Christ, and his Apostles, and his Church, while themselves deny
to follow them.

Now for this we need no other testimony but their own words in the Council of
Constance. Council.
[ Whereas in certain parts of the Contant. sess. 13.
word some temerariously presume to affirm, that the Christian people ought to
receive the Sacrament of the Eucharist under both kinds of bread and wine, and
do every where communicate the Laity not only in bread but in wine also; -- --
Hence it is, that the Council decrees and defines against this error, that
although Christ instituted after supper, and administered this venerable
Sacrament under both kinds of bread and wine, yet this notwithstanding -- --
And although in the primitive Church this Sacrament was received of the
faithful under both kinds] Here is the acknowledgment, both of Christ's
institution in both kinds, and Christ's ministering it in both kinds, and the
practice of the primitive Church to give it in both kinds; yet the conclusion
from these premises is [ We command under the pain of Excommunication, that no
Priest communicate the people under both kinds of bread and wine.] The
opposition is plain: Christ's Testament ordains it: The Church of Rome forbids
it: It was the primitive custom to obey Christ in this: a later custom is by
the Church of Rome introduced to the contrary. To say that the first practice
and institution is necessary to be followed, is called Heretical: to refuse the
latter subintroduc'd custom incurrs the sentence of Excommunication: and this
they have passed not only into a law, but into an Article of Faith; and if this
be not teaching for doctrines the Commandments of men, and worshipping God in
vain with men's traditions; then there is, and there was, and there can be no
such thing in the world.

So that now the question is not, whether this doctrine and practice be an
INNOVATION, but whether it be not better it should be so? Whether it be not
better to drink new wine than old? Whether it be not better to obey man than
Christ, who is God blessed for ever? Whether a late custom be not to be
preferred before the ancient? a custom dissonant from the institution of
Christ, before that which is wholly consonant to what Christ did and taught?
This is such a bold affirmative of the Church of Rome, that nothing can suffice
to rescue us from an amazement in the consideration of it: especially since,
although the Institution it self, being the only warranty and authority for
what we do, is of it self our rule and precept; (according to that of the
Lawyer, Institutiones sunt praeceptiones (...) praefat. super Inflit. (...).
Mat. 26. 17.
quibus instituuntur and docentur homines) yet besides this, Christ added
preceptive words, Drink ye all of this: he spoke it to all that received, who
then also represented all them, who for ever after were to remember Christ's
death.

But concerning the doctrine of Antiquity in this point, although the Council
of Constance confess the Question, yet since that time they have taken on them
a new confidence, and affirm, that the half Communion was always more or less
the practice of the most Ancient times. We therefore think it fit to produce
testimonies concurrent with the saying of the Council of Constance, such as are
irrefragable, and of persons beyond exception Cassander affirms, That in the
Latin Consult. (...). 22.
Church for above a thousand years, the body of Christ, and the blood of Christ
were separately given, the body apart, and the blood apart, after the
consecration of the mysteries. So Aquinas also affirms, [ According to the
ancient Commen. in 6. Joh. lect. 7.
custom of the Church, all men as they communicated in the body, so they
communicated in the blood; which also to this day is kept in some Churches.]
And therefore Paschasius De corp and sang. Dom. cap. 19.
Ratbertus resolves it dogmatically, That neither the flesh without the blood,
nor the blood without the flesh is rightly communicated; because the Apostles
all of them did drink of the chalice. And Salmeron being Tract. 35.
forced by the evidence of the thing, ingenuously and openly confesses, That it
was a general custom to communicate the Laity under both kinds.

It was so, and it was more: There was anciently a Law for it, Aut integra
Sacrament Apud (...). de (...). did. 2. cap, (...).
a percipiant, aut ab integris arceantur, said Pope Gelasius. Either all or
none, let them receive in both kinds, or in neither; and he gives this reason,
Quia divisio unius and ejusdem mysterii sine grandi sacrilegio non potest
pervenire. The mystery is but one and the same, and therefore it cannot be
divided without great sacrilege. The reason concludes as much of the Receiver
as the Consecrator, and speaks of all indefinitely.

THUS it is acknowledged to have been in Vide (...). de Sacr. tract. 2. de
Euchar. q. 18. De consecrat did. 2. cap. Si. non sunt, and cap Quia passus, 7
cap. Prima (...), and cap. Tunc eis, and cap. (...).
the Latin Church, and thus we see it ought to have been: And for the Greek
Church there is no question; for even to this day they communicate the people
in the Chalice. But this case is so plain, and there are such clear testimonies
out of the Fathers recorded in their own Canon Law, that nothing can obscure
it; but to use too many words about it. We therefore do exhort our people to
take care that they suffer not themselves to be robbed of their portion of
Christ, as he is pleased sacramentally and graciously to communicate himself
unto us.

SECT. VII.
Public Prayers in an unknown Tongue, the Roman practice. As easy to
reconcile Adultery to the seventh Commandment, as this practice to the
fourteenth Chap. of the first to the Corinthians. Testimonies of the Fathers
against it. That such Service does not Edify. A dumb Priest may serve as well
for them that understand not, as he that speaks aloud; for the first can do all
the Signs and Ceremonies, and the other does no more to them. The words both of
Civil and Canon Law against it. Heathen Priests and Heretics, Turks and Jews
agree with the Roman practice.

AS the Church of Rome does great injury to Christendom, in taking from the
people what Christ gave them in the matter of the Sacrament; so she also
deprives them of very much of the benefit which they might receive by their
holy prayers, if they were suffered to pray in public in a Language they
understand. But that is denied to the common people, to their very great
prejudice and injury.

CONCERNING which, although it is as possible to reconcile Adultery with the
seventh Commandment, as Service in a Language not understood, to the fourteenth
Chapter of the first Epistle to the Corinthians; and that therefore if we can
suppose that the Apostolical age did follow the Apostolical rule, it must be
concluded, that the practice of the Church of Rome is contrary to the practice
of the Primitive Church: Yet besides this, we have thought fit to declare the
plain sense and practice of the succeeding Ages in a few testimonies, but so
pregnant, as not to be avoided.

Origin affirms, that the Grecians in their Lib. 8. contra Celsum.
prayers use Greek, and the Romans the Roman language, and so every one
according to his Tongue, prays unto God, and praises him as he is able. S.
Chrysostom urging the precept of the Apostle for prayers in a Language
understood by the hearer, affirms that which is but reasonable, saying, If a
man speaks in the Persian Tongue, and understands not what himself says, to
himself he is a Barbarian, and therefore so he is to him that understands no
more than he does. And what profit can he receive, who hears a sound, and
discerns it not? It were as good he were absent as present: For if he be the
better to be there, because he sees what is done, and guesses at something in
general, Affectus consequitur intellectum: ubi autem nullus earum rerum quae
petuntur vel dicuntur habetur intellectus, aut (...) tantum, ibi exiguus
assurgit affectus. Azor. Inst. moral. to. 1. lib. 9. c. 34. q. 8.
and consents to him that ministers: It is true, this may be, but this
therefore is so, because he understands something; but he is only so far
benefited as he understands, and therefore all that which is not understood,
does him no more benefit that is present, than to him that is absent, and
consents to the prayers in general, and to what is done for all faithful
people. But [ If indeed ye meet for the (...) of the Church, those things ought
to be spoken which the hearers understand,] said S. Ambrose: And so it was in
the primitive Church: blessings and all other things in the Church were done in
the Vulgar tongue, says In 1 Cor. 14.
Lyra; Nay, not only the public Prayers, but the whole Bible was anciently by
many Translations, made fit for the Peoples use. S. Hierom Epist ad Sophron.
(...), that himself translated the Bible into the Dalmatian Tongue; and Sozom.
l. 6. hist. cap. 37.
Ulphilas a Bishop among the Goths, translated it into the Gothic Tongue; and
that it was translated into all Languages, we are told by Hom. 1. in 8. Joan.
S. Chrysostom, De Doctr. Christ. c. 5.
S. Austin, and Sermon. 5. de Graecar. affect. curat.
Theodoret.

BUT although what twenty Fathers say, can make a thing no more certain than if
S. Paul had alone said it, yet both S. Paul and the Fathers are frequent to
tell us, That a Service or Prayers in an unknown Tongue do not edisie: So Lib.
Qui (...) var. Script. locis q. 278.
S. Basil, In 1 Cor. hom. 35.
S. Chrysostom, Super 1 Cor. 14.
S. Ambrose, and Super Psalm. 18. con. 2.
S. Austin, and this is consented to by In 1 Cor. 14.
Aquinas, Ibid.
Lyra, and Liturg. cap. 28.
Cassander: And besides that, these Doctors affirm, that in the primitive
Church the Priest and People joined in their Prayers, and understood each
other, and prayed in their Mothertongue: We find a story (how true it is, let
them look to it, but it is) told by Histor. Bohem. c. 13
Aeneas Sylvius, who was afterward Pope Pius the II. that when Cyrillus Bishop
of the Moravians, and Methodius had converted the Slavonians, Cyril being at
Rome, desired leave to use the Language of that Nation in their Divine Offices.
Concerning which when they were disputing, a voice was heard, as if from
Heaven, Let every spirit praise the Lord, and every tongue (...) unto him: Upon
which it was granted according to the Bishops desire. But now they are not so
kind at Rome; and although the Fathers at Trent confessed in their Decree, that
the Mass contains in it great matter of erudition and edification of the
People, yet they did not think it fit, that it should be said in the vulgar
Tongue: So that it is very good food, but it must be locked up; it is an
excellent Candle, but it must be put under a bushel: And now the Question is,
Whether it be sit that the People pray so as to be edified by it; or is it
better that they be at the prayers when they shall not be edified? Whether it
be not as good to have a dumb Priest to do Mass, as one that has a tongue to
say it? For he that has no tongue, and he that has none to be understood,
(...) alike insignificant to me. Quid prodest locutionum De Doctr. Christ. lib.
4. cap. 10.
integritas quam non sequitur intellectus (...)? cum loquendi nulla sit causa,
si quod loquimur non intelligunt propter quos ut intelligant loquimur, said S.
Austin: What does it avail that man speaks all, if the hearers understand none?
(...) there is no cause why a man should speak at all, if they, for whose
understanding you do speak, understand it not. God understands the Priests
thoughts when he speaks not, as well as when he speaks; he hears the prayer of
the heart, and sees the word of the mind, and a dumb Priest can do all the
ceremonies, and make the signs; and he that speaks aloud to them that
understand him not, does no more. Now since there is no use of vocal prayer in
public, but that all together may (...) their desires, and stir up one
another, and join in the expression of them to God; by this device, a man who
understands not what is said, can only pray with his lips; for the heart cannot
pray but by desiring, and it cannot desire what it understands not. So that in
this case, prayer cannot be an act of the soul: There is neither (...) nor
understanding, notice or desire: The heart says nothing, and asks for nothing,
and therefore receives nothing. Solomon calls that the sacrifice of fools, when
men consider not; and they who understand not what is said, cannot take it into
consideration. But there needs no more to be said in so plain a case. We end
this with the words of the Civil and Canon Law. Justinian the Emperor made a
Law in these words, [ We will and command, that all Bishops and Priests
celebrate the sacred Oblation, and the Prayers thereunto added in holy Baptism,
not in a low voice, but with a loud and clear voice, which may be heard by the
faithful people; that is, be understood, for so it follows, that thereby the
minds of the hearers may be raised up with Novel. 123
greater devotion to set forth the praises of the Lord God; for so the Apostle
teaches in the first to the Corinthians. It is true, that this Law was rased
out of the Latin versions of Justinian. The fraud and design was too De (...)
l 2. c. 13. (...). (...).
palpable, but it prevailed nothing; for it is acknowledged by Cassander and
Bellarmine, and is in the Greek Copies of Holoander.

THE Canon Law is also most express from an Authority of no less than a Pope
and a General Council, as themselves esteem; Innocent III. in the great Council
of (...), above MCC years after Christ, in these words, [ (...) in most parts
within Cap. 9.
the same City and Diocese, the people of diverse Tongues are mixed together,
having under one and the same faith diverse ceremonies and rites, we straightly
charge and command, That the Bishops of such Cities and Dioceses provide men
fit, who may celebrate Divine Service according to the diversity of ceremonies
and languages, and administer the Sacraments of the Church, instructing them
both by word and by example.]

NOW if the words of the Apostle, and the practice of the primitive Church, the
Sayings of the Fathers, and the Confessions of wise men among themselves; if
the consent of Nations, and the piety of our forefathers; if right reason, and
the necessity of the thing; if the needs of the ignorant, and the very
inseparable conditions of holy prayers; if the Laws of Princes, and the Laws of
the Church, which do require all our prayers to be said by them that understand
what they say; if all these cannot prevail with the Church of Rome to do so
much good to the Peoples souls, as to consent they should understand what in
particular they are to ask of God, certainly there is a great pertinacy of
opinion, and but a little charity to those precious souls, for whom Christ
died, and for whom they must give account.

INDEED the old (...) Rites, and the Sooth-sayings of the Salian Priests, Vix
Sacerdotibus Quintil l. 1.
suis intellecta, sed quae mutari vetat Religio: were scarce understood by
their Priests themselves, but their Religion forbad to change them. Thus
anciently did the Osseni Heretics of whom Epiphanius tells, and the
Heracleonitae of whom S. Austin Verb. (...). Cap. 6. ad Quod vult (...).
gives account; they taught to pray with obscure words; and some others in
Clemens Alexandrinus, supposed, that words spoken in a barbarous or unknown
tongue, (...), are more powerful. The Jews also in their Synagogues at this
day, read Hebrew, which the people but rarely understand; and the Turks in
their Mosques read Arabic, of which the people know nothing. But Christians
never did so, till they of Rome resolved to refuse to do benefit to the souls
of the people in this instance, or to bring them from intolerable ignorance.

SECT. VIII.
Worship of Images. What they call giving them due honor. This worship first
brought in by Heretics. Opposed by the first Fathers. Epiphanius his zeal
against it. Forbidden by the Council of Eliberis. First decreed by the second
Council of Nice. Condemned by the Synod of Frankford, convened by Charles the
Great, under whose name a Book was published against that Nicene Synod, and the
worship of Images. Against which the Primitive Christians were so prejudiced,
that they would not allow Images to be made.

THE Church of Rome has to very bad purposes introduced and imposed upon
Christendom the worship and veneration of Images, kissing them, pulling off
their hats, kneeling, falling down and praying before them, which they call,
giving them due honor and veneration. What external honor and veneration that
is, which they call due, is expressed by the instances now reckoned, which the
Council of Trent in their Decree enumerate and establish. What the inward
honor and worship is, which they intend to them, is intimated in the same
Decree. By the Images they worship Christ and his Saints; and therefore by
these Images they pass that honor to Christ and his Saints which is their due:
that is, as their Doctors explain it, Latria or Divine worship to God and
Christ. Hyperdulia or more than service, to the Blessed Virgin Mary; and
service or doulia to other canonized persons. So that upon the whole, the case
is this: Whatever worship they give to God, and Christ and his Saints, they
give it first to the image, and from the image they pass it unto Christ and
Christ's servants. And therefore we need not to enquire what actions they
suppose to be fit or due. For whatsoever is due to God, to Christ or his
Saints, that worship they give to their respective Images: all the same in
external semblance and ministry; as appears in all their great Churches, and
public actions, and processions, and Temples and Festivals, and endowments,
and censings, and pilgrimages, and prayers, and vows made to them.

NOW besides that these things are so like Idolatry, that they can no way be
reasonably excused (of which we shall in the next Chapter give some account)
besides Chap. 2. Sect. 12.
that they are too like the religion of the Heathens, and so plainly and
frequently forbidden in the Old Testament, and are so infinitely unlike the
simple and wise, the natural and holy, the pure and the spiritual religion of
the Gospel; besides that they are so infinite a scandal to the Jews and Turks,
and reproach Christianity it self amongst all strangers that live in their
communion, and observe their rites: besides that they cannot pretend to be
lawful, but with the laborious artifices of many Metaphysical notions and
distinctions, which the people who most need them, do least understand; and
that therefore the people worship them without these distinctions, and directly
put confidence in them; and that it is impossible that ignorant persons, who in
all Christian countries make up the biggest number, should do otherwise, when
otherwise they cannot understand it; and besides that, the thing it self with
or without distinctions, is a superstitious and forbidden, an unlawful and
unnatural worship of God, who will not be worshipped by an Image: we say that
besides all this, This whole Doctrine and practice is an innovation in the
Christian Church, not practiced, not endured in the primitive ages; but
expressly condemned by them, and this is our present undertaking to evince.

THE first notice we find of Images brought into Christian Religion, was by
Simon Magus: indeed that was very Ancient, but very heretical and abominable:
but that he brought some in to be worshipped, we find in Lib. 1. h. (...) fabul.
Theodoret, and S. Austin, Lib. 1. cap. 23. vide etiam Epiphan. to. 2. lib. 1.
baeres. 27. and S. August. de (...). (...).
S. Irenaeus tells, That the Gnostics De (...). (...).
or Carpocratians did make Images, and said, that the form of Christ as he was
in the flesh, was made by Pilate; and these Images they worshipped, as did the
Gentiles: These things they did, but against these things the Christians did
zealously and piously declare: We have no Image in the world, said S. Clemens
of Lib. 6. strom. and in paranetico.
Alexandria: It is apparently forbidden to us to exercise that deceitful art:
For it is written, Thou shall not make any similitude of any thing in Heaven
above, etc. And Origin wrote a just Lib. 7. and 8. cont. Cells.
Treatise against Celsus; in which he not only affirms, That Christians did not
make or use Images in Religion, but that they ought not, and were by God
forbidden to do so. To the same purpose also Lactantius discourses to the
Emperor, and confutes the pretenses and little answers of the Heathen in that
manner, that he leaves no pretense for Christians under another cover, to
introduce the like abomination.

We are not ignorant, that those who were converted from Gentilism, and those
who loved to imitate the customs of the Roman Princes and people, did soon
introduce the Historical use of Images, and according to the manner of the
world, did think it honorable to depict or make Images of those whom they had
in great esteem; and that this being done by an esteem, relying on Religion,
did by the weakness of men, and the importunity of the Tempter, quickly pass
into inconvenience and superstition; yet even in the time of Julian the
Emperor, S. Cyril denies, that the Christians did give veneration and worship
to the Image, even of the Cross it self, which was one of the earliest
temptations; and S. Epiphanius Epist. ad Jo. Hieros.
(it is a known story) tells, that when in the village of Bethel he saw a cloth
picture, as it were of Christ, or some Saint in the Church, against the
Authority of Scripture; He cut it in pieces, and advised that some poor man
should be buried in it; affirming, that such Pictures are against Religion, and
unworthy of the Church of Christ. The Epistle was translated into Latin by S.
Hierome; by which we may guess at his opinion in the question.

THE Council of Eliberis is very ancient, and of Can. 36. Placuit (...) in
Ecclesia esse non debere, ne quod colitur aut adoratur in parictibus
depingatur. De morib. Eccles. l. 1. c. 34. Idem de fide and Symbolo. c. 7. and
contr. Adimant. cap. 13.
great fame; in which it is expressly forbidden, that what is worshipped, should
be depicted on the walls; and that therefore Pictures ought not to be in
Churches. S. Austin complaining, that he knew of many in the Church who were
Worshippers of Pictures, calls them Superstitious; and adds, that the Church
condemns such customs, and strives to correct them: and S. Gregory writing to
Serenus Bishop of Massilia, says he would not have had him to break the
Pictures and Images, which were there set for an historical use; but commends
him for prohibiting any one to worship them, and enjoins him still to forbid
it. But Superstition by degrees creeping in, the Worship of Images was decreed
in the seventh Synod, or the second Nicene. But the decrees of this Synod being
by Pope An. Dom. 764.
Adrian sent to Charles the Great, he convocated a Synod of German and French
Bishops at Francford, who discussed the Acts passed at Nice, and condemned
them: And the Acts of this Synod, although they were diligently suppressed by
the Popes arts, yet Eginardus, Hincmarus, Aventinus, Blondus, Adon, Aymonius
and Regino, famous Historians, tell us, That the Bishops of Francford condemned
the Synod of Nice, and commanded it should not be called a General Council; and
published a Book under the name of the Emperor, confuting that unchristian
Assembly; and not long since, this Book, and the Acts of Francford were
published by Bishop Tillius; by which, not only the infinite fraud of the Roman
Doctors is discovered, but the worship of Images is declared against and
condemned.

A while after this, Ludovicus the son of Charlemain, sent Claudius a famous
Preacher to Taurinum in Italy, where he preached against the worshipping of
Images, and wrote an excellent book to that purpose. Against this book Jonas
Bishop of Orleans, after the death of Ludovicus and Claudius, did write: In
which he yet durst not assert the worship of them, but confuted it out of
Origin; whose words he thus cites, [ Images are neither to be esteemed by
inward affection, nor worshipped with outward show;] and out of Lactantius
these, [ Nothing is to be worshipped that is seen with mortal eyes: Let us
adore, let us worship nothing, but the name alone of our only Parent, who is to
be sought for in the Regions above, not here below:] And to the same purpose,
he also alleges excellent words out of Fulgentius and S. Hierom; and though he
would have Images retained, and therefore was angry at (...) who caused them to
be taken down, yet he himself expressly affirms, that they ought not to be
worshipped; and withal adds, that though they kept the Images in their
Churches for history and ornament, yet that in France the worshipping of them
was had in great detestation. And though it is not to be denied, but that in
the sequel of Jonas his book, he does something prevaricate in this question;
yet it is evident, that in France this Doctrine was not accounted Catholic for
almost nine hundred years after Christ; and in Germany it was Lib. 2. in vita
Isaaci Angeli, A. D. 1160.
condemned for almost 1200 years, as we find in (...).

WE are not unskilled in the devices of the Roman Writers, and with how much
(...) they would excuse this whole matter, and palliate the crime imputed to
them, and elude the Scriptures expressly condemning this Superstition: But we
know also, that the arts of Sophistry are not the ways of Salvation. And
therefore we exhort our people to follow the plain words of Scripture, and the
express Law of God in the second Commandment; and add also the exhortation of
S. John, Little children, 1 John 5. 21
keep your selves from Idols. To conclude, it is impossible but that it must be
confessed, that the worship of Images was a thing unknown to the primitive
Church; in the purest times of which, they would not allow the making of them;
as (amongst diverse others) appears in the Writings of Clemens Strom l. 6. and
in Protrep.
Alexandrinus, Lib. 2. c. 22. advers. Marcion. and (...) Idololater. c. 3.
Tertullian, and Lib. 4. cont. Celsum.
Origin.

SECT. IX.
Picturing God the Father and the Holy Trinity, a scandalous practice in the
Roman Church. It is against the Doctrine and practice of the Primitive Church,
and of the wiser Heathens, who had no Images or Pictures of their gods.

AS an Appendage to this, we greatly reprove the custom of the Church of Rome,
in picturing God the Father, and the most holy and undivided Trinity; which,
besides that it ministers infinite scandal to all sober-minded men, and gives
the new Arrians in Polonia, and Anti-Trinitarians, great and ridiculous
entertainment, exposing that sacred Mystery to derision and scandalous
contempt: It is also (which at present we have undertaken particularly to
remark) against the doctrine and practice of the primitive Catholic Church.

S. Clemens of Alexandria says, that in the Strom. (...) 1.
Discipline of Moses, God was not to be represented in the shape of a Man, or
of any other thing: and that Christians understood themselves to be bound by
the same Law, we find it expressly taught by Origin Lib. 7. contra Celsum.
, Tertullian De corona militis.
, Eusebius Lib. 1. c. 5. (...). Evang.
, Athanasius Orat. contra gentes.
, S. Hierom In c. 40. Isa.
, S. Austin De fide and symbol. c. 7.
, Theodoret In Deuteronomy. q. 1.
, Damascen Lib. 4. de (...). (...) c. 12.
, and the Synod of Constantinople, as it is reported in the 6. Action of the
second Nicene Council. And certainly if there were not a strange spirit of
contradiction or superstition or deflexion from the Christian Rule, greatly
(...) in the Church of Rome, it were impossible that this practice should be so
countenanced by them, and defended so, to no purpose, with so much scandal, and
against the natural reason of mankind, and the very Law of Nature it self: For
the Heathens were sufficiently by the light of Nature, taught to abominate all
Pictures or Images of God.

Sed nulla effigies, simulacraque nulla Deorum: Sil. Italic.

Majestate locum, and sacro implevere timore.
They in their earliest ages had no Pictures, no Images of their Gods: Their
Temples were filled with majesty, and a sacred fear; and the reason is given by
Macrobius, Antiquity Lib. 1. in somn. Scip. cap. 2.
made no Image (viz. of God) because the supreme God, and the mind that is born
of him, (that is, his Son, the eternal Word) as it is beyond the Soul, so it is
above Nature, and therefore it is not lawful that Figments should come thither.

(...) Callistus relating the heresy Lib. 18. (...). 53.
of the Armenians and Jacobites says, they made Images of the Father, Son, and
Holy Ghost, quod perquam ab sur dum est. Nothing is more absurd, than to make
Pictures or Images of the Persons of the holy and adorable Trinity. And yet
they do this in the Church of Rome. For in the windows of their Churches, even
(...) Countrey-villages where the danger cannot be denied to be great, and the
scandal insupportable; nay, in their books of Devotion, in their very
Mass-books and breviaries, in their Portuises and Manuals they picture the holy
Trinity with three noses and four eyes, and three faces in a knot, to the great
dishonor of God and scandal of Christianity it self. We add no more, (for the
case is too evidently bad) but reprove the error with the words of their own
Polydore Virgil: Since Lib. 2. de Invent. c. 23.
the world began never was any thing more foolish than to picture God, who is
present every where.

SECT. X.
Setting up the Pope as universal Bishop, an Innovation. Among the Apostles
(the first Church Governors) no Prerogative of one over the rest, a remarkable
testimony of S. Cyprian to prove it. Bishops succeeded the Apostles without
Superiority of one over another by Christ's Law. The Pope has invaded their
rights; and diminished their power many ways. Primitivs Fathers make every
Bishop to have a share of power not from another Bishop but from Christ; and
are against one Bishops judging and forcing another Bishop to obedience. Popes
opposed when they interposed their authority in the affairs of other Churches.

THE last Instance of Innovations introduced in Doctrine and Practice by the
Church of Rome, that we shall represent, is that of the Popes Universal
Bishopric. That is, not only that he is Bishop of Bishops, superior to all
and every one; but that his Bishopric is a Plenitude of Power; and as for
other Bishops, of his fullness they all receive, a part of the Ministry and
solicitude; and not only so, but that he only is a Bishop by immediate Divine
Dispensation, and others receive from him whatsoever they have. For to this
height many of them are come at last. Which Doctrine, although as it is in
sins, where the carnal are most full of reproach, but the spiritual are of
greatest malignity; so it happens in this Article. For though it be not so
scandalous as their Idolatry, so ridiculous as their Superstitions, so
unreasonable as their Doctrine of Transubstantiation, so easily reproved as
their Half Communion, and Service in an unknown Tongue; yet it is of as
dangerous and evil effect, and as false, and as certainly an Innovation, as any
thing in their whole Conjugation of Errors.

WHEN Christ founded his Church, he left it in the hands of his Apostles,
without any prerogative given to one, or eminency above the rest, save only of
priority and orderly precedence, which of it self was natural, necessary and
incident. The Apostles governed all; their Authority was the sanction, and
their Decrees and Writings were the Laws of the Church. They exercised a common
jurisdiction, and divided it according to the needs and emergencies, and
circumstances of the Church. In the Council of Jerusalem, S. Peter gave not the
decisive sentence, but S. James, who was the Bishop of that See. Christ sent
all his Apostles as his Father sent him; and therefore he gave to every one of
them the whole power which he left behind; and to the Bishops congregated at
Miletum, S. Paul Act. 20. 28
gave them caution to take care of the whole flock of God, and affirms to them
all, that the Holy Ghost had made them Bishops: and in the whole New Testament,
there is no act or sign of superiority, or that one Apostle exercised power
over another: but to them whom Christ sent, he in common entrusted the Church
of God: according to that excellent saying of S. Cyprian, [ The Epist de unit.
(...). and (...) cause. 24. qu. 1.
other Apostles are the same that S. Peter was, endowed with an equal
fellowship of honor and power: and they are all shepherds, and the slock is
one] and therefore it ought to be fed by all the Apostles with unanimous
consent.

THIS unity and identity of power without question and interruption did
continue and descend to Bishops in the primitive Church, in which it was a
known doctrine that the Bishops were successors of the Apostles: and what was
not in the beginning, could not be in the descent, unless it were innovated and
introduced by a new authority. Christ gave ordinary power to none but the
Apostles, and the power being to continue for ever in the Church, it was to be
succeeded to, and by the same authority, even of Christ, it descended to them
who were their successors, that is, to the Bishops, as all antiquity Iren. e.
lib. 4. c. 43. 44. S. Cyprian. lib. 1. cp. 6. and lib. 2. cp. 10. and lib. 4.
cp. 9. S. Aembrese de dignit. sacerd. c. 1. S. Aeug. de baptism contra Donat l.
7 c. 43. and ibid. Clarus (...). Idcmdeverb: Dom Ser. 24 Con. Romans sub Sylvest.
Constable. Apost. l. 8. c ult. Anacl. P. ep. 2. Clcmens P. ep. 1. S. Hieron. ep.
13. and ep. 54. Euthym. in Ps. 44. S. Gregor. in Evang. Hom. 26. (...)
Heliodor. cp. 1. S. Chrysostom. ser. Damascen de imaginibus. Orat. 2. S. Greg.
Naz. Orat. 21. dc laud. Basilii.
does consent and teach: Not S. Peter alone, but every Apostle, and therefore
every one who succeeds them in their ordinary power, may and must remember the
words of S. Paul; We are Ambassadors or Legates for Christ: Christ's Vicars,
not the Pope's Delegates: and so all the Apostles are called in the Preface of
the Mass; Quos operis tui Vicarios cidem contulisti praeesse Pastores; they are
Pastors of the Flock and Vicars of Christ; and so also they are in express
terms called by S. Ambrose, and In cpist. 1. (...) Corin. cap 3. and in cpist.
ad Roman. c. 1.
therefore it is a strange usurpation, that the Pope arrogates that to himself
by Impropriation, which is common to him with all the Bishops of Christendom.

THE consequent of this is, that by the law of Christ, one Bishop is not
superior to another: Christ gave the power to all alike; he made no Head of the
Bishops; he gave to none a supremacy of power or universality of jurisdiction.
But this the Pope has long challenged, and to bring his purposes to pass, has
for these Six hundred years bygone invaded the rights of Bishops, and
delegated matters of order and jurisdiction to Monks and Friars; insomuch that
the power of Bishops was greatly diminished at the erecting of the Cluniac and
Cistercian Monks about the year ML: but about the year MCC, it was almost
swallowed up by privileges granted to the Begging Friars, and there kept by the
power of the Pope: which power got one (...) step more above the Bishops, when
they got it declared that the Pope is above a Council of Bishops: and at last
it was (...) into a new doctrine by Cajetane (who for his prosperous invention
was made a Cardinal) that all the whole Apostolic or Episcopal power is
radical and inherent in the Pope, in whom is the fullness of the Ecclesiastical
authority; and that Bishops receive their portion of it from him: and this was
first boldly maintained in the Council of Trent by the Jesuits; and it is now
the opinion of their Order: but it is also that which the Pope challenges in
practice, when he pretends to a power over all Bishops, and that this power is
derived to him from Christ; when he calls himself the Universal Bishop, and the
Vicarial Head of the Church, the Churches Monarch, he from whom all
Ecclesiastical Authority is derived, to whose sentence in things Divine every
Christian under pain of damnation is bound to be subject Extrav. Com. lib. 1.
(...) 9 de (...). r. and obed. cap. Vnam Sanctam.
.

NOW this is it which as it is productive of infinite mischiefs, so it is an
Innovation and an absolute deflexion from the primitive Catholic Doctrine; and
yet is the great groundwork and foundation of their Church. This we shall
represent in these following testimonies. Pope Eleutherius Referente
Archiepisc. Granatensi in Council. Trid.
in an Epistle to the Bishops of France says that Christ committed the
Universal Church to the Bishops; and S. Ambrose says that Vbi supra.
the Bishop holds the place of Christ, and is his substitute. But famous are
the words of S. Cyprian, [ The Church of Christ is one Lib. 4. ep 2.
through the whole world, divided by him into many members, and the Bishopric
is but one, diffused in the agreeing plurality of many Bishops.] And again, [
To every Pastor a portion of the flock is given, which let every one of them
rule and govern.] By which words it is evident that the primitive Church
understood no Prelation of one and Subordination of another, commanded by
Christ, or by virtue of their Ordination; but only what was for orders sake
introduced by Princes and consent of Prelates. And it was to this purpose very
full which was said (...) Baro. tom. 6. A. D. 499. n. 36.
by Pope Symmachus: As it is in the holy Trinity, whose power is one and
undivided, (or to use the expression in the Athanasian Creed, none is before or
after other, none is greater or less than another) so there is one Bishopric
amongst diverse Bishops, and therefore why should the Canons of the ancient
Bishops be violated by their Successors? Now these words being spoken against
the invasion of the rights of the Church of Arles by Anastasius, and the
question being in the exercise of Jurisdiction, and about the institution of
Bishops, does fully declare that the Bishops of Rome had no superiority by the
laws of Christ over any Bishop in the Catholic Church, and that his Bishopric
gave no more power to him, than Christ gave to the Bishop of the smallest
Diocese.

AND therefore all the Church of God, whenever they reckoned the several orders
and degrees of Ministry in the Catholic Church, reckon the Bishop as the last
and supreme, beyond whom there is no spiritual power but in Christ. For as the
whole Dionys. Areop de Eccles. hierarch. de sacer. perfect.
Hierarchy ends in Jesus, so does every particular one in its own Bishop.
Beyond the Bishop there is no step, till you rest in the great Shepherd and
Bishop of souls. Under him every Bishop is supreme in spirituals, and in all
power which to any Bishop is given by Christ. S. Ignatius therefore exhorts
Epist ad Smyrnens. and ad (...).
that all should obey their Bishop, and the Bishop obey Christ, as Christ
obeyed his Father. There are no other intermedial degrees of Divine
institution. But (as Origin teaches) The Apostles, and they who after them are
ordained by God, that is, the Bishops, have the supreme place in the Church,
and the Prophets have the second place. The same also is taught by P. Gelasius
Disc. 97. c. duo sunt.
, by S. Hierom (...). Jerem. (...). 7. and adver. Lucif.
, and Fulgentius In Council. Paris. l. 1. c. 3.
, and indeed by all the Fathers who spoke any thing in this matter: Insomuch
that when Bellarmine is in this question pressed out of the book of Nilus by
the Authority of the Fathers standing against him, he answers, Papam Patres non
habere in Ecclesia, sed Filios omnes; The Pope acknowledges no Fathers in the
Church, for they are all his Sons.

NOW although we suppose this to be greatly sufficient to declare the Doctrine
of the primitive Catholic Church, concerning the equality of power in all
Bishops by Divine right: yet the Fathers have also expressly declared
themselves, that one Bishop is not superior to another, and ought not to judge
another, or force another to obedience. They are the words of S. Cyprian to a
Council of Bishops: [ None of us makes himself a Bishop of Bishops, In Council.
Carthag.
or by tyramical power drives his colleagues to a necessity of obedience, since
every Bishop according to the license of his own liberty and power, has his
own choice, and cannot be judged by another, nor yet himself judge another; but
let us all expect the judgment of our Lord Jesus Christ, who only and alone
has the power of setting us in the Government of his Church, and judging of
what we do.] This was spoken and intended against Pope Stephen, who did then
begin dominari in clero, to lord it over God's heritage, and to excommunicate
his brethren, as Demetrius did in the time of the Apostles themselves: but they
both found their reprovers. Demetrius was chastised by Saint John for this
usurpation, and Stephen by S. Cyprian, and this De Bapt. contr. Donatist. l. 3.
c. 3.
also was approved by S. Austin. We conclude this particular with the words of
S. Gregory Bishop of Rome, who because the Patriarch of Constantinople called
himself Universal Bishop, said, It was a proud Lib. 4. cp. 76, 78, 31, 34, 38,
39. and lib. 6. (...). 24.
title, profane, sacrilegious, and Antichristian: and therefore he little
thought that his successors in the same See should so fiercely challenge that
Antichristian title; much less did the then Bishop of Rome in those Ages
challenge it as their own peculiar; for they had no mind to be, or to be
esteemed Antichristian. Romano pontisici oblatum est, sed nullus unquam eorum
hoc singularitatis nomen assumpsit. His predecessors (it seems) had been
tempted with an offer of that title, but none of Lib. 4. ep. 32 Quis est iste,
qui contra statuta Evangelica, contra Canonum decreta, novum sibi usurpare
nomen praesumit? Videatur Epistola S. Hieron, ad Evagrium, Council. Chalced.
action. 16. Council. Nicen. can. 6. and can. 7. and Council. C. P. can. 3. and
Novel. Justin. 131.
them ever assumed that name of singularity, as being against the law of the
Gospel and the Canons of the Church.

NOW this being a matter of which Christ spoke not one word to S. Peter, if it
be a matter of Faith and Salvation, as it is now pretended, it is not
imaginable he would have been so perfectly silent. But though he was silent of
any intention to do this, yet S. Paul was not silent that Christ did otherwise;
for he has set in his Church primum Apostolos; first of all, Apostles; not
first S. Peter and secondarily Apostles; but all the Apostles were first. It is
also evident that S. Peter did not carry himself so as to give the least
overture or umbrage to make any one suspect he had any such pre-eminence; but
he was (as S. Chrysostom truly says) (...), he did all things with the common
consent, In act. Apost. (...). 3.
(...), nothing by special authority or principality: and if he had any such,
it is more than probable that the Apostles who survived him, had succeeded him
in it, rather than the Bishop of Rome: and it being certain (as the Bishop
Canus loc. lib. 6. c. 8. p 235.
of Canaries confesses) That there is in Scripture no revelation that the
Bishop of Rome Ed. Salmant. 1563. Con. (...). l. 2. c. 34. Sent. l. 4. did.
24. q. 2. art. 5.
should succeed Peter in it, and we being there told that S. Pet. was at
Antioch, but never that he was at Rome; it being confessed by some of their own
parties, by Cardinal Cusanus, Soto, Driedo, Canus and Segovius, that this
succession was not addicted to any particular Church, nor that Christ's
institution of De. Eccl. dog. l. 4. c. 3
this does any other way appear; that it cannot be proved that the Bishop of
Rome is Prince of the Church: it being also certain that there was no such
thing known in the Primitive Church, but that the holy Fathers both of Africa
and the East did oppose Pope Victor and Pope Stephen, when they began to
interpose with a presumptive Authority in the affairs of other Churches; and
that the Bishops of the Church did treat with the Roman Bishop as with a
brother, not as their superior: and that the General Council held at Chalcedon
did give to the Bishops of C. P. equal rights and preeminence with the Bishops
of Rome: and that the Greek Churches are at this day and have been a long time
great opponents of this pretension of the Bishops of Rome: and after all this,
since it is certain that Christ, who foreknows all things, did also know that
there would be great disputes and challenges of this preeminence, did indeed
Luk 22. 25 (...). 20. 26, 27.
suppress it in his Apostles, and said not it should be otherwise in
succession, and did not give any command to his Church to obey the Bishops of
Rome as his Vicars, more than what he commanded concerning all Bishops; it must
be certain that it cannot be necessary to salvation to do so, but that it is
more than probable that he never intended any such thing, and that the Bishops
of Rome have to the great prejudice of Christendom made a great schism, and
usurped a title which is not their due, and challenged an Authority to which
they have no right, and have set themselves above others who are their equals,
and impose an Article of Faith of their own contriving, and have made great
preparation for Antichrist, if he ever get into that Seat, or be in already,
and made it necessary for all of the Roman Communion to believe and obey him in
all things.

SECT. XI.
Other instances of new Doctrines and practices in the Roman Church. It is
easier to show where our Religion was before Luther, than where theirs was
before the Council of Trent. Great and Excellent persons have complained
heavily of the corrupt State of that Church, but without redress. The
Reformation preferred a New cure before an Old sore.

THERE are very many more things in which the Church of Rome has greatly
turned aside from the Doctrines of Scripture, and the practice of the Catholic
Apostolic and primitive Church.

SUCH are these: The Invocation of Saints: the Insufficiency of Scriptures
without Traditions of Faith unto Salvation: their absolving sinners before they
have by Canonical penances and the fruits of a good life testified their
repentance: their giving leave to simple Presbyters by Papal dispensation, to
give Confirmation or chrism: selling Masses for Nine-pences: Circumgestation of
the Eucharist to be adored: The dangerous Doctrine of the necessity of the
Priests intention in collating Sacraments; by which device they have put it
into the power of the Priest to damn whom he pleases of his own Parish: their
affirming that the Mass is a proper and propitiatory sacrifice for the quick
and the dead: private Masses, or the Lord's Supper without Communion; which is
against the doctrine and practice of the Ancient Church of Rome it self, and
contrary to the Tradition of the Apostles, if we may believe Pope Calixtus, and
is also forbidden under pain of Excommunication. Peracta consecratione omnes
communicent, (...). did. 2. (...). Peracta. Videctiam ib. cap. In (...) and
cap. Siquis.
qui noluerint ecclesiasticis carere liminibus; sic autem etiam Apostoli
statuerunt, and sancta Romana tenet Ecclesia. When the Consecration is finished
let all Communicate that will not be thrust from the bounds of the Church; for
so the Apostles appointed, and so the holy Church of Rome does hold. The same
also was (...) by Pope Soter and Pope Martin in a Council of Bishops, and most
severely enjoined by the Canons of the Apostles as they are cited in the Canon
Law. De cons did. 1. c. Omnes sid. Omnes (...) qui (...) in solennitatibus
sacris ad Ecclesiam and (...) Apostolorum and Evangelia audiant. Qui autem non
(...) in (...); dum Missa peragatur, nec Sanctam Communionem percipiunt, velut
inquietudines Ecclesiae commoventes convenit communione privari.


THERE are diverse others; but we suppose that those Innovations which we have
already noted, may be (...) to verify this charge of Novelty. But we have done
this the rather, because the Roman Emissaries endeavor to prevail amongst the
ignorant and prejudicate by boasting of Antiquity; and calling their Religion,
the Old Religion and the Catholic: so insnaring others by ignorant words in
which is no truth; their Religion as it distinguishes from the Religion of the
Church of England and Ireland, being neither the Old nor the Catholic
Religion; but New and superinduced by arts known to all who with sincerity and
diligence have looked into their pretenses.

BUT they have taught every Priest that can scarce understand his Breviary (of
which in Ireland there are but too many) and very many of the people, to ask
where our Religion was before Luther? Whereas it appears by the premises, that
it is much more easy for us to show our Religion before Luther, than for them
to show theirs before Trent. And although they can show too much practice of
their Religion in the degenerate ages of the Church, yet we can and do clearly
show ours in the purest and first ages; and can and do draw lines pointing to
the times and places where the several rooms and stories of their Babel was
builded, and where polished, and where furnished.

BUT when the Keepers of the (...) slept, and the (...) had sown tares, and
they had choked the wheat, and almost destroyed it: when the world complained
of the (...) errors in the Church, and being oppressed by a violent power,
durst not complain so much as they had cause: and when they who had cause to
complain were yet themselves very much abused, and did not complain in all they
might; when diverse excellent persons, S. Bernard, Clemangis, Grosthead,
Marsilius, Ocham, Alvarus, Abbat Joachim, Petrarch, Savanarola, Valla, Erasmus,
Mantuan, Gerson, Ferus, Cassander, Andreas Fricius, Modrevius, Hermannus
Coloniensis, Wasseburgius Archdeacon of Verdun, Paulus Langius In Chron. (...).
, Staphilus, Telesphorus de Cusentia, Doctor Talheymius, Francis Zabarel the
Cardinal, and Pope Adrian himself, with many others; not to reckon Wiclef, Hus,
Jerome of Prague, the Bohemians, and the poor men of Lions, whom they called
(...), and confuted with fire and sword; when almost all Christian Princes did
complain heavily of the corrupt state of the Church and of Religion, and no
remedy could be had, but the very intended remedy made things much worse; then
it was that diverse Christian Kingdoms, and particularly the Church of England,

Tum primum senio docilis, tua saecula Roma
Erubuit, pudet exacti (...) temporis, odit
Praeteritos foedis cum religionibus annos.
Being ashamed of the errors, superstitions, heresies and impieties which had
deturpated the face of the Church; looked into the glass of Scripture and pure
Antiquity, and washed away those stains with which time, and inadvertency, and
tyranny had besmeared her; and being thus cleans'd and washed, is accused by
the Roman parties of Novelty, and condemned because she refuses to run into the
same excess of riot and de-ordination. But we cannot deserve blame who return
to our ancient and first health, by preferring a New cure before an Old sore.

CHAP. II.
The Church of Rome, as it is at this day disordered, teaches Doctrines, and
uses Practices, which are in themselves, or in their true and immediate
Consequences, direct Impieties, and give warranty to a wicked Life.

SECT. 1.
Repentance according to the Romish Doctors, not of obligation as soon as we
sin, by Gods Law, but only before we die. The Church requiring it once a Year
at Easter is satisfied with a ritual repentance. The Objection answered, that
this is not the Doctrine of the Church, but the Opinion of some private
Doctors. Contrition with them not available without confession to a Priest; but
Attrition with it is. And one act of Contrition will make all sure.

OUR First instance is in their Doctrines of Repentance. For the Roman Doctors
teach, that unless it be by accident, or in respect of some other obligation, a
sinner is not bound presently to repent of his sin as soon as he has committed
it. Some time or other he must do it, and if he take care so to order his
affairs that it be not wholly omitted, but so that it be done one time or
other, he is not by the precept or grace of Repentance bound to do more. Scotus
and his Scholars say that a sinner is bound, viz. by the precept of the Church,
to repent on Holy days, especially the great ones. But this is thought too
severe by Soto and Medina, who teach that a sinner is bound to repent but once
a year, that is, against Easter. These Doctors indeed do differ concerning the
Churches sense; which according to the best of them is bad enough; full as bad
as it is stated in the charge: but they agree in the worst part of it, viz.
that though the Church calls upon sinners to repent on Holy days, or at Easter;
yet that by the Law of God they are not tied to so much, but only to repent in
the danger or article of death. This is the express Doctrine taught in the
Church of Rome by their famous Enchir. c l. n. 31.
Navar; and for this he quotes Pope Adrian and Cardinal Cajetan, and finally
affirms it to be the sense of all men. The same also is taught by Reginaldus,
saying, It is Praxis fori (...). l. 5. c. 2. sect. 4. n. 23.
true, and the opinion of all men, that the time in which a sinner is bound by
the commandment of God to be contrite for his sins, is the imminent article of
natural or violent death.

WE shall not need to aggravate this sad story by the addition of other words
to the same purpose in a worse degree; such as those words are of the same
Reginaldus. There is no precept that a sinner should not persevere in enmity
against God. There is no negative precept forbidding such a perseverance. These
are the words of this man, but the proper and necessary consequent of that
which they all teach, and to which they must consent. For since it is certain
that he who has sinned against God and his Conscience, is in a state of
enmity, we say he therefore ought to repent presently, because until he has
repented he is an enemy to God. This they confess, but they suppose it
concludes nothing; for though they consider and confess this, yet they still
saying, a man is not bound by God's Law to repent till the article of death, do
consequently say the same thing that Reginaldus does, and that a man is not
bound to come out of that state of enmity till he be in those circumstances
that it is very probable if he does not then come out, he must stay in it for
ever. It is something worse than this yet that Dom. a Soto in quart. sent.
did. 17. qu. 2. art. 6. concl. secunda.
Sotus says, [ even to resolve to defer our repentance, and to refuse to repent
for a certain time, is but a venial sin.] But Non est dubium quin id licitum
sit. Cod de poeniten. tract. l. q. 6. p. 18. edit. Salmantic. A. D. 1553.
Medina says it is none at all.

IF it be replied to this, that though God has left it to a sinners liberty to
repent when he please, yet the Church has been more severe than God has been,
and ties a sinner to repent, by collateral positive laws; for having bound
every one to confess at Easter, consequently she has tied every one to repent
at Easter, and so, by her laws, can lie in the sin without interruption but
twelve Months or thereabouts; yet there is a secret in this, which nevertheless
themselves have been pleased to discover for the ease of tender consciences,
viz. that the Church ordains but the means, the exterior solemnity of it, and
is satisfied if you obey her laws by a Ritual repentance, but the holiness and
the inward repentance, which in charity we should have supposed to have been
designed by the law of Festivals, Reginald. lib. de contrit c. 2. cap 5.
Non est id quod per proeceptum de observatione Festorum injungitur, is not
that which is enjoined by the Church in her law of Holy Days. So that still
sinners are left to the liberty which they say God gave; even to satisfy our
selves with all the remaining pleasures of that sin for a little while, even
during our short mortal life; only we must be sure to repent at last.

WE shall not trouble our selves or our charges with confuting this impious
Doctrine. For it is evident that this gives countenance and too much warranty
to a wicked life; and that of it self is confutation enough, and is that which
we intended to represent.

IF it be answered, that this is not the doctrine of their Church, but of some
private Doctors; we must tell you, that, if by the Doctrine of their Church
they mean such things only as are decreed in their Councils; it is to be
considered, that but few things are determined in their Councils; nothing but
articles of belief, and the practice of Sacraments relating to public order:
and if they will not be reproved for any thing but what we prove to be false in
the articles of their simple belief, they take a liberty to say and to do what
they list, and to corrupt all the World by their rules of conscience. But, that
this is also the Doctrie of their Church their own men tell us. Communis
omnium. It is the Doctrine of all their men; so they affirm, as we have cited
their own words above: who also undertake to tell us in what sense their Church
intends to tie sinners to actual repentance; not as soon as the sin is
committed, but at certain seasons, and then also to no more of it, than the
external and ritual part. So that if their Church be injuriously charged,
themselves have done it, not we. And besides all this: it is hard to suppose or
expect that the innumerable cases of conscience which a whole Trade of Lawyers
and Divines amongst them have made, can be entered into the records of Councils
and public decrees. In these cases we are to consider, who teaches them? Their
Gravest Doctors, in the face of the Sun, under the intuition of Authority in
the public conduct of souls, in their allowed Sermons, in their books licensed
by a curious and inquisitive authority, not passing from them but by warranty
from several hands entrusted to examine them, ne fides Ecclesioe aliquid
detrimenti patioetur; that nothing be published but what is consonant to the
Catholic faith. And therefore these things cannot be esteemed private opinions
Non illico ut bomo se reum sentit culp. e poenitentioe lege poenitcre
conslringitur. Hoec prosecto conclusio more and usu Ecclesioe satis videtur
constabilita. Dom. a Soto in quart sent, did. 17. qu. 2. art 6.
; especially, since if they be, yet they are the private opinions of them all,
and that we understand to be public enough: and are so their Doctrine, as what
the Scribes and Pharisees taught their Disciples, though the whole Church of
the Jews had not passed it into a law. So this is the Roman Doctrine; though
not the Roman law. Which difference we desire may be observed in many of the
following instances, that this objection may no more interpose for an escape,
or an excuse. But we shall have occasion again to speak to it, upon new
particulars.

BUT this, though it be infinitely intolerable, yet it is but the beginning of
sorrows. For the guides of Souls in the Roman Church have prevaricated in all
the parts of Repentance, most sadly and dangerously.

THE next things therefore that we shall remark are their Doctrines concerning
Contrition: which when it is genuine and true, that is, a true cordial sorrow
for having sinned against God; a sorrow proceeding from the love of God, and
conversion to him, and ending in a dereliction of all our sins, and a walking
in all righteousness, both the Psalms and the Prophets, the Old Testament and
the New, the Greek Fathers and the Latin have allowed as sufficient for the
pardon of our sins through faith in Jesus Christ (as our Writers have often
proved in their Sermons and books of Conscience) yet first, the Church of Rome
does not allow it to be of any value, unless it be joined with a desire to
confess their sins to a Priest; saying, that a man by contrition is not
reconciled to God, without their Sacramental or Ritual penance, actual or
votive; and this is decreed by the Council of Trent, which thing besides that
it is against Sessio. 4. c. 4.
Scripture, and the promises of the Gospel, and not only teaches for Doctrine
the Commandments of Men, but evacuates the goodness of God by their Traditions,
and weakens and discourages the best repentance, and prefers repentance toward
men, before that which the Scripture calls Repentance toward God, and faith in
our Lord Jesus Christ.

BUT the malignity of this Doctrine and its influence it has on an evil life
appears in the other corresponding part of this Docrine. For as Contrition
without their ritual and sacramental confession will not reconcile us to God:
so Attrition (as they call it) or contrition imperfect, proceeding from fear of
damnation, together with their Sacrament will reconcile the sinner. Contrition
without it will not: attrition with it, will reconcile us; and therefore by
this doctrine, which is expressly decreed at Trent, there is no necessity of
Contrition at all; and attrition is as good to all intents and purposes of
pardon: and a little repentance will prevail as well as the greatest, the
imperfect as well as the perfect. So Gulielmus In 4. sent. did. 18. q. 1.
de Rubeo explains this doctrine. He that confesses his sins, grieving but a
little, obtains remission of his sins by the Sacrament of Penance ministered to
him by the Priest absolving him. So that although God working Contrition in a
penitent, has not done his work for him without the Priests absolution, in
desire at least; yet if the Priest do his part, he has done the work for the
penitent, though God had not wrought that excellent grace of contrition in the
penitent.

BUT for the contrition it self; it is a good word, but of no severity or
affrightment by the Roman Doctrine: One contrition, Lib. 3. instruct. sacerdot.
c. 5. n. 4. Sum. qu. 16. art. 1.
one act of it, though but little and remiss, can blot out any, even the
greatest sin (always understanding it in the sense of the Church, that is in
the Sacrament of Penance) says Cardinal Tolet. A certain little inward grief
of mind is required to the perfection of Repentance, said Maldonat. And to
(...) a grief in general for all our sins is De contrit. number. 107. Quaecunque
intentio contra (...), in quocunque instanti sufficient ad consequendam
misericordiam and remissionem. Ib. n. 106.
sufficient; but it is not necessary to grieve for any one sin more than
another, said Franciscus de Victoria. The greatest sin and the smallest, as to
this, are all alike; and as for the Contrition it self, any intention or degree
whatsoever, in any instant whatsoever, is sufficient to obtain mercy and
remission, said the same Author.

NOW let this be added to the former, and the sequel is this, That if a man
live a wicked life for threescore or fourscore years together, yet if in the
article of his death, sooner than which God has not commanded him to repent,
he be a little sorrowful for his sins, then resolving for the present that he
will do so no more; and though this sorrow has in it no love of God, but only
a fear of Hell, and a hope that God will pardon him, this, if the Priest
absolves him, does instantly pass him into a state of salvation. The Priest
with two fingers and a thumb can do his work for him; only he must be greatly
disposed and prepared to receive it: Greatly, we say, according to the sense of
the Roman Church; for he must be attrite, or it were better if he were
contrite; one act of grief, a little one, and that not for one sin more than
another, and this at the end of a long wicked life, at the time of our death,
will make all sure.

UPON these terms, it is a wonder that all wicked men in the world are not
Papists; where they may live so merrily, and die so securely, and are out of
all danger, unless peradventure they die very suddenly, which because so very
few do, the venture is esteemed nothing, and it is a thousand to one on the
sinners side.

SECT. II.
Confession, as used in the Roman Church, a trifling business, whereby few are
frighted from sinning, but more made confident, and go on in sinning;
Confessing and sinning going in a round. Their Rules and Doctrines of
Confession, enjoin some things that are dangerous, and lead into temptation.

WE know it will be said, That the Roman Church enjoins Confession, and imposes
Penances, and these are a great restraint to sinners, and gather up what was
scattered before. The reply is easy, but it is very sad. For,

1. FOR Confession: It is true, to them who are not used to it, as it is at the
(...) time, and for that once it is as troublesome as for a bashful man to speak
Orations in public: But where it is so perpetual and universal, and done by
companies and crowds, at a solemn set time, and when it may be done to any one
besides the ParishPriest, to a Friar that begs, or to a Monk in his Dorter,
done in the ear, it may be, to a person that has done worse, and therefore
has no awe upon me, but what his Order imprints, and his Vitiousness takes
off; when we see Women and Boys, Princes and Prelates do the same every (...):
And as oftentimes they are never the better, so they are not at all ashamed;
but men look upon it as a certain cure, like pulling (...) a man's clothes to go
and wash in a river, and make it by use and habit, by considence and custom, to
be no certain pain, and the women blush or smile, weep or are unmoved, as it
happens under their veil, and the men under the boldness of their Sex: When we
see that men and women confess to day, and sin to morrow, and are not (...)
from their sin the more for it; because they know the worst of it, and have
felt it often, and believe to be eased by it, certain it is that a little
reason, and a little observation will suffice to conclude, that this practice
of Confession has in it no affrightment, not so much as the horror of the sin
it self has to the Conscience. For they who commit sins confidently, will with
less regret (it may be) confess it in this manner, where it is the fashion for
every one to do it. And when all the world observes how loosly the Italians,
Spaniards and French do live in their Carnivals, giving to themselves all
liberty and license to do the vilest things at that time, not only because they
are for a while to take their leave of them, but because they are (as they
suppose) to be so soon eased of their crimes by Confession, and the circular
and never-failing hand of the Priest; they will have no reason to admire the
severity of Confession, which as it (...) most certainly intended as a deletory
of sin, and might do its first intention, if it were equally managed; so now
certainly it gives confidence to many men to sin, and to most men to neglect
the greater and more effective parts of (...) repentance.

WE shall not need to observe how Confession is made a Minister of State, a
Picklock of secrets, a Spy upon families, a Searcher of inclinations, a
Betraying to temptations; for this is wholly by the sault of the Men, and not
of the Doctrine; but even the Doctrine it self, as it is handled in the Church
of Rome, is so far from bringing peace to the troubled Consciences, that it
intromits more scruples and cases than it can resolve.

FOR besides, that it self is a question, and they have made it dangerous by
pretending that it is by Divine Right and Institution, (for so some of the
Schoolmen Vid. Biel. l. 4. did. 17. q. 1. and Scotum ib. and Bonavent. ib. n.
72.
teach, and the Canonists say the contrary, Melius dicitur came institutam
fuisse a quadam universali Ecclesiae traditione, quam ex novi vel veteris
Tostamenti authoritate, and tamen negatur baec traditio esse universalis.
Confessio non est necessaria apud Graecos, quia non emanavit ad illos
traditionaliter. De poenit. did. 5. in principio Gloss. ib. Vide etiam
Panormitan, super (...) J. 5. cap. Quod autem c. Omnis utriusque sexus, sect.
18. extrav. Gloss. Maldonatus fatetur omnes Canonistas in banc sententiam
consensisse. Disp. de Saer. tom. 2. c. (...). de confess. orig.
and that it is only of humane and positive Constitution) and by this
difference in so great a point, have made the whole Economy of their
repentance, which relies upon the supposed necessity of Confession, to fail, or
to shake vehemently, and at the best, to be a foundation too uncertain to build
the hopes of salvation on it; besides all this, we say, Their Rules and
Doctrines of Confession, enjoin some things that are of themselves dangerous,
and lead into temptation. An instance of this is in that which is decreed in
the Canons Sess. 4. can. 7.
of Trent, that the Penitent must not only confess every mortal sin which after
diligent inquiry he remembers, but even his very sinful thoughts in particular,
and his (...) desires, and every circumstance which changes the kind of the
sin, or (as some add) does notably increase it: and how this can be safely
done, and who is sufficient for these things, and who can tell his
circumstances without tempting his Confessor, or betraying, and defaming
another person, (which is forbidden) and in what cases it may be done, or in
what cases omitted; and whether the confession be (...) upon infinite other
considerations, and whether it be to be repeated in whole or in part, and how
often, and how much? these things are so uncertain, casual and contingent, and
so many cases are multiplied upon every one of these, and these so disputed and
argued by their greatest Doctors, by Thomas, and Scotus, and all the Schoolmen,
and by the Casuists, that as Beat us Rhenanus complains, it was truly observed
by the famous John Geilerius, that according to their cases, enquiries and
conclusions, it is impossible for any man to make a right Confession. So that
although the shame of private Confession be very tolerable and easy, yet the
cases and scruples which they have introduced, are neither easy nor tolerable,
and though (as it is now used) there be but little in it, to restrain sin, yet
there is very much danger of increasing it, and of receiving no benefit by it.

SECT. III.
Penances in the Roman Church very ineffectual: how they differ from the
ancient Canonical ones. Indulgences will relieve him that thinks his enjoined
penances too severe. What vast stores of Pardons that Church boasts of, and
upon what easy terms granted. They serve themselves by them, but do not serve
God. An account, why so many thousand years of pardon need be granted. A holy
life seems only necessary for him that has neither friends nor money.

BUT then for Penances and Satisfactions of which they boast so much, as being
so great restraints to sin, these as they are publicly handled, are nothing
but words and ineffective sounds. For, first, if we consider what the Penances
themselves are which are enjoined; they are reduced from the ancient Canonical
Penances to private and arbitrary, from years to hours, from great severity to
gentleness and slattery, from fasting and public shame to the saying over
their Beads, from Cordial to ritual, from smart to money, from heartiness and
earnest to pageantry and theatrical Images of Penance; and if some Confessors
happen to be severe, there are ways enough to be eased. For the Penitent may
have leave to go to a gentler, or he may get Commutations, or he may get
somebody else Eman. Sa. V. (...). n. 10. Tol. l. 3. inslr. saccrd. cap. 11. n.
6.
to do them for him: and if his Penances be never so great, or never so little,
yet it may be all supplied by Indulgences; of which there are such store in the
Lateran at Rome, that as Pope Boniface said, No man is able to number them; yet
he confirmed them all.

IN the Church of Sancta Maria de Popolo there are for every day in the year
two thousand and eight hundred years of pardon, besides fourteen thousand and
fourteen Carentanes; which in one year amount to more than a Million: all which
are confirmed by the Pope Paschal I. Boniface VIII. and Gregory IX. In the
Church of S. Vitus and Modestus there are for every day in the year seven
thousand years and seven thousand Carentanes of pardon, and a pardon of a third
part of all our sins besides; and the price of all this is but praying before
an Altar in that Church. At the Sepulcher of Christ in Venice there is hung up
a prayer of S. Augustine, with an Indulgence of fourscore and two thousand
years, granted by Boniface the VIII. (who was of all the Popes the most
bountiful of the Churches treasure) and Benedict the XI. to him that shall say
it, and that for every day toties quoties. The Divine pardon of Sica gave a
plenary Indulgence to every one that being confessed and communicated should
pray there in the Franciscan Church of Sancta Maria de gli Angeli, and this
pardon is ab omni poena and culpa. The English of that we easily understand,
but the meaning of it we do not, because they will not own that these
Indulgences do profit any one whose guilt is not taken away by the Sacrament of
Penance. But this is not the only snare in which they have inextricably
entangled themselves: but be it as they please for this; whatever it was, it
was since enlarged by Sixtus IV. and Sixtus V. to all that shall wear S.
Francis's Cord. The saying a few Pater nosters and Ave's before a privileged
Altar can in innumerable places procure vast portions of this Treasure; and to
deliver a soul out of Purgatory, whom they list, is promised to many upon easy
terms, even to the saying of their Beads over with an appendent Medal of the
Pope's benediction. Every Priest at his third or fourth Mass is as sure (as may
be) to deliver the souls of his Parents: And a thousand more such stories as
these are to be seen every where and every day.

ONCE for all: There was a book printed at Paris by Francis Regnault, A. D.
1536. May 25. called The hours of the most blessed Virgin Mary, according to
the use of Sarum; in which for the saying three short prayers written in Rome
in a place called The Chapel of the holy Cross of seven Romans, are promised
fourscore and ten thousand years of pardon of deadly sin. Now the meaning of
these things is very plain. By these devices they serve themselves, and they do
not Tolct instr. sacerd. lib. 3. cap. 11. n. 6.
serve God. They serve themselves by this Doctrine: For they teach that what
Penance is ordinarily imposed, does not take away all the punishment that is
due; for they do not impose what was anciently enjoined by the Penitential
Canons, but some little thing instead of it: and it may be, that what was
anciently enjoined by the Penitential Canons, is not so much as God will exact,
(for they suppose that he will forgive nothing but the guilt and the eternity;
but he will exact all that can be demanded on this side Hell, even to the last
farthing he must be paid some way or other, even when the guilt is taken away)
but therefore to prevent any failing that way, they have given Indulgences
enough to take off what was due by the old Canons, and what may be due by the
severity of God; and if these fail, they may have recourse to the Priests, and
they by their Masses can make supply: so that their Disciples are well, and the
want of ancient Discipline shall do them no hurt.

BUT then how little they serve God's end by treating the sinner so gently,
will be very evident. For by this means they have found out a way, that though
it may be God will be more severe than the old Penitential Canons; and although
these Canons were much more severe than men are now willing to suffer, yet
neither for the one or the other shall they need to be troubled: they have
found out an easier way to go to Heaven than so. An Indulgence will be no great
charge, but that will take off all the supernumerary Penances which ought to
have been imposed by the ancient Discipline of the Church, and may be required
by God. A little alms to a Priest, a small oblation to a Church, a pilgrimage
to the image or relics of a Saint, wearing St. Francis's Cord, saying over
the Beads with an hallowed Appendent, entering into a Fraternity, praying at a
priviledg'd Altar, leaving a Legacy for a Soul-Mass, visiting a priviledg'd
Cemetery, and twenty other devices will secure the sinner from suffering
punishment here or hereafter, more than his friendly Priest is pleased gently
to impose.

To them that ask, what should any one need to get so many hundred thousand
years of pardon, as are ready to be had upon very (...) terms? They answer as
before; That whereas it may be for Perjury the ancient Canons enjoined Penance
all their life Vidc Council. (...). c 54. Burchard l. 19. Tertul. lib. de (...).
; that will be supposed to be twenty or forty years, or suppose an hundred; if
the man have been perjured a thousand times, and committed adultery so often,
and done innumerable other sins, for every one of which he deserves to suffer
forty years penance, and how much more in the account of God he deserves, he
knows not; if he be attrite, and confessed so that the guilt is taken away, yet
as much temporal punishment remains due as is not paid here: but the
Indulgences of the Church will take off so much as it comes to, even of all
that would be suffered in Purgatory. Now it is true, that Purgatory (at least
as is believed) cannot last a hundred thousand years; but yet God may by the
acerbity of the flames in twenty years equal the Canonical Penances of twenty
thousand years: to prevent which, these Indulgences of so many thousand years
are devised. A wise and thrifty Invention sure, and well contrived, and rightly
applotted according to every man's need, and according as they suspect his Bill
shall amount to.

THIS strange Invention, as strange as it is, will be owned, for this is the
account of it which we find in Bellarmine: and although De Indulgen l. 1. c. 9
sect. Existit (...).
Gerson and Dominicus a Soto are ashamed of these prodigious Indulgences, and
suppose that the Pope's Quaestuaries did procure them, yet it must not be so
disowned; truth is truth, and it is notoriously so; and therefore a reason must
be found out for it, and this is it which we have accounted. But the use we
make of it is this; That since they have declared, that when sins are pardoned
so easily, yet the punishment remains so very great, and that so much must be
suffered here or in Purgatory; it is strange that they should not only in
effect pretend to show more mercy than God does, or the primitive Church did;
but that they should directly lay aside the primitive Discipline, and while
they declaim against their Adversaries for saying they are not necessary, yet
at the same time they should devise tricks to take them quite away, so that
neither Penances shall much smart here, nor Purgatory (which is a device to
make men be Mulata's, as the Spaniard calls, half Christians, a device to make
a man go to Heaven and to Hell too) shall not torment them hereafter. However
it be, yet things are so ordered, that the noise of Penances need not trouble
the greatest Criminal, unless he be so unfortunate as to live in no Country
and near no Church, and without Priest, or friend, or money, or notice of any
thing that is so loudly talked of in Christendom. If he be, he has no help but
one; he must live a holy and a severe life, which is the only great calamity
which they are commanded to suffer in the Church of England: but if he be not,
the case is plain, he may by these Doctrines take his ease.

SECT. IV.
The Roman Doctors themselves know how to spoil the hopes from these large
grants of Indulgences, if any should fancy that Purgatory would quickly be
emptied, and no need to continue Pensions for those that died many Years since.
Though a plenary or full Indulgence (one would think) should make all sure, yet
no such matter; for there is a more full and a most full indulgence. Other
things that, they say, may evacuate Indulgences, so that they lose their force:
therefore they advise to employ the Priest, and to multiply Masses. Cardinal
Albernotius his care, by his last Will, to have fifty thousand Masses said for
his Soul.

WE doubt not but they who understand the proper sequel of these things, will
not wonder that the Church of Rome should have a numerous company of
Proselytes, made up of such as the beginings of David's Army were. But that we
may undeceive them also, for to their souls we intend charity and relief by
this Address, we have thought fit to add one Consideration more, and that is,
That it is not fit that they should trust to this, or any thing of this, not
only because there is no foundation of truth in these new devices, but because
even the Roman Doctors themselves, when they are pinched with an Objection, let
their hold go, and to escape, do in remarkable measures destroy their own new
building.

THE case is this: To them who say, that if there were truth in these
pretensions, then all these, and the many millions of Indulgences more, and the
many other ways of releasing souls out of Purgatory, the innumerable Masses
said every day, the power of the Keys so largely employed, would in a short
time have emptied Purgatory of all her sad inhabitants, or it may be very few
would go thither, and they that unfortunately do, cannot stay long; and
consequently, besides that this great softness and easiness of procedure would
give confidence to the greatest sinners, and the hopes of Purgatory would
destroy the fears of Hell, and the certainty of doing well enough in an
imperfect life, would make men careless of the more excellent: besides these
things, there will need no continuation of Pensions to pray for persons dead
many years ago: To them, I say, who talk to them at this rate, they have enough
to answer.

DECEIVE not your selves, there are more things to be reckoned for than so. For
when you have deserved great punishments for great sins, and the Guilt is taken
off by Absolution, and (you suppose) the Punishment by Indulgences or the
Satisfaction of others; it may be so, and it may be not so.

FOR 1. it is according as your Indulgence is. Suppose it for forty years, or
it may be an hundred, or a thousand, (and that is a great matter) yet
peradventure according to the old penitential rate you have deserved the
Penance of forty thousand years; or at least you may have done so by the more
severe account of God: If the Penance of forty years be taken off by your
Indulgence, it does as much of the work as was promised or intended; but you
can feel little ease, if still there remains due the Penance of threescore
thousand years. No man can tell the difference when what remains shall be so
great as to surmount all the evils of this life; and the abatement may be
accounted by pen and ink, but will signify little in the perception: it is
like the casting out of a Devil out of a miserable Demoniack, when there still
remains fifty more as bad as he that went away; the man will hardly find how
much he is advanced in his cure. BUT 2. you have with much labor and some
charge purchased to your self so many Quadragenes or Lents of pardon; that is,
you have bought off the Penances of so many times forty days. It is well; but
were you well advised? it may be your Quadragenes are not Carenes, that is, are
not a quitting the severest Penances of fasting so long in bread and water: for
there is great difference in the manner of keeping a penitential Lent, and it
may be you have purchased but some lighter thing; and then if your demerit
arise to so many Carenes, and you purchased but mere Quadragenes, without a
minute and table of particulars, you may stay longer in Purgatory than you
expected. 3. BUT therefore your best way is to get a plenary Indulgence; and
that may be had on reasonable terms: but take heed you do not think your self
secure, for a plenary Indulgence does not do all that it may be you require;
for there is an Indulgence more full, and another most full, and it is not Vide
Joan. de Turrecremata in comment. did. 1. de paenitent.
agreed upon among the Doctors whether a plenary Indulgence is to be extended
beyond the taking off those Penances which were actually enjoined by the
Confessor, or how far they go further. And they that read Turrecremata, Navar,
Cordubensis, Fabius Incarnatus, Petrus de Soto, Armilla aurea, Aquinas, Tolet,
Cajetan, in their several accounts of Indulgences, will soon perceive that all
this is but a handful of Smoke, when you hold it, you hold it not. 4. BUT
further yet; all Indulgences are granted upon some inducement, and are not ex
mero motu, or acts of mere grace without cause; and if the cause be not
reasonable, they are invalid: and whether the cause be sufficient will be very
hard to judge. And if there be for the Indulgence, yet if there be not a
reasonable cause for the quantity of the Indulgence, you cannot tell how much
you get: and the Preachers of Indulgences ought not to declare how valid they
are assertive, that is, by any confidence; but opinative or recitative, they
can only tell what is said, or what is their own opinion. 5. WHEN this
difficulty is passed over, yet it may be the person is not capable of them; for
if he be not in the state of Grace all is nothing; and if he be, yet if he does
not perform the condition of the Indulgence actually, his mere endeavor or
good desire is nothing. And when the conditions are actually done, it must be
enquired whether in the time of doing them you were in charity; whether you be
so at least in the last day of finishing them: it is good to be certain in
this, lest all evaporate and come to nothing. But yet suppose this too, though
the work you are to do as the condition of the Indulgence, be done so well that
you lose not all the Indulgence, yet for every degree of Imperfection in that
work you will lose a part of the Indulgence, and then it will be hard to tell
whether you get half so much as you propounded to your self. (...). Council
Tridcnt l. 1. page 20. Londin. edit.
But here Pope Adrian troubles the whole affair again: for if the Indulgence be
only given according to the worthiness of the work done, then that will avail
of it self without any Grant from the Church; and then it is hugely
questionable whether the Popes Authority be of any use in this whole matter. 6.
BUT there is yet a greater heap of dangers and uncertainties; for you must be
sure of the Authority of him that gives the Indulgence, and in this there are
many doubtful Questions; but when they are over, yet it is worth enquiry, (for
some Doctors are fearful in this point) whether the intromission of Venial
sins, without which no man lives, does hinder the fruit of the Indulgence; for
if it does, all the cost is lost. 7. WHEN an Indulgence is given, put case to
abide forty days on certain conditions, whether these forty days are to be
taken collectively or distributively; for, because it is confessed that the
matter of Indulgences is res odibilis, an hateful and an Fab. Incarnat. scrut.
(...). de Indulgent.
odious matter, it is not to be understood in the sense of favor, but of
greatest severity; and therefore it is good to know beforehand what to trust
to, to inquire how the Bull is penned, and what sense of Law every word does
bear; for it may be any good man's case. If an Indulgence be granted to a place
for so many days in every year, it were sit you inquire for how many years that
will last; for some Doctors say, That if a definite number of years be not set
down, it is intended to last but twenty years. And therefore it is good to be
wise early. 8. BUT it is yet of greater consideration: If you take out a Bull
of Indulgence, relating to the Article of death, in case you recover that
sickness in which you thought you should use it, you must consider, whether you
must not take out a new one for the next fit of sickness; or will the first,
which stood for nothing, keep cold, and without any sensible error serve when
you shall indeed die? 9. You must also enquire and be rightly informed, whether
an Indulgence granted upon a certain Festival will be valid if the day be
changed, (as they were all at once by the Gregorian Calendar) or if you go into
another Country where the Feast is not kept the same day, as it happens in
moveable Feasts, and on S. Bartholomew's-day, and some others. 10. WHEN your
Lawyers have told you their opinion of all these Questions, and given it under
their hands, it will concern you to inquire yet further, whether a succeeding
Pope have not or cannot revoke an Indulgence granted by his Predecessor; for
(...) gravam. Germ. Idem facere voluit Paulus quintus in Venetorum (...).
this is often done in matters of favor and privileges; and the German Princes
complained sadly of it, and it was complained in the Council of Lions, that
Martin the Legate of Pope Innocent the VIII. revoked and dissipated all former
Grants: and it is an old Rule, Papa nunquam sibi lig at manus, The Pope never
binds his own hands. But here some caution would do well. 11. IT is worthy
inquiry, whether in the year of Jubilee all other Indulgences be suspended; for
though some think they are not, yet Navar and Emanuel Sa affirm that they are;
and if they chance to say true, (for no man knows whether they do or no) you
may be at a loss that way. And when all this is done, yet 12. YOUR Indulgences
will be of no avail to you in reserved cases, which are very many. A great many
more very fine scruples might be moved, and are so; and therefore when you have
gotten all the security you can by these, you are not safe at all. But
therefore be sure still to get Masses to be said.
So that now the great Objection is answered; you need not fear that saying
Masses will ever be made unnecessary by the multitude of Indulgences: The
Priest must still be employed and entertained in subsidium, since there are so
many ways of making the Indulgence good for nothing: And as for the fear of
emptying Purgatory by the free and liberal use of the Keys, it is very
needless; because the Pope cannot evacuate (...). de indulgent. sect. (...).
edit. Barcinon. 1628.
Purgatory, or give so many Indulgences as to take out all souls from thence:
And therefore if the Popes, and the Bishops, and the Legates, have been already
too free, it may be there is so much in arrear, that the Treasure of the Church
is spent, or the Church is in debt for souls; or else, though the Treasure be
inexhaustible, yet so much of her Treasure ought not to be made use of, and
therefore it may be that your souls shall be polt-pon'd, and must stay and take
its turn God knows when. And therefore we cannot but commend the prudence of
Apud Gen Sepulvedam in vita Egidii Albernotii Cardinal.
Cardinal Albernotius, who by his last Will took order for fifty thousand
Masses to be said for his soul; for he was a wise man, and loved to make all as
sure as he could.

SECT. V.
Ensie to conclude that all is an Art to get money, and deceive men's souls, to
tempt a man to negloct himself when he hopes to be relieved by many others. How
good Life is undermined by their Doctrines relating to Indulgences in 3 or 4
remarkable instances. Their Doctrine dangerous in all the parts of Repontance.
Contrition, Confession, Satisfactions and Penances, all spoiled as they teach
them. The (...) scandal of the Tax of the Apostolical chamber, where a License
is given to many sins, and for such (...) sum an Absolution from the greatest.

BUT then to apply this to the Consciences of the poor people of the Roman
Communion. Here is a great deal of Treasure of the Church pretended, and a
great many favors granted, and much ease promised, and the wealth of the
Church boasted of, and the peoples money gotten; and that this may be a
perpetual spring, it is clear amongst their own Writers, that you are not sure
of any good by all that is past, but you must get more security, or this may be
nothing. But how easy were it for you now to conclude, that all this is but a
mere cozenage, an art to get money? but that is but the least of the evil, it is
a certain way to deceive souls. For since there are so many thousands that
trust to these things, and yet in the confession of your own Writers there are
so many sallibilities in the whole, and in every part, why will you suffer your
selves so weakly and vainly to be cozened out of your souls with promises that
signify nothing, and words without virtue, and treasures that make no man
rich, and Indulgences that give confidence to sin, but no ease to the pains
which follow?

BESIDES all this, it is very considerable, that this whole affair is a state
of temptation; for they that have so many ways to escape, will not be so
careful of the main stake, as the interest of it requires. He that hopes to be
relieved by many others, will be tempted to neglect himself: There is an (...),
an Unum necessarium, even that we work out our own salvation with fear and
trembling. A little wisdom, and an easy observation were enough to make allmen
that love themselves, wisely to abstain from such diet which does not nourish,
but fills the stomach with wind and imagination. But to return to the main
inquiry:

WE desire that it be considered, how dangerously good life is undermined, by
the Propositions collaterally taught by their Great Doctors, in this matter of
Indulgences; besides the main and direct danger and deception.

1. Venial sins preceding or following the work enjoined for getting
Indulgences, hinder not their fruit: but if they intervene in the time of doing
them, than they hinder. By Fab. Incar. ubi supra.
this Proposition there is infinite uncertainty concerning the value of any
Indulgence: for if venial sins be daily incursions, who can say that he is one
day clean from them? And if he be not, he has paid his price for that which
profits not, and he is made to rely upon that which will not support him. But
though this being taught, does evacuate the Indulgence, yet it is not taught to
prevent the sin; for before and after, if you commit venial sins, there is no
great matter in it: The inconvenience is not great, and the remedy is easy;
you are told of your security as to this point beforehand.

2. POPE Adrian taught a worse matter. He that will obtain indulgence for
another, if Apud Petrum de Soto lect. de instit. (...). de necessariis ad
effectum indul.
he does perform the work enjoined, though himself be in deadly sin, yet for
the other he prevails: as if a man could do more for another than he can do for
himself; or as if God would regard the prayers of a vile and a wicked person
when he intercedes for another, and at the same time, if he prays for himself,
his prayer is an abomination. God first is entreated for our selves, and when
we are more excellent persons, admits us to intercede, and we shall prevail for
others; but that a wicked person who is under actual guilt, and obliged himself
to suffer all punishment, can ease and take off the punishment due to others by
any externally good work done ungratiously, is a piece of new Divinity without
color of reason or religion. Others in this are something less scandalous; and
affirm, that though it be not necessary that when the Indulgence is granted,
the man should be in the state of grace, yet it is necessary that at some time
or other he should be; at any time (it seems) it will serve. For thus they turn
Divinity and the care of souls into Mathematics and Clock-work, and dispute
minutes and periods with God, and are careful to tell their people how much
liberty they may take, and how far they may venture, lest they should lose any
thing of their sins pleasure, which they can possibly enjoy, and yet have hopes
of being saved at last.

3. BUT there is worse yet. If a man willingly commits a sin in hope and
expectation of a Jubilee, and of the Indulgences afterward to be granted, he
does not lose the Indulgence, but shall receive it: which is expressly affirmed
by Navar In (...). de jubilaeo notab. 34. n 4. and 6.
and Antonius Cordubensis Qu 37. de indulg. prop. 3.
, and Bellarmine Lib. 1. de indulg. c. 10. Sect. Alter a dubitatio.
, though he asks the question, denies it not. By which it is evident that the
Roman Doctrines and Divinity teach contrary to God's way; who is most of all
angry with them that turn his grace into wantonness, and sin, that grace may
abound.

4. IF any man by reason of poverty, cannot give the prescribed Alms, he cannot
Scrutin. Saccrd. ubi supra.
receive the Indulgence. Now since it is sufficiently known, that in all or
most of the Indulgences a clause is sure to be included, that something be
offered to the Church, to the Altar, to a Religious House, etc. The consequent
of this will be soon seen, that Indulgences are made for the rich, and the
Treasures of the Church are to be dispensed to them that have Treasures of
their own, for Habenti dabitur. But then God help the poor; for them Purgatory
is prepared, and they must burn: For the rich it is pretended, but the smell of
fire will not pass upon them.

FROM these premises we suppose it but too evident, that the Roman Doctors
prevaricate in the whole Doctrine of Repentance, which indeed in Christ Jesus
is the whole Economy of Justification and Salvation; it is the hopes and staff
of all the world, the remedy of all evils past, present, and to come. And if
our physic be poisoned, if our staff be broken, if our hopes make us ashamed,
how shall we appear before Christ at his coming? But we say, that in all the
parts of it their Doctrine is insinitely dangerous.

1. Contrition is sufficient if it be but one little act, and that in the very
Article of Death; and before that time it is not necessary by the Law of God,
nay it is indeed sufficient; but it is also insufficient, for without
Confession in act or desire it suffices not. And though it be thus
insufficiently sufficient, yet it is not necessary: For Attrition is also
sufficient, if a Priest can be had, and then any little grief proceeding out of
the fear of Hell will do it, if the Priest do but absolve.

2. Confession might be made of excellent use, and is so among the pious
Children of the Church of England; but by the Doctrines and Practices in the
Church of Rome it is made, not the remedy of sins by proper energy, but the
excuse, the alleviation, the considence, the ritual, external and sacramental
remedy, and serves instead of the labors of a holy and a regular life; and yet
is so entangled with innumerable and inextricable cases of conscience, orders,
humane prescripts, and great and little artifices, that scruples are more
increased than sins are lessened.

3. FOR Satisfactions and Penances, which, if they were rightly ordered, and
made instrumental to kill the desires of sin, or to punish the Criminal, or
were properly the fruits of repentance, that is, parts of a holy life, good
works done in charity, and the habitual permanent grace of God, were so
prevailing, as they do the work of God; yet when they are taken away, not only
by the declension of primitive Discipline, but by new Doctrines and
Indulgences, regular and offered Commutations for money, and superstitious
practices, which are sins themselves, and increase the numbers and weights of
the account, there is a great way made for the destruction of souls, and the
discountenancing the necessity of holy life; but nothing for the advantage of
holiness, or the becoming like to God.

AND now at last for a Cover to this Dish, we have thought fit to mind the
World, and to give caution to all that mean to live godly in Christ Jesus, to
what an insinite scandal and impiety this affair has risen in the Church of
Rome, we mean in the instance of their Taxa Camerae, seu Cancellariae
Apostolicae, the Tax of the Apostolical Chamber or Chancery; a book publicly
printed, and exposed to common sale; of which their own Espencaeus gives this
account, Digres. 2. ad cap 1. epist. ad Titum.
That it is a book in which a man may learn more wickedness, than in all the
Summaries of vices published in the World: And yet to them that will pay for
it, there is to many given a License, to all an Absolution for the greatest and
most horrid sins. There is a price set down for his Absolution that has killed
his Father or his Mother, Brother, Sister, or Wife, or that has lien with his
Sister or his Mother. We desire all good Christians to excuse us for naming
such horrid things;

Nomina sunt ipso pene timenda sono.
But the Licenses are printed at Paris in the year 1500. by Tossan Denis. Pope
Innocent the VIII. either was Author or Inlarger of these Rules of this
Chancery-tax, and there are Glosses upon them, in which the Scholiast himself
who made them, affirms, that he must for that time conceal some things to avoid
scandal. But how far this impiety proceeded, and how little regard there is in
it to piety, or the good of souls, is visible by that which Augustinus de
Ancona teaches, [ That the Pope ought not to give Indulgences De potest. Papae
q 3. ad. 3.
to them who have a desire of giving money, but cannot as to them who actually
give. And whereas it may be objected, that then poor men's souls are in a worse
condition than the rich; he answers, That as to the remission of the punishment
acquired by the Indulgence, in such a case it is not inconvenient that the rich
should be in a better condition than the poor.] For in that manner do they
imitate God, who is no respecter of persons.

SECT. VI.
Other Instances of dangerous Doctrines: as, That one man may satisfy for
another. That a habit of sin, is not a sin distinct from those actions by which
it was contracted. Mischief of this doctrine showed. The distinction of Mortal
and venial sins. In what senso to be understood and admitted. With them, one
whole sort of sins is venial in its own nature, and a whole heap of them cannot
make a mortal sin, nor put us out of God's favor. But when the Casuists differ
so much in determining whether this or that be a venial or mortal sin; if the
Confessor says it is venial, and it proves to be a mortal one, a man's soul is
betrayed.

THESE Observations we conceive to be sufficient to deter every well meaning
person from running into, or abiding in such temptations. Every false
Proposition that leads to impiety, is a stock and fountain of temptations; and
these which we have reckoned in the matter of Repentance, having influence upon
the whole life, are yet much greater, by corrupting the whole mass of Wisdom
and Spiritual Propositions.

THERE are indeed many others. We shall name some of them, but shall not need
much to insist on them. Such as are,

1. THAT one Man may satisfy for another Sa aphor. verb. satisfa. number. 10.
Serutin. Sacerd. tract. de Indulg. sect. penult. Suarcz. part. 4. in 3. disp.
38. sect. 9.
. It is the general Doctrine of their Church: The Divines and Lawyers consent
in it, and publicly own it: The effect of which is this, that some are made
rich by it, and some are careless; But qui non solvit in aere, luat in corpore,
is a Canonical rule; and though it was spoken in the matter of public
penances, and so relates to the exterior Court, yet it is also practiced and
avowed in satisfactions or penances relating to the inward Court of Conscience,
and penance Sacramental; and the rich man is made negligent in his duty, and is
whipped upon another man's back, and his purse only is the Penitent; and which
is worst of all, here is a pretense of doing that, which is too near blasphemy
but to say. For by this Doctrine, it is not to be said of Christ alone, that he
was wounded for our transgressions, that he only satisfied for our sins; for in
the Church of Rome it is done frequently, and pretended daily, that by another
man's stripes we are healed.

2. THEY teach, That a habit of sin, is not a sin, distinct from those former
actions by which the habit was contracted. The secret intention of which
Proposition, and the malignity of it, consists in this, that it is not
necessary for a man to repent speedily; and a man is not bound by repentance to
interrupt the procedure of his impiety, or to repent of his habit, but of the
single acts that went before it. For as for those that come after, they are
excused, if they be produced by a strong habit; and the greater the habit the
less is the sin: But then as the repentance need not for that reason, be hasty
and presently; so because it is only to be of single acts, the repentance it
self need not be habitual, but it may be done in an instant; whereas to
mortify a habit of sin (which is the true and proper repentance) there is
required a longer time, and a procedure in the methods of a holy life. By this,
and such like Propositions, and careless Sentences, they have brought it to
that pass, that they reckon a single act of Contrition, at any time to be
sufficient to take away the wickedness of a long life.

Now that this is the avowed Granat. in materia de peccatis tract. 8. desp. 1.
sect. 1. F. Knot against Chillingworth in his Infidelity unmasked, p. 105, 106,
107. etc.
Doctrine of the Roman Guides of souls, will sufficiently appear in the
Writings of their chiefest, of which no learned man can be ignorant. The thing
was of late openly and professedly disputed against us, and will not be denied.
And that this Doctrine is infinitely destructive of the necessity of a good
life, cannot be doubted of, when themselves do own the proper consequents of
it, even the unnecessariness of present repentance, or before the danger of
death; of which we have already given accounts. But the reason why we remark it
here, is that which we now mentioned, because that by the Doctrine of vicious
habits, having in them no malignity or sin but what is in the single preceding
acts, there is an excuse made for millions of sins: For if by an evil habit the
sinner is not made worse, and more hated by God, and his sinful acts made not
only more, but more criminal; it will follow, that the sins are very much
lessened: For they being not so voluntary in their exercise and distinct
emanation, are not in present so malicious; and therefore he that has gotten a
habit of drunkenness or swearing, sins less in every act of drunkenness, or
profane oath, than hethat acts them seldom, because by his habit he is more
inclined, and his sins are almost natural, and less considered, less chosen,
and not disputed against; but pass by inadvertency, and an untroubled consent,
easily and promptly, and almost naturally from that principle: So that by this
means, and in such cases when things are come to this pass, they have gotten an
imperfect warrant to sin a great deal, and a great while, without any new great
inconvenience: Which evil state of things ought to be infinitely avoided by all
Christians that would be saved by all means; and therefore all such Teachers,
and all such Doctrines are carefully to be declined, who give so much easiness,
not only to the remedies, but to the sins themselves. But of this, we hope it
may be sufficient to have given this short warning.

3. THE distinction of Mortal and Venial sins, as it is taught in the Church of
Rome, is a great cause of wickedness, and careless conversation. For although
we do with all the ancient Doctors admit of the distinction of sins Mortal and
Venial; yet we also teach, That in their own nature, and in the rigor of the
Divine Justice, every sin is damnable, and deserves God's anger, and that in
the unregenerate they are so accounted, and that in Hell the damned suffer for
small and great in a common mass of torment; yet by the Divine mercy and
compassion, the smaller sins which come by surprise, or by invincible
ignorance, or inadvertency, or unavoidable infirmity, shall not be imputed to
those who love God, and delight not in the smallest sin, but use caution and
prayers, watchfulness and remedies against them. But if any man delights in
small sins, and heaps them into numbers, and by deliberation or licentiousness
they grow numerous, or are in any sense chosen, or taken in by contempt of the
Divine Law, they do put us from the favor of God, and will pass into severe
accounts. And though sins are greater or less by comparison to each other, yet
the smallest is a burden too great for us, without the allowances of the
Divine mercy.

BUT the Church of Rome teaches, that there is a whole kind of sins, which are
venial in their own nature; such, which if they were all together, all in the
world conjoined, could not equal one mortal sin Bellar. l. 1. de amiss.
gratiae, c. 13. sect. alterum est. Et de Sacram. Euc. l. 4. c. 19. sect.
respondeo.
, nor destroy charity, nor put us from the favor of God; such for which no man
can perish, Cap. 14. sect. add postremo. De Purgator. l. 1. c. 11. sect.
probatur ultimo.
etiamsi nullum pactum esset de remissione, though God's merciful Covenant of
Pardon did not intervene. And whereas Christ said, Of every idle word a man
shall speak, he shall give account at the day of judgment; and, By your words
ye shall be justified; and, By your words ye shall be condemned: Bellarmine
expressly affirms, It is not intelligible, how an idle word should in its own
nature be worthy of the Eternal wrath of God and Eternal flames. Many other
desperate words are spoken by the Roman Doctors in this Question, which we love
not to aggravate, because the main thing is acknowledged by them all.

BUT now we appeal to the reason and Consciences of all men, Whether this
Doctrine of sins Venial in their own nature, be not greatly destructive to a
holy life? When it is plain, that they give rest to men's Consciences for one
whole kind of sins; for such, which because they occur every day, in a very
short time (if they be not interrupted by the grace of Repentance) will swell
to a prodigious heap. But concerning these we are bidden to be quiet; for we
are told, that all the heaps of these in the world cannot put us out of Gods
favor. Add to this, that it being in thousands of cases, impossible to tell
which are, and which are not Venial in their own nature, and in their appendent
circumstances, either the people are cozened by this Doctrine into an useless
confidence; and for all this talking in their Schools, they must nevertheless
do to Venial sins, as they do to Mortal, that is, mortify them, fight against
them, repent speedily of them, and keep them from running into mischief; and
then all their kind Doctrines in this Article, signify no comfort or ease, but
all danger and difficulty, and useless dispute; or else, if really they mean,
that this easiness of opinion be made use of, then the danger is imminent, and
carelessness is introduced, and licentiousness in all little things is easily
indulged; and men's souls are daily lessened without repair, and kept from
growing toward Christian perfection, and from destroying the whole body of
sin; and in short, despising little things, they perish by little and little.

THIS Doctrine also is worse yet in the handling. For it has infinite
influence to the disparagement of holy life, not only by the uncertain, but as
it must frequently happen, by the false determination of innumerable cases of
conscience. For it is a great matter both in the doing and the thing done, both
in the caution and the repentance, whether such an action be a venial or a
mortal sin. If it chance to be mortal, and your Confessor says it is venial,
your soul is betrayed. And it is but a chance what they say in most cases; for
they call what they please venial, and they have no certain rule to answer by;
which appears too sadly in their innumerable differences which is amongst all
their Casuists in saying what is, and what is not mortal; and of this there
needs no greater proof than the reading the little Summaries made by their most
leading guides of Consciences, Navar, Cajetane, Tolet, Emanuel Sa, and others;
where one says such a thing is mortal, and two say it is venial.

AND lest any man should say or think, this is no great matter, we desire that
it be considered that in venial sins there may be very much fantastic
pleasure, and they that retain them do believe so; for they suppose the
pleasure is great enough to outweigh the intolerable pains of Purgatory; and
that it is more eligible to be in Hell a while, than to cross their appetites
in such small things. And however it happen in this particular, yet because the
Doctors differ so infinitely and irreconcileably, in saying what is, and what
is not Venial, whoever shall trust to their Doctrine, saying that such a sin is
Venial; and to their Doctrine, that says it does not exclude from God's favor,
may be these two Propositions be damned before he is aware.

WE omit to insist upon their express contradicting the words of our Blessed
Savior, who taught his Church expressly, That we must work in the day time; for
the night comes, and no man works: Let this be as true as it can in the
matter of Repentance and Mortification, and working out our pardon for mortal
sins; yet it is not true in Venial sins, if we may believe their great in 4
(...). (...). 21. q. t. art. 2.
S. Thomas, whom also Bellarmine Lib. 1. cap. 14. de Purgator. sect. est ergo
opinio vera.
follows in it; for he affirms, That by the acts of Love and Patience in
Purgatory, Venial sins are remitted; and that the acceptance of those (...),
proceeding out of Charity, is a virtual kind of penance. But in this particular
we follow not S. Thomas nor Bellarmine in the Church of England and Ireland;
for we believe in Jesus Christ, and follow him: If men give themselves liberty
as long as they are alive to commit one whole kind of sins, and hope to work it
out after death by acts of Charity and Repentance, which they would not do in
their life time; either they must take a course to sentence the words of Christ
as savouring of Heresy, or else they will find themselves to have been at
first deceived in their Proposition, and at last in their expectation. Their
faith has failed them here, and hereafter they will be ashamed of their hope.

SECT. VII.
Their new doctrine of Probability. That a probable opinion may be safely
followed in practice. The opinion of one grave Doctor, or the example of good
men makes a matter probable, and either side may be chosen. Though this is not
an Article of their Faith, yet it is a Rule of manners. Sad instances of
wickedness this gives warranty to. A strange Instance of obtaining an
Indulgence (granted upon condition of Visiting an Altar of a distant Church) by
those that cannot go to it (as Nuns and Prisoners) if they address to an Altar
of their own with that Intention; secured by the practice of the Church.

THERE is a Proposition, which indeed is new, but is now the general Doctrine
of the Leading Men in the Church of Rome; and it is the foundation on which
their Doctors of Conscience rely, in their decision of all cases in which
there is a doubt or question made by themselves; and that is, That if an
Opinion or Speculation be probable, it may in practice be safely followed: And
if it be inquired, What is sufficient to make an opinion probable; the Answer
is Emanuel Sa aphor. verb. Dubium. Escobar. The. moral.
easy, Sufficit opinio alicujus gravis Doctoris aut Bonorum exemplum: The
opinion of any one grave Doctor is sufficient to make a matter probable; nay,
the example and practice of good men, that is, men who Exa. 3. c. 3. de
Conscientia probabili, etc.
are so reputed; if they have done it, you may do so too, and be safe. This is
the great Rule of their Cases of Conscience.

AND now we ought not to be pressed with any ones saying, that such an opinion
is but the private opinion of one or more of their Doctors. For although in
matters of Faith this be not sufficient, to impute a Doctrine to a whole
Church, which is but the private opinion of one or more; yet because we are now
speaking of the infinite danger of souls in that communion, and the horrid
Propositions by which their Disciples are conducted, to the disparagement of
good life, it is sufficient to allege the public and allowed sayings of their
Doctors; because these sayings are their Rule of living: and because the
particular Rules of Conscience, use not to be decreed in Councils, we must
derive them from the places where they grow, and where they are to be found.

BUT besides, you will say, That this is but the private opinion of some
Doctors; and what then? Therefore it is not to be called the Doctrine of the
Roman Church. True, we do not say, It is an Article of their Faith, but, a rule
of manners: This is not indeed in any public Decree; but we say, that although
it be not, yet neither is the contrary. And if it be but a private opinion,
yet, is it safe to follow it, or is it not safe? For that is the question, and
therein is the danger. If it be safe, then this is their rule, A private
opinion of any one grave Doctor may be safely followed in the questions of
Virtue and Vice. But if it be not safe to follow it, and that this does not
make an opinion probable, or the practice safe; Who says so? Does the Church?
No; Does Dr. Cajus? or Dr. Sempronius say so? Yes: But these are not safe to
follow; for they are but private Doctors: Or if it be safe to follow them,
though they be no more, and the opinion no more but probable, then I may take
the other side, and choose which I will, and do what I list in most cases, and
yet be safe by the Doctrine of the Roman Casuists; which is the great line, and
general measure of most men's lives; and that is it which we complain of. And we
have reason; for they suffer their Casuists to determine all cases, severely
and gently, strictly and loosly; that so they may entertain all spirits, and
please all dispositions, and govern them by their own inclinations, and as they
list to be governed; by what may please them, not by that which profits them;
that none may go away scandalized or (...) from their penitential chairs.

BUT upon this account, it is a sad reckoning which can be made concerning
souls in the Church of Rome. Suppose one great Doctor amongst them (as many of
them do) shall say, it is lawful to kill a King whom the Pope declares
Heretic. By the Doctrine of probability here is his warranty. And though the
Church do not declare that Doctrine; that is, the Church does not make it
certain in Speculation, yet it may be safely done in practice: Here is enough
to give peace of conscience to him that does it. Nay, if the contrary be more
safe, yet if the other be but probable by reason or Authority, you may do the
less safe, and refuse what is more. For that also is the opinion of some grave
Doctors Eman. Sa, aphorism. Verb. Dubium. Escobar. de conscientia probabili.
: If one Doctor says, it is safe to swear a thing as of our knowledge, which we
do not know, but believe it is so, it is therefore probable that it is lawful
to swear it, because a grave Doctor says it, and then it is safe enough to do
so.

AND upon this account, who could find Apud Nauclerum. generat. 21. (...) 6.
fault with Pope Constantine the IV. who when he was accused in the Lateran
Council for holding the Sea Apostolic when he was not in Orders, justified
himself by the example of Sergius Bishop of Ravenna, and Stephen Bishop of
Naples. Here was exemplum bonorum, honest men had done so before him, and
therefore he was innocent. When it is Did. 82. Can. Presbyter in glossa.
observed by Cardinal Campegius, and Albertus Pighius did teach, That a Priest
lives more holily and chastely that keeps a Concubine, than he that has a
married Wife; and then shall find in the 3 Qu. 7. Lata Extravag de bigamis.
Quia circa. Communiter dicitur quod Clericus pro simplici fornicatione deponi
non debet did. 81. Maximianus, Glossa in Gratian.
Pope's Law, That a Priest is not to be removed for fornication; who will not,
or may not practically conclude, that since by the Law of God, marriage is
holy, and yet to some men, fornication is more lawful, and does not make a
Priest irregular, that therefore to keep a Concubine is very lawful; especially
since abstracting from the consideration of a man's being in Orders or not,
fornication it self is probably no sin at all? Sent. l. 4. did. 33.
For so says Durandus, Simple fornication of it self is not a deadly sin
according to the Natural Law, and excluding all positive Law; and Martinus de
Magistris says, to Lib. de Temp. qu. 2. do (...).
believe simple fornication to be no deadly sin, is not heretical, because the
testimonies of Scripture are not express. These are grave Doctors, and
therefore the opinion is probable, and the practice safe. Vide Dan. Tilen de
Verbo non Scripto, l. 4. c. 8.
When the good people of the Church of Rome hear it read, That P. Clement 8. in
the Index of Prohibited books says, That the Bible published in vulgar Tongues,
ought not to be read and retained, no not so much as a compend of the History
of the Bible; and Bellarmine says, that it is not necessary to salvation, to
believe that there are any Scriptures at all written; and that Cardinal Hosius
says, Perhaps it had been better for the Church, if no Scriptures had been
written: They cannot but say, that this Doctrine is probable, and think
themselves safe, when they walk without the light of Gods Word, and rely wholly
upon the Pope, or their Priest, in what he is pleased to tell them; and that
they are no way obliged to keep that Commandment of Christ, Search the
Scriptures. Instruct. Sacerd l. 5. c. 6. n. 15.
Cardinal Tolet says, That if a Nobleman be set upon, and may escape by going
away, he is not tied to it, but may kill him that intends to strike him with a
stick: That if a man be in a great Lib. 4. c. 13. n. 4.
passion, and so transported, that he considers not what be says, if in that
case he does blaspheme, he does not always sin: That if a man Lib. 5. c. 10 n.
3.
be beastly drunk, and then commit fornication, that fornication is no sin:
That if a man Lib. 5. c. 13. n. 10.
desires carnal pollution, that he may be eased of his carnal temptations, or
for his health, it were no sin: That it is lawful for a man to Lib. 5. c. 11.
n. 5.
expose his bastards to the Hospital to conceal his own shame. He says it out
of Soto, and he from Thomas Aquinas: That if the times Lib. 8. c. 49. n. 4.
be hard, or the Judge unequal, a man that cannot sell his wine at a due price,
may lawfully make his Measures less than is appointed; or mingle water with his
wine, and sell it for pure, so he do not lie; and yet if he does, it is no
mortal sin, nor obliges him to restitution. Emanuel Sa Aphor. tit. Debitum
Conjugale. 6.
affirms, That if a man lie with his intended wife before Marriage, it is no
sin, or a light one; nay, quinetiam expedit si multum illa differatur, it is
good to do so, if the benediction or publication of Marriage be much deferred:
That Infants in their cradles may be made Priests, is the common opinion of
Divines and Canonists, says Tolet; and that in their Cradles they Lib. 1. c.
61.
can be made Bishops, said the Archdeacon and the Provost; and though some say
the Ibid.
contrary, yet the other is the more true, says the Cardinal. Vasquez says,
That not De Adorat. l. 3. disp. 1. c. 2.
only an Image of God, but any creature in the world, reasonable or
unreasonable, may without danger be worshipped together with God, as his image:
That we ought to adore the Relics Ibid. c. 5. sect. 33.
of Saints, though under the form of Worms; and that it is no sin to worship a
Ray of Light in which the Devil is invested, if a man supposes him to be
Christ: And in the same manner, if he supposes it to be a piece of a Saint,
which is not, he shall not want the merit of his Devotion. And to conclude,
Pope Celestine the III. (as Alphonsus a Castro reports himself to have seen a
Decretal of his to that purpose) affirmed, That if one of the Married Couple
fell into Heresy, the Marriage is dissolved, and that the other may marry
another; and the Marriage is Council. C. P. 6. can. 76.
nefarious, and they are Irritae Nuptiae, the Espousals are void, if a
Catholic and a Heretic marry together, said the Fathers of the Synod in
Trullo. And though all of this be not owned generally, yet if a Roman Catholic
marries a Wife that is or shall turn Heretic, he may leave her, and part bed
and board, according to the Doctrine taught by the Cap. sin. de conver. conjug.
c. 2. de Divortiis.
Canon Law it self, by the Lawyers and Divines, as appears in De Matrim, part.
2. cap. 7. sect. 5. n. 4.
Covaruvius, In sent. 4. d. 39. art. 1. concl. ult.
Matthias Aquarius, and Lib. 1. de Matrim. c. 14. sect. Secundo sine consensu.
Bellarmine.

THESE Opinions are indeed very strange to us of the Church of England and
Ireland, but no strangers in the Church of Rome, and, because they are taught
by great Doctors, by Popes themselves, by Cardinals, and the Canon Law
respectively, do at least become very probable, and therefore they may be
believed and practiced without danger; according to the Doctrine of
Probability. And thus the most desperate things that ever were said by any,
though before the Declaration of the Church they cannot become Articles of
Faith, yet besides that they are Doctrines publicly allowed, they can also
become Rules of practice, and securities to the consciences of their disciples.

To this we add, that which is usual in the Church of Rome, the Praxis
Ecclesiae, the Practice of the Church. Thus if an Indulgence be granted upon
condition to visit such an Altar in a distant Church; the Nuns that are shut
up, and Prisoners that cannot go abroad, if they address themselves to an Altar
of their own with that intention, they shall obtain the Indulgence. Id enim
confirmat Ecclesiae praxis, says Fabius; The Scrutin Sacerd. de Indulg.
practice of the Church in this case gives first a probability in speculation,
and then a certainty in practice. This instance, though it be of no concern,
yet we use it as a particular to show the Principle upon which they go. But it
is practicable in many things of greatest danger and concern. If the question
be, Whether it be lawful to worship the Image of the Cross, or of Christ, with
Divine worship? First, there is a Doctrine of S. Thomas for it, and Vasquez,
and many others; therefore it is probable, and therefore is safe in practice;
and sic est Ecclesiae praxis, the Church also practices so, as appears in their
own Offices: Part. 3 q. 25. art. 4. Vide etiam Pontif cap. de benedictione
novae crucis. f. 163.
And S. Thomas makes this use of it; Illi exhibemus cultum latriae in quo
ponimus spem salutis: sed in cruce Christi ponimus spem salutis. Cantat enim
Ecclesia, O Crux ave spes unica, Hoc passionis tempore, Auge piis justitiam,
Reisque dona veniam. Ergo Crux Christi est adoranda adoratione Latriae. We give
Divine worship (says he) to that in which we put our hopes of salvation; but in
the Cross we put our hopes of salvation; for so the Church sings, (it is the
practice of the Church) Hail O Cross, our only hope in this time of suffering;
increase righteousness to the godly, and give pardon to the guilty: therefore
the Cross of Christ is to be adored with Divine Adoration.

BY this Principle you may embrace any Opinion of their Doctors safely,
especially if the practice of the Church do intervene, and you need not trouble
your self with any further inquiry: and if an evil custom get amongst men, that
very custom shall legitimate the action, if any of their grave Doctors allow
it, or Good men use it; and Christ is not your Rule, but the Examples of them
that live with you, or are in your eye and observation, that is your Rule. We
hope we shall not need to say any more in this affair; the pointing out this
rock may be warning enough to them that would not suffer shipwreck, to decline
the danger that looks so formidably.

SECT. VIII.
They teach that Prayers by the opus operatum, the work done, do prevail: It
not being essential to Prayer, to think particularly of what he says.
Prevailing like charms even when they are not understood. What Attention they
require to Prayer. Pope Leo' s strange grant of remission of all negligences in
Prayer. The command of hearing Mass, is not to intend the words, but to be
present at the Sacrifice, though their words are not heard. Comparison between
Their Prayers and Ours in the Church of England. Their absurd manner of
numbering prayers by Beads; and repetitions of the same words some hundreds of
times, not to be distinguished from that of the Gentiles which our Savior
reproves.

AS these Evil Doctrines have general influence into Evil Life; so there are
some others, which if they be pursued to their proper and natural issues; that
is, if they be believed and practiced, are enemies to the particular and
specisick parts of Piety and Religion. Thus the very Prayers of the Faithful
are, or may be, spoiled by Doctrines publicly allowed, and prevailing in the
Roman Church.

FOR 1. they teach, That prayers themselves ex opere operato, or by the natural
work it self, do prevail: For it is not essential to prayer for a man to think
particularly of what he says; it is not necessary to think of the things
signisied by the words: So Suarez De Orat. l. 3. c. 4.
teaches. Nay, it is not necessary to the essence of Prayer, that he who prays
should think de ipsa locutione, of the speaking it self. And indeed it is
necessary that they should all teach so, or they cannot tolerably pretend to
justify their prayers in an unknown Tongue. But this is indeed their public
Doctrine: For prayers in the mouth of the man that says them are like the words
Sum. part. 3. (...). 23.
of a Charmer, they prevail even when they are not understood, says Salmeron.
Or as Antoninus, They are like a precious stone, of Vide ctiam Jacob. de
Graffiis de orat. l. 2. Instruct. Sacer. c. 13 n. 5. and 6.
as much value in the hand of an unskilful man, as of a Jeweller. And therefore
Attention to, or Devotion in our prayers, is not necessary: For the
understanding of which, says Cardinal Tolet, when it is said that you must say
your prayers or offices attently, reverently and devoutly, you must know that
Attention or Advertency to your prayers is manifold: 1. That you attend to the
words, so that you speak them not too fast, or to begin the next verse of a
Psalm, before he that recites with you has done the former verse; and this
attention is necessary. But 2. there is an attention which is by understanding
the sense, and that is not necessary. For if it were, very extremely few would
do their duty, when so very few do at all understand what they say. 3. There is
an attention relating to the end of prayer, that is, that he that prays,
considers that he is present before God, and speaks to him; and this indeed is
very prositable, but it is not necessary: No, not so much. So that by this
Doctrine no attention is necessary, but to attend that the words be all said,
and said right. But even this attention is not necessary that it should be
actual, but it suffices to be virtual, that is, that he who says his office,
intend to do so, and do not change his mind, although he does not attend: And
he who does not change his mind, that is, unless observing himself not to
attend, he still turn his mind to other things, he attends: meaning, he attends
sufficiently, and as much as is necessary; though indeed speaking naturally and
truly, he does not attend. If any man in the Church of England and Ireland, had
published such Doctrine as this, he should quickly and deservedly have felt the
severity of the Ecclesiastical Rod; but in Rome it goes for good Catholic
Doctrine.

NOW although upon this account Devotion is (it may be) good; and it is good to
attend to the words of our prayer, and the sense of them; yet that it is not
necessary, is evidently consequent to this. But Ibid. n. 7.
it is also expressly affirmed by the same hand; There ought to be devotion,
that our mind be inflamed with the love of God, though if this be wanting,
without contempt, it is no deadly sin. Ecclesiae satisfit per opus externum,
Vbi supra.
nec aliud jubet, says Reginaldus: If ye do the outward work, the Church is
satisfied, neither does she command any thing else. Good Doctrine this! And it
is an excellent Church, that commands nothing to him that prays, but to say so
many words.

WELL! but after all this, if Devotion be necessary or not, if it be present or
not, if the mind wander, or wander not, if you mind what you pray, or mind it
not, there is an easy cure for all this: For Pope Leo granted remission of all
negligences in their saying their offices and prayers to them, who after they
have done, shall say this prayer, [To the Holy and Undivided Trinity, To the
Humanity of our Lord Jesus Christ crucified; To the fruitfulness of the most
Blessed, and most Glorious Virgin Mary, and to the University of all Saints, be
Eternal praise, honor, virtue and glory, from every Creature; and to us
remission of sins for ever and ever, Amen. Blessed are the bowels of the Virgin
Mary, which bore the Son of the Eternal God; and blessed are the paps which
suckled Christ our Lord: Pater noster. Ave Maria.] This prayer to this purpose,
Vbi supra cap. 13.
is set down by Navar, and Cardinal Tolet.

THIS is the sum of the Doctrine, concerning the manner of saying the Divine
offices in the Church of Rome, in which greater care is taken to obey the
Precept of the Church, than the Commandments of God: [ For the Precept of
hearing Mass is not, to intend the words, but to be present at the Sacrifice,
though the words be not so much as heard, and they that think the contrary,
think so without any probable reason] says Tolet. It seems there was not so
much as Ibid. n. 6.
the Authority of one grave Doctor to the contrary; for if there had, the
contrary opinion might have been probable; but all agree upon this Doctrine,
all that are considerable.

So that between the Church of England, and the Church of Rome, the difference
in this Article is plainly this, They pray with their lips, we with the heart;
we pray with the understanding, they with the voice; we pray, and they say
prayers. We suppose that we do not please God, if our hearts be absent; they
say, it is enough if their bodies be present at their greatest solemnity of
prayer, though they hear nothing that is spoken, and understand as little. And
which of these be the better way of serving God, may soon be determined, if we
remember the complaint which God made of the Jews, This people draws near me
with their lips, but their hearts are far from me. But we know, that we are
commanded to ask in faith, which is seated in the understanding, and requires
the concurrence of the will, and holy desires; which cannot be at all, but in
the same degree in which we have a knowledge of what we ask. The effectual,
fervent prayer of a righteous man prevails: But what our prayers want of this,
they must needs want of blessing and prosperity. And if we lose the benefit of
our prayers, we lose that great instrumentality by which Christians are
receptive of pardon, and strengthened in faith, and confirmed in hope, and
increase in charity, and are protected by Providence, and are comforted in
their sorrows, and derive help from God: Ye ask, and have not, because ye ask
amiss; that is Saint James his rule. They that pray not as they ought, shall
never obtain what they fain would.

HITHER is to be (...), their fond manner of prayer, consisting in vain
repetitions of Names, and little forms of words, The Psalter of our Lady, is an
hundred and fifty Ave Mary's, and at the end of every tenth, they drop in the
Lord's Prayer, and this with the Creed at the end of the fifty, makes a perfect
Rosary. This indeed is the main entertainment of the peoples Devotion; for
which cause Mantuan called their Religion,

-- Relligionem
Quae filo insertis numerat sua murmura baccis.
A Religion that numbers their murmurs by berries filled upon a string: This
makes up so great a part of their Religion, that it may well be taken for one
half of its desinition. But because so few do understand what they say, but all
repeat, and stick to their numbers, it is evident they think to be heard for
that. For that or nothing; for besides that, they neither do nor understand:
And all that we shall now say to it is, That our Blessed Savior reproved this
way of Devotion, in the Practice and Doctrines of the Heathens: Very like to
which is that which they call the Psalter of Jesus; in which are fifteen short
Ejaculations, as [ Have mercy on me *, Strengthen me *, Help me *, Comfort me,
etc.] and with every one of these, the name of Jesus is to be said thirty
times, that is in all, four hundred and fifty times. Now we are ignorant how to
distinguish Obe (...) desine Deos uxor gratulando obtundere, nisi illos tuo ex
ingenio judicas, ut nil (...) intelligere nisi idem dictum est centies.
Heautont. act. 5. scen. 1.
this from the (...), or vain repetition of the Gentiles; for they did just so,
and Christ said; they did not do well; and that is all that we pretend to know
of it. They thought to be heard the rather for so doing; and if the people of
the Roman Church do not think so, there is no reason why they should do so. But
without any further arguing about the business, they are not ashamed to own it.
For the Author of the Preface to the Jesus Psalter, printed by Fouler at
Antwerp, promises to the repetition of that sweet Name, Great aid against
temptations, and a wonderful increase of grace.

SECT. IX.
They pray to dead Men and Women, whom they suppose beatified, and invoke them,
as helpers, preservers, Guardians, Deliverers, contrary to the Scriptures. An
answer to that pretense, that they only desire the Saints to pray for them,
which by many instances is showed to be false. What their Divines teach
concerning the Blessed Virgin, to engage all to have recourse to her. An
account of the public prayers to her. The Council of Constance invoked her, as
other Councils did use to invocate the Holy Ghost. Of the Lady's Psalter by
Bonaventure. How derogatory to Christ, to rely, in praying to God, upon the
Merits, Satisfaction and Intercession of Saints. St. Austin's excellent saying,
Tutius and jucundius, etc. How their devotion is prostituted to new upstart
Saints which are of late Canonization.

BUT this mischief is gone further yet: Summa (...). v. (...).
For as Cajetan affirms, Prayers ought to be well done; Saltem non male; at
least not ill. But besides, that what we have now remarked is so, not well,
that it is very ill; that which follows is directly bad, and most intolerable.
For the Church of Rome in her public and allowed offices, prays to dead men
and women, who are, or whom they suppose to be beatified; and these they
invocate as Preservers, Helpers, Guardians, Deliverers in their necessity; and
they expressly call them, their Refuge, their Guard and Defense, their Life, and
Health: Which is so formidable a Devotion, that we for them, and for our selves
too, if we should imitate them, are to dread the words of Jer. 17. 5. Psalm.
115. 9. and 146 3. and 118. 8. and 50, 15.
Scripture, Cursed is the man that trusts in man. We are commanded to call
upon God in the time of trouble; and it is promised, that he will deliver us,
and we shall glorify Heb. 4. 16. Mat. 11. 28. John 6. (...).
him. We find no such command to call upon Saints; neither do we know who are
Saints, excepting a very few; and in what present state they are, we cannot
know, nor how our prayers can come to their knowledge; and yet if we did know
all this, it cannot be endured at all, that Christians, who are commanded to
call upon God, and upon none else, and to make all our prayers through Jesus
Christ, and never so much as warranted to make our prayers through Saints
departed, should yet choose Saints for their particular Patrons, or at all
rely upon them, and make prayers (...) them in such forms of words, which are
only sit to be spoken to God; prayers which have no testimony, command, or
promise in the Word of God, and therefore, which cannot be made in faith, or
prudent hope.

NEITHER will it be enough to say, that they only desire the Saints to pray for
them; for though that be of it self a matter indifferent, if we were sure they
do hear us when we pray, and that we should not by that means, secretly destroy
our considence in God, or lessen the honor of Christ our Advocate; of which
because we cannot be sure, but much rather the contrary, it is not a matter
indifferent: Yet besides this, in the public Offices of the Church of Rome,
there are prayers to Saints made with confidence in them, with derogation to
God's glory and prerogative, with diminution to the honor of Christ, with
words in sound, and in all appearance the same with the highest that are
usually expressed in our prayers to God, and his Christ: And this is it we
insist upon, and reprove, as being a direct destruction of our sole confidence
in God, and too near to blasphemy, to be endured in the Devotions of
Christians. We make our words good by these Allegations;

1. WE shall not need here to describe out of their didactical writings, what
kind of prayers, and what causes of confidence they teach toward the Blessed
Virgin Mary, and all Saints: Only we shall recite a few words of Antoninus
their great Divine, and (...) of Florence, It is necessary that (...). part, 4
(...). (...).
they to whom she converts her eyes, being an Advocate for them, shall be
justified and saved. And whereas it may be objected out 1 Jo. c. 2. 1, 2.
of John, that the Apostle says, If any man sin, we have an Advocate with the
Father, Jesus Christ the Righteous. (He answers) That Christ is not our
Advocate alone, but a Judge: and since the just is scarce secure, how shall a
sinner go to him, as to an Advocate? Therefore God has provided us of an
Advocatess, who is gentle, and sweet, in whom nothing that is sharp is to be
found. And to those words of St. Paul, Come boldly to the Throne of Grace: (He
says) That Mary is the Throne of Christ, in whom he rested, to her therefore
let us come with boldness, that we may obtain mercy, and find grace in time of
need; and adds, that Mary is called full of grace, because she is the means and
cause of Grace, by transfusing grace to mankind;] and many other such dangerous
Propositions: Of which who please to be further Bernardin. de bustis, de
Concept. Mariae. 1. (...). sermon. 1. (...). 2.
satisfied (if he can endure the horror of reading blasphemous sayings) he may
sind too great abundance in the Mariale of Bernardine, which is confirmed by
public Authority, Jacobus Perez de Valentia In Cantic. Mar. Magnisicat.
, and in Ferdinand Quirinus de Salazar Comment. in 8. Proverb in verse. 19.
, who affirms, That the Virgin Mary by offering up Christ to God the Father,
was worthy to have (after a certain manner) that the whole salvation and
redemption of mankind should be ascribed to her; and that this was common to
Christ and the blessed Virgin his Mother, that she did offer and give the price
of our Redemption truly and properly; and that she is deservedly called the
Redeemer, the Repairer, the Mediator, the Author and cause of our salvation.
Many more horrid blasphemies are in his notes upon that Chapter; and in his
Defense of the Immaculate Conception, published with the Privilege of Philip
the III. of Spain, and by the Authority of his Order. But we insist not upon
their Doctrines delivered by their great Writers, though every wise man knows
that the Doctrines of their Church are delivered in large and indefinite terms,
and descend not to minute senses, but are left to be explicated by their
Writers, and are so practiced and understood by the people; and at the worst,
the former Doctrine of Probability will make it safe enough: But we shall
produce the public practice of their Church.

AND (...), it cannot be supposed, that they intend nothing but to desire their
prayers; for they rely also on their merits, and hope to get their desires, and
to prevail by them also: For so it is (...) by the Roman Catechism, Tit. de
(...).
made by the Decree of the Council of Trent, and published by the Popes
command; [ The Saints are therefore to be invocated, because they continually
make prayers for the health of mankind, and God gives us many benefits by their
(...) and favor: And it is lawful to have recourse to the favor or grace of
the Saints, and to use their help; for they undertake the Patronage of us.] And
the Council of Trent Sess. 9.
does not only say it is good to fly to their prayers, but to their aid, and to
their help; and that is indeed the principal, and the very meaning of the
other. We pray that the Saints should intercede for us, id est, ut merit a
eorum nobis suffr agentur; that is, that their Merits should help us, said the
Master of the Sentences. Atque id confirmat Ecclesiae praxis, to use their own
so frequent expression in many cases.

Continet hoc Templum Sanctorum corpora pura,
A quibus auxilium suppleri, poscere cura.
This Distich is in the Church of S. Laurence in Rome. This Church contains the
pure bodies of Saints, from whom take care to require that help be supplied to
you. But the practice of the Church tells their secret meaning best. For
besides what the Common people are taught to do, as to pray to S. Gall for the
health and fecundity of their Geese, to S. Wendeline for their Sheep, to S.
Anthony for their Hogs, to S. Pelagius for their Oxen; and that several Trades
have their peculiar Saints; and the Physicians are Patronized by Cosmas and
Damian, the Painters by S. Luke, the Potters by Goarus, the Huntsmen by
Eustachius, the Harlots (for that also is a Trade at Rome) by S. Afra and S.
Mary Magdalene; they do also rely upon peculiar Saints for the cure of several
diseases; S. Sebastian and S. Roch have a special privilege to cure the Plague,
S. Petronilla the Fever, S. John and S. Bennet the Abbot to cure all Poison, S.
Apollonia the Tooch-ach, S. Otilia Sore eyes, S. Apollinaris the French Pox,
(for it seems he has lately got that employment, since the discovery of the
West Indies) S. Vincentius has a special faculty in restoring stolen goods,
and S. Liberius (if he please) does (...) cure the Stone, and S. Felicitas (if
she be heartily called upon) will give the teeming Mother a fine Boy. It were
strange if nothing but Intercession by these Saints were intended, that they
cannot as well pray for other things as these; or that they have no Commission
to ask of these any thing else, or not so confidently; and that if they do ask,
that S. Otilia shall not as much prevail to help a Fever as a Cataract; or that
if S. Sebastian be called upon to pray for the help of a poor female sinner,
who by sad diseases pays the price of her lust, he must go to S. Apollinaris in
behalf of his Client.

BUT if any of the Roman Doctors say, That they are not tied to defend the
Superstitions of the Vulgar, or the abused: They say true, they are not indeed,
but rather to reprove them, as we do, and to declare against them; and the
Council of Trent very goodly forbids all Superstitions in this Article, but yet
tells us not what are Superstitions, and what not; and still the world goes on
in the practice of the same intolerable follies, and every Nation has a
particular Guardian-Saint, and every City, every Family, and almost every
House, and every Devouter person almost chooses his own Patron-Saint, whose
Altars they more devoutly frequent, whose Image they more religiously worship,
to whose Relics they more readily go in Pilgrimage, to whose Honor they say
more Pater nosters, whose Festival they more solemnly observe; spoiling their
prayers, by their confidences in unknown persons, living in an unknown
condition, and diminishing that affiance in God and our Lord Jesus Christ, by
importune and frequent addresses to them that cannot help.

BUT that these are not the faults of their people only, running wilfully into
such follies, but the practice of their Church, and warranted and taught by
their Guides, appears by the public prayers themselves; such as these, O
generous Mary, beauteous Ex cursu (...) beatae Mariae.
above all, obtain pardon for us, apply grace unto us, prepare glory for us.
Hail thou Rose, thou Virgin Mary, etc. Grant to us to use true wisdom, and with
the elect to enjoy grace, that we may with melody praise thee; and do thou
drive our sins away: O Virgin Mary give us joys. These, and diverse others like
these, are in the Anthem of our Lady. In the Rosary of our Lady this Hymn is to
be said;

Reparatrix and Salvatrix desperantis animae,
Irroratrix and Largitrix Spiritualis gratiae,
Quod requiro, quod suspiro, mea sana vulnera,
Et da menti te poscenti gratiarum munera,
Vt sim castus and modestus, etc.....
Cord prudens, ore studens veritatem dicere,
Malum nolens, Deum volens pio semper opere.
That is, [Thou Repairer and Savior of the despairing Soul, the Dew-giver and
Bestower of spiritual grace, heal my wounds, and give to the mind that prays to
thee, the gifts of grace, that I may be chaste, modest, wise in heart, true in
my sayings, hating evil, loving God in holy works:] and much more to the same
purpose. There also the blessed Virgin Mary, after many glorious Appellatives,
is prayed to in these words, [Joyn me to Christ, govern me always, enlighten my
heart, defend me always from the snare of the enemy, deliver us from all evil,
and from the pains of Hell.

SO that it is no wonder that Pope Leo Ad Recanatenses de Lauretana imagine.
apud Bembum. l. 8. (...). 17.
the X. calls her a Goddess, and Turcelin In epist. dedicat. (...) Lauretan.
the Jesuit, Divinae majestatis, potestatisque sociam. Huic olim (...),
mortaliumque principatum detulit. Ad hujus arbitrium (quoad hominum tutela
postulat) terras, maria, coelum, naturamque moderatur. Hac annuente, and per
hanc, divinos the sauros, and (...) dona largitur; the companion or partner of
the Divine Majesty and Power. To her he long since gave the principality of all
heavenly and mortal things. At her will (so far as the Guardianship of Men
requires) he rules the Earth and Seas, Heaven and Nature: And she consenting,
he gives Divine treasures and Celestial gifts. Nay, in the Mass-books penned
1538. and used in the Polonian Churches, they call the Blessed Virgin Mary,
Viam ad vitam, totius Fol. 323, 324, 325.
mundi gubernatricem, peccatorum cum Deo (...), fontem remissionis peccatorum,
lumen luminum; the way to life, the Governess of all the world, the Reconciler
of sinners with God, the Fountain of Remission of sins, Light of Light, and at
last salute her with an Ave universae Trinitatis Fol. 327. Vide epist. Andr.
Dudithii (...); Eccles. episc. edit. A. D. 1590. (...) loci and (...) nomine.
Matter, Hail thou Mother of the whole Trinity.

WE do not pick out these only, as the most singular, or the worst forms; for
such as these are very numerous, as is to be seen in their Breviaries, Missals,
Hours of our Lady, Rosary of our Lady, the Latany of our Lady, called Litania
Mariae, the Speculum Rosariorum, the Hymns of Saints, Portuises and Manuals.
These only are the instances which amongst many others presently occur. Two
things only we shall add, instead of many more that might be represented.

THE first is, That in a Hymn which they (from what reason or Etymology we know
not, neither are we (...)) call a Sequence, the Council of Constance did
invocate the Blessed Virgin, in the same manner as Councils did use to invocate
the Holy Ghost; They call her the Mother of Grace, the remedy to the miserable,
the fountain of mercy, and the light of the Church; Attributes proper to God
and incommunicable; they sing her praises, and pray to her for graces, they
sing to her with the heart, they call themselves her sons, they declare her to
be their health and comfort in all doubts, and call on her for light from
Heaven, and trust in her for the destruction of Heresies, and the repression of
Schisms, and for the lasting Confederations of peace.

THE other thing we tell of, is, That there is a Psalter of our Lady, of great
and ancient account in the Church of Rome; it has been several times printed
at Venice, at Paris, at Leipsich; and the title is, [The Psalter of the Blessed
Virgin, compiled by the Seraphical Doctor S. Bonaventure, Bishop of Alba, and
Presbyter Cardinal of the Holy Church of Rome.] But of the Book it self, the
account is soon made; for it is nothing but the Psalms of David, an hundred and
fifty in number are set down; altered indeed, to make as much of it as could be
sense so reduced; In which the name of Lord is left out, and that of Lady put
in; so that whatever David said of God and Christ, the same prayers, and the
same praises they say of the Blessed Virgin Mary; and whether all that can be
said without intolerable blasphemy, we suppose needs not much disputation.

THE same things, but in a less proportion and frequency, they say to other
Saints. O Maria Magdalena In Canticis quae (...) sequentia. Dominic. ante
ascensionem Doinini.

Audi vot a laud plena,
Apud Christum chorum istum
Clementer concilia.
Vt fons summae pietatis
Quite lavit a peccatis,
Servos suos, atque tuos
Mundet dat a venia.


O Mary Magdalen, hear our prayers, which are full of praises, and most
clemently reconcile this company unto Christ: That the Fountain of Supreme
Piety, who cleansed thee from thy sins, giving pardon, may cleanse us who are
his servants and thine. These things are too bad already, we shall not
aggravate them by any further Commentary; but apply the premises.

NOw therefore we desire it may be considered, That there are as the effects of
Christ's death for us, three great products, which are the rule and measure of
our prayers, and our confidence; 1. Christ's merits. 2. His Satisfaction. 3. His
Intercession. By these three we come boldly to the Throne of Grace, and pray to
God through Jesus Christ. But if we pray to God through the Saints too, and
rely upon their 1. Merit. 2. Satisfaction. 3. And Intercession; Is it not plain
that we make them equal with Christ, in kind, though not in degree? For it is
(...) avowed and practiced in the Church of Rome, to rely upon the Saints
Intercession; and this intercession Vide speculim Rosarior. sequentias; and
Breviar. (...).
to be made valid by the Merits of the Saints: [We pray thee, O S. Jude the
Apostle, that by thy Merits thou would draw me from the custom of my sins,
and snatch me from the power of the Devil, and advance me to the invisible
powers;] and they say as much to others. And for their Satisfactions, the
treasure of the Church for Indulgences is made up with them, and the
satisactions of Christ: So that there is nothing remaining of the honor due to
Christ our Redeemer, and our Considence in him, but the same in every kind is
by the Church of Rome imputed to the Saints: And therefore the very being and
Economy of Christianity, is destroyed by these prayers; and the people are
not, cannot be good Christians in these devotions; and what hopes are laid up
for them, who repent to no purpose, and pray with derogation to Christ's
honor, is a matter of deepest consideration. And therefore we desire our
charges not to be seduced by little tricks and artifices of useless and
laborious distinctions, and protestations against evidence of fact, and with
fear and trembling to consider, what God said by the Prophet, My people have
done two great Jer. 2. 13.
evils, they have for saken me, fortem vivum, the strong and the living God;
fontem vivum, so some copies read it, the living fountain, and have dug for
themselves cisterns, that is, little fantastic helps, that hold no water,
that give no refreshment; or, as S. Paul expresses it, they worship and
invocate the creature (...) besides the Romans 1. 25
Creator; so the word properly signifies, and so it is used by the Apostle in
other 1 Cor. 3. 11.
places. And at least let us remember those excellent words of S. Austin,
Tutius and jucundius loquar Gal. 1. 8. 2 King. 17. Lib. 1. c. 2. de Visitatione
infir morum: ascrip. S. Au.
ad meum Jesum, quam ad aliquem sanctorum spirituum Dei; I can speak safer and
more pleasantly or cheerfully to my Lord Jesus, than to any of the Saints and
Spirits of God. For that we have Commandment, for this we have none; for that
we have example in Scriptures, for this we have none; there are many promises
made to that, but to this there is none at all; and therefore we cannot in
faith pray to them, or at all rely upon them for helps.

WHICH Consideration is greatly heightened by that prostitution of Devotion
usual in the Church of Rome, (...), to every Upstart, to every old and new
Saint. And although they have a story among themselves, That it is ominous for
a Pope to Canonize a Saint, and he never survives it above a twelvemonth, as
Pietre Mathieu observes in the instances of Clement the IV. and Adrian the VI.
yet this hinders not, but that they are tempted to do it frequently. But
concerning the thing it self, the best we can say, is what Christ said of the
Samaritans, They worship they know not what. John 4. 22.
Such are S. Fingare, S. Anthony of (...), S. Christopher, Charles Borromaeus,
Vide libr. de Sanctis Hiber nicis nuper Latin edit. per D. Picardum
Parisiensem.
Ignatius Loyola, Xaverius, and many others; of whom Cardinal Bessarion Apud
Bodin. in method. bistor. l. 4. Apud Aug. Triumphum de Ancona, q 14. ad. 4. and
quaest. 17. ad. 4. verb. Harmannus.
complained, that many of them were such persons whose life he could not
approve; and such, concerning whom they knew nothing, but from their Parties,
and by pretended Revelations made to particular and hypochondriacal persons. It
is a famous saying of S. Gregory, That the bodies of many persons are
worshipped on Earth, whose souls are tormented in Hell: and Augustinus gustinus
Triumphus affirms, That all who are canonized by the Pope cannot be said to be
in Heaven. And this matter is beyond dispute; for Prateolus tells, that Herman,
the Author of the Heresy of the Fratricelli, was for twenty years together
after his death honored for a Saint, but afterward his body was taken up and
burnt. But then since (as Ambrosius Catharinus and Vivaldus observe) if one
Saint be called in question, then the rest may; what will become of the
Devotions which are paid to such Saints which have been canonized within these
last five Centuries? Concerning whom we can have but slender evidence that they
are in Heaven at all. And therefore the Cardinal Lib. de Reform. Eccles.
of Cambray, Petrus de Alliaco, wishes that so many new Saints were not
canonized. They are indeed so many, that in the Church of Rome the Holy Days,
which are called their Greater Doubles, are threescore and four, besides the
Feasts of Christ and our Lady, and the Holy Days which they call Half double
Festivals, together with the Sundays, are above one hundred and thirty. So that
besides many Holy Days kept in particular places, there are in the whole year
about two hundred Holy Days, if we may believe their own Gavantus; which,
besides that De (...). 7. 10.
it is an intolerable burden to the poor Labourer, who must keep so many of
them, that on the rest he can scarce earn his bread, they do also turn Religion
into Superstition, and habituate the People to idleness, and disorderly
Festivities, and impious celebrations of the day with unchristian merriments
and licentiousness. We conclude this with those words of S. Paul, How shall
Romans 10. 14
we call on him on whom we have not believed? Christ said, Ye believe in God,
believe also in me. But he never said, Ye have believed in me, believe also in
my Saints. No: For there is but one Mediator between God and Tim. a. 5.
man, the man Christ Jesus. And therefore we must come to God, not by Saints,
but only by Jesus Christ our Lord.

SECT. X.
Of the horrible Incantations and charms used by the Priests in Exorcising
persons possessed. The whole manner how they cast out Devils set down at large,
and several remarks upon it.

THERE is in the Church of Rome a horrible impiety taught and practiced, which,
so far as it goes, must needs destroy that part of holy life which consists in
the holiness of our Prayers; and indeed is a Conjugation of Evils, of such
evils, of which in the whole world a society of Christians should be least
suspected; we mean the infinite Superstitions and Incantations, or Charms used
by their Priests in their Exorcising possessed persons, and conjuring of Devils.

THERE was an Ecclesiastical book called Ordo Baptiz. andi cum modo Visitandi,
printed at Venice, A. D. 1575. in which there were damnable and diabolical
Charms, insomuch that the Spanish Inquisitors in their Expurgatory Index,
printed at Madrid, A. D. 1612. commanded deleatur tota exorcismus Ne miretur
lector eruditus quod (...) apud Inquisitores sit foeminini generis, fortasse
dispensatum fuit cum bonis viris in hoc articulo. An potius factum quia bonus
Angelus nunquam, mali autem Genii (...) sub formae foeminina apparuere: quod
notavit Trithemius.
Luciferina, cujus initium est, Adesto Domine tui famuli; that all that
Luciferian Exorcism be blotted out. But whoever looks into the Treasure of
Exorcisms and horrible Conjurings (for that is the very title of the Book
printed at Colein, A. D. 1608.) shall find many as horrid things, and not
censured by any Inquisitors as yet, so far as we have ever read or heard. Nay,
that very Luciferina, or Devilish Exorcism, is reprinted at Lions, A. D. 1614.
in the institutio baptizandi, which was restored by the Decree of the Council
of Trent: So that though it was forbidden in Spain, it was allowed in France.
But as (...) as that are allowed every where in the Church of Rome: The most
famous, and of most public use are The Treasure of Exorcisms, of which we but
now made mention; the Roman Ritual, The Manual of Exorcisms, printed at
Antwerp, A. D. 1626. with Approbation of the Bishop, and privilege of the
Archdukes; the Pastorals of several Churches, especially that of Ruraemund; and
especially the Flagellum Daemonum, The Devils whip, by Father Hierom Mengus a
Friar Minor; which the Clergy of Orleans did use in the Exorcising of Martha
Brosser, A. D. 1599. the story whereof is in the Epistles of Cardinal D'Ossat,
and the History of the Excellent (...). 133.
Thuanus.

NOW from these Books, especially this last, we shall represent their manner of
casting out Devils; and then speak a word to the thing it self.

Their manner and form is this,

First, They are to try the Devil by Holy Plagellum (...). do cum. 3.
water, Incense, Sulphur, Rue, which from thence, as we suppose, came to be
called Herb of Grace, and especially S. John's wort, which therefore they call
Devils flight; Vide Raimun. Lullium. lib. 2. de quinta (...).
with which if they cannot cast the Devil out, yet they may do good to the
Patient; for so Pope Alexander the first promised and commanded the Priests to
use it for (...) sanctifying and pacifying the people, and driving away the
snares of the Devil: And to this, it were well if the Exorcist would rail upon,
mock and jeer the Devil; for he cannot endure a witty and a sharp taunt, and
loves jeering and railing, no more than he loves holy water; and this was well
tried of old against an Empuse that met Apollonius Tyanaeus at Mount Caucasus,
against (...). de (...) Apollonii.
whom he railed, and exhorted his company to do so.

NEXT to this, the Exorcist may ask the Devil some questions; What is his name?
How many of them there are? For what cause, and at what time he entered? and,
for his own learning, by what persons he can be cast out? and by what Saint
adjur'd? who are his particular enemies in Heaven? and who in Hell? by what
words he can be most (...)? (for the Devils are such fools that they cannot
keep their own counsel, nor choose but tell, and when they do, they always tell
true:) He may also ask him by what Covenant, or what Charm he came there, and
by what he is to be released? Then he may call Lucifer to help him, and to
torment that Spirit (for so they oast out Devils, by Beelzebub the Prince of the
Devils;) and certainly Lucifer dares not but obey him. Next to this, the
Exorcist is cunningly to get out of the Devil, the confession of some Article
of Faith, for the edification of the standers by (whom he may by this means
convince of the truth of Transubstantiation, the reality of Purgatory, or the
value of Indulgences) and command him to knock his head three times against the
ground, in adoration of the Holy Trinity. But let him take heed what Relics
he apply to the Devil; for if the Relics be (...), the Devil will be too hard
for him. However, let the Exorcising Priest be sure to bless his Pottage, his
Meat, his Ointment, his Herbs; and then also he may use some Schedules, or
little rolls of Paper, containing in them holy words; but he must be sure to be
exercised and skilful in all things that belong to the conjuring of the Devil:
These are the preparatory documents, which when he has observed, then let him
fall to his prayers.

NOW for the prayers, they also are publicly described in their Offices before
cited; and are as follows,

The Priest ties his stole about the neck of the possessed with three knots,
and says, O ye abominable Rebels against God, I conjure you Spirits, and adjure
you, I call, I constrain, I call out, I contend and contest, where ever you are
in this Man, by the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost [then he makes three ] by the
most powerful name of God, Heloy, the strong and admirable, I exorcise you, and
adjure you, and command you, by the power I have, that you incontinently hear
the words of my conjuring, and perceive your selves overcome, and command you
not to depart without license, and so I bind you with this stole of jucundity
in the name of the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, Amen. Then he makes two and
thirty crosses more, and calls over one and thirty names of God in false
Hebrew, and base Greek, and some Latin, signifying the same names; and the two
and thirtieth is by the sign of the Cross, praying God to deliver them from
their enemies. Then follow more prayers, and more adjurations, and more
conjurations. (for they are greatly different you must know) and aspersions of
holy water, and shewings of the Cross, and signings with it. Then they adjure
the Devil (in case the names of God will not do it) by S. Mary, and S. Anne, by
S. Michael, and S. Gabriel, by Raphael, and all Angels and Archangels, by the
Patriarchs, and by the Prophets, and by his own infirmity, by the Apostles, and
by the Martyrs; [and then after all this, if the Devil will not come out, he
must tarry there still, till the next Exorcism; in which] The Exorcist must
rail at the Devil, and say over again the Names of God, and then ask him
questions, and read over the sequences of the Gospels; and after that tell him,
that he has power over him, for (...) can transubstantiate bread into Christ's
body; and then conjure him again, and call him damned Devil, unclean Spirit,
and as bad as he can call him; and so pray to God to cast him out of the man's
mouth and nose, lips and teeth, jaws and cheeks, eyes and forehead, eyebrows,
and eyelids, his feet, and his members, his marrow, and his bones, and must
reckon every part of his body [to which purpose, we suppose it would be well if
the (...) were well skilled in Laurentius, or Bauhinus his Anatomy] And if he
will not go out yet, there is no help but he must choose, till the third
Exorcism: In which besides many prayers and conjurations in other words to the
same purpose, the Exorcist must speak louder [especially if it be a deaf Devil,
for then indeed it is the more necessary] and tell the Devil his own, and
threaten him terribly, and conjure him again, and say over him about some
twenty or thirty names or titles of Christ, and forbid the Devil to go any
whither, but to the center of the world, and must damn him eternally to the
Sulphurous flames of Hell, and to be tormented worse than Lucifer himself, for
his daring to resist so many great Names; and if he will not now obey, let him
take fire and brimstone, and make a fume, whether the possessed will or no,
until the Devil tells you all his mind in what you ask him: [the Liver of
Tobias his fish were a rare thing here, but that is not to be had for love or
money:] And after this he conjures him again by some of the names of God, and by
the Merits, and all the good things which can be spoken or thought of the most
Blessed Virgin, and by all her names and titles, which he must reckon, one and
forty in number, together with her Epithets, making so many, and by these he
must cast him headlong into Hell.

BUT if the Devil be stubborn (for some of them are very disobedient) there is
a fourth, and a fifth, and a sixth Exorcism, and then he conjures the earth,
the water, and the fire to make them of his party, and comands them not to
harbor such villainous Spirits, and commands Hell to hear him, and (...) his
word, and (...) all the Spirits in Hell to take that Spirit to themselves (for
it may be they will understand their duty better than that stubborn Devil, that
is broke loose from thence.) But if this chance to fail, there is yet left a
remedy that will do it. He must make the picture of the Devil, and write his
name over the head of it, and conjure the fire to burn it most horribly and
hastily; [and if the picture be upon wood or paper, it is ten to one that may
be done.] After all this stir, Sprinkle more holy water, and (...) Sulphur,
Galbanum, Assa foetida, Aristolochia, Rue, St. John's Wort; all which (...)
distinctly blessed, the Exorcist must hold the Devils picture (...) the fire,
and adjure the Devil to hear him; and then he must not spare him but tell him
all his faults, and give him all his names, and Anathematize him, and curse not
only him, but Lucifer too, and Beelzebub, and Satan, and Astaroth, and Behemot,
and Beherit, and all together; [for indeed there is not one good natured Devil
amongst them all;] and then pray once more, and so throw the Devils picture
into the fire, and then insult in a long form of crowing over him, which is
there set (...).

AND now after all, if he will not go out, there is a seventh Exorcism for him
with new Ceremonies. He must show him the (...) Host in the Pix, pointing at it
with his finger, and then conjure him (...), and rail at him once more; to
which purpose, there is a very fine form taken out of Prierius, and set down in
the Flagellum Daemonum; and then let the Exorcist pronounce sentence against
the Devil, and give him his oath, and then a commandment to go out of the
several parts of his body, always taking care that at no hand he remain in the
upper parts; and then is the Devils Qu. to come out, if he have a mind to it
(for that must be always supposed) and then follow the thanksgivings.

THIS is the manner of their devotion, described for the use of their
Exorcists; in which is such a heap of folly, madness, superstition, blasphemy,
and ridiculous guises and playings with the Devil, that if any man amongst us
should use such things, he would be in danger of being tried at the next
Assizes for a Witch, or a Conjurer; however, certain it is, what ever the Devil
loses by pretending to obey the Exotcist, he gains more by this horrible
debauchery of Christianity. There needs no confutation of it, the impiety is
visible and tangible; and it is sufficient to have told the story.

ONLY this we say, as to the thing it self:

THE casting out of Devils is a miraculous power, and given at first for the
confimation of Christian Faith, as the gifts of Tongues and Healing were, and
therefore we have reason to believe, that because it is not an ordinary power,
the ordinary Exorcisms cast out no more Devils, than Extreme Unction cures
sicknesses. We do not envy to any one, any grace of God, but wish it were more
modestly pretended, unless it could be more evidently proved. Origin condemned
this whole procedure of conjuring Devils long since. Quaeret aliquis si
convenit vel Daemones adjurare. Qui Tract. 35. in Matthew.
aspicit Jesum imperantem Daemonibus, sed (...) potestatem dantem Discipulis
super omnia daemonia, and ut infirmitates sanarent, dicet, quoniam non est
secundum Potestatem datam a salvatore adjurare Daemonia. Judaicum enim est: If
any one asks, Whether it be fit to adjure Devils? He that beholds Jesus
commanding over Devils, and also giving power to his Disciples over all unclean
spirits, and to heal diseases, will say, that to adjure Devils is not according
to the In illa verba, [Qui credit in me majora faciet.]
power given by our Blessed Savior; For it is a Jewish trick: and S.
Chrysostom spoke soberly and truly, We poor Wretches cannot drive away the
flies, much less Devils.

BUT then as to the manner of their Conjurations and Exorcisms; this we say, If
these things come from God, let them show their warranty, and their books of
Precedents: If they come not from God, they are so like the Enchantments of
Balaam, the old Heathens, and the modern Magicians, that their Original is soon
discovered.

BUT yet from what principle it comes, that they have made Exorcists an
Ecclesiastical Order, with special words and instruments of collation; and that
the words of Ordination giving them power only over possessed Christians,
Catechumens or Baptized, should by them be extended and exercised upon all
Infants, as if they were all possessed by the Devil; and not only so, but to
bewitched Cattle, to Mice and Locusts, to Milk and Lettice, to Houses and
Tempests; as if their Charms were Prophylactick, as well as Therapeutick; and
could keep, as well as drive the Devil out, and prevent storms like the old
(...) of whom Seneca makes mention: Of these Quoest. not. l. 4. c. 6.
things we cannot guess at any probable principle, except they have derived
them from the Jewish Cabala, or the Exorcisms, which it is said Solomon used,
when he had consented to Idolatry.

BUT these things are so unlike the wisdom and simplicity, the purity and
spirituality of Christian devotion; are so perfectly of their own devising, and
wild imaginations; are so full of dirty superstitions, and ignorant fancies,
that there are not in the world many things, whose sufferance and practice can
more destroy the Beauty of Holiness, or reproach a Church, or Society of
Christians.

SECT. XI.
The Church of Rome invents Sacramentals of her own, without a Divine Warrant.
Such as Holy water, Paschal wax, Oil, Palm-boughs, etc. Concerning which their
Doctrine is, that by these the Blood of Christ is applied to us, and they not
only signify but produce Spiritual and supernatural effects. How the people
are abused with Legendary stories of miraculous cures wrought by them. And are
taught in the Sacraements themselves, to rely so much upon their inherent
virtue, as to take less care of moral and virtuous dispositions.

TO put our trust and confidence in God only, and to use Ministeries of his own
appointment and sanctification, is so essential a duty owing by us to God, that
whoever trusts in any thing but God, is a breaker of the first Commandment; and
he that invents instrumental supports of his own head, and puts a subordinate
ministerial confidence in them, usurps the rights of God, and does not pursue
the interests of true Religion, whose very essence and formality is to glorify
God in all his attributes, and to do good to man, and to advance the honor and
Kingdom of Christ. Now how greatly the Church of Rome prevaricates in this
great Soul of Religion, appears by too evident and notorious demonstration: For
she has invented Sacramentals of her own, without a Divine warrant, (...),
said Cyril. Hieros. (...). 4.
S. Cyril. Concerning the holy and Divine mysteries of Faith or Religion, we
ought to do nothing by chance, or of our own heads, nothing without the
Authority of the Divine Scriptures: But the Church of Rome does otherwise;
invents things of her own, and imputes spiritual effects to these Sacramentals;
and promises not only temporal blessings and immunities, and benedictions, but
the collation or increment of Spiritual graces, and remission of venial sins,
and alleviation of pains due to mortal sins, to them who shall use these
Sacramentals: Which because God did not institute, and did not sanctisie, they
use them without Faith, and rely upon them without a promise, and make
themselves the fountains of these graces, and produce confidences, whose last
resort is not upon God, who neither was the Author, nor is an Approver of them.

OF this nature are Holy Water, the Paschal Wax, Oil, Palm-boughs, Holy Bread
(not Eucharistical) Hats, Agnus Dei's, Meddals, Swords, Bells, and Roses
hallowed upon the Sunday called Laetare Jerusalem: such as Pope Pius the second
to James the II. of Scotland, and Sixtus Bellarm. de cultu sanct. lib. 3. cap.
7 sect. secunda propositio, and sect. secund, ad (...).
Quintus to the Prince of Parma: Concerning which, their Doctrine is this, That
the blood of Christ is by these applied unto us, that they do not only
signify, but produce spiritual effects, that they blot out venial sins, that
they drive away Devils, that they cure diseases, and that though these things
do not operate infallibly, as do the Sacraments, and that God has made no
express Covenant concerning them, yet by the devotion of them that use them,
and the prayers of the Church, they do prevail.

NOW though it be easy to say, and it is notoriously true in Theology, that
the prayers of the Church can never prevail, but according to the grace which
God has promised; and either can only procure a blessing upon natural things,
in order to their natural effects, or else an extraordinary supernatural
effect, by virtue of a Divine promise; and that these things are pretended to
work beyond their natural force, and yet God has not promised to them a
supernatural blessing (as themselves confess;) yet besides the falseness of the
Doctrine, on which these superstitions do rely, it is also as evident, that
these instrumentalities produce an affiance and confidence in the Creature, and
estrange men's hearts from the true Religion and trust in God, while they think
themselves blessed in their own inventions, and in digging to themselves
Cisterns of their own, and leaving the Fountain of Blessing and Eternal Life.

To this purpose the Roman Priesta abuse the People with Romantic stories out
of the Dialogues of S. Gregory, and venerable Bede; making them believe, that
S. Fortunatus cured a Man's broken thigh with Holy Water, and that S. Malachias
the Bishop of Down and Connor, cured a madman with the same medicine; and that
Saint Hilarion cured many sick persons with Holy Bread and Oil (which indeed is
the most likely of them all, as being good food, and good medicine;) and
although not so much as a Chicken is now adays cured of the Pip by Holy Water,
yet upon all occasions they use it, and the common people throw it upon
Childrens Cradles, and sick Cows Horns, and upon them that are blasted; and if
they recover by any means, it is imputed to the Holy Water: And so the
Simplicity of Christian Religion, the Glory of our Dependence on God, the Wise
Order and (...) of Blessings in the Gospel, the Sacredness and Mysteriousness
of Sacraments and Divine Institutions, are disordered and dishonored: The
Bishops and Priests inventing both the Word and the Element, institute a kind
of Sacrament, in great derogation to the Supreme Prerogative of Christ; and men
are taught to go in ways which Superstition has invented, and Interest does
support.

BUT there is yet one great instance more of this irreligion. Upon the
Sacraments themselves they are taught to rely, with so little of Moral and
Virtuous Dispositions, that the efficacy of one is made to lessen the necessity
of the other; and the Sacraments are taught to be so effectual by an inherent
virtue, that they are not so much made the instruments of Virtue, as the
Suppletory; not so much to increase, as to make amends for the want of Grace:
On which we shall not now insist; because it is sufficiently remarked in our
reproof of the Roman Doctrines, in the matter of Repentance.

SECT. XII.
Their Doctrines as explained by their practice, make men guilty of Idolatry.
They teach men to give Divine honor to creatures: As the same worship to the
Image, and the prototype. They teach the same thing with the (...), whose
worship of Images was relative: and for a Christian to excuse himself by this,
is to say that for God's sake he will make bold to dishonor him. Of worship of
the Image of the Cross, and their hopes of Salvation in it. Their worshipping
the consecrated Bread and Wine considered, and the things they say to excuse
themselves from Idolatry herein.

AFTER all this, if their Doctrines as they are explicated by their practice,
and the Commentaries of their greatest Doctors, do make their Disciples guilty
of Idolatry, there is not any thing greater to deter men from them, than that
danger to their Souls which is imminent over them, upon that acoount.

THEIR worshipping of Images we have already reproved upon the account of its
novelty and innovation in Christian Religion. But that it is against good life,
a direct breach of the second Commandment, an Act of Idolatry, as much as the
Heathens themselves were guilty of, in relation to the second Commandment, is
but too evident by the Doctrines of their own Leaders.

FOR if to give Divine honor to a Creature be Idolatry, then the Doctors of
the Church of Rome teach their People to commit Idolatry: For they affirm, That
the same worship which is given to the Prototype or Principal, the same is to
be given to the Image of it. As we worship the Holy Trinity, and Christ, so we
may worship the Images of the Trinity, and of Christ; that is, with Latria, or
Divine honor. This is the constant sentence of the Divines, The Image is to be
worshipped with the same honor and worship, with which we worship those whose
Instit. moral. par. 1. l. 9. c. 6.
image it is, said Azorius, their great Master of Casuistical Theology. And
this is the Doctrine of their great Saint Thomas, of Alexander of Ales,
Bonaventure, Albertus, Richardus, Capreolus, Cajetan, Coster, Valentia,
Vasquez, the Jesuits of Colein, Triers and Mentz, approving Coster's opinion.

NEITHER can this be eluded by saying, that though the same worship be given to
the Image of Christ, as to Christ himself, yet it is not done in the same way;
for it is terminatively to Christ or God, but relatively to the image, that is,
to the image for God's or Christ's sake. For this is that we complain of, that
they give the same worship to an image, which is due to God; for what cause
soever it be done, it matters not, save only that the excuse makes it in some
sense, the worse for the Apology. For to do a thing which God has forbidden,
and to say it is done for God's sake, is to say, that for his sake we displease
him; for his sake we give that to a Creature, which is God's own propriety. But
besides this, we affirm, and it is of it self evident, that whoever, Christian
or Heathen, worships the image of any thing, cannot possibly worship that image
terminatively, for the very being of an image is relative; and therefore if the
man understands but common sense, he must suppose and intend that worship to be
relative, and a Heathen could not worship an image with any other worship; and
the second Commandment, forbidding to worship the likeness of any thing in
Heaven and Earth, does only forbid that thing which is in Heaven to be
worshipped by an image, that is, it forbids only a relative worship: For it is
a contradiction to say, this is the image of God, and yet this is God; and
therefore it must be also a contradiction, to worship an image with Divine
worship terminatively, for then it must be that the image of a thing, is that
thing whose image it is. And therefore these Doctors teach the same thing which
they condemn in the Heathens.

BUT they go yet a little further: The Image of the Cross they worship with
Divine honor; and therefore although this Divine worship is but relative, yet
consequently, the Cross it self is worshipped terminatively by Divine
adoration. For the Image of the Cross has it relatively, and for the Crosses
sake, therefore the Cross it self is the proper and full object of the Divine
adoration. Now that they do and teach this, we charge upon them by undeniable
Records: For in the very Pontisical published by the Authority of Pope Clement
the VIII. these words are found, The Legates Edit. Roman. p. 672.
Cross must be on the right hand, because Latria, or Divine honor is due to
it. And if Divine honor relative be due to the Legates Cross, which is but the
Image of Christ's Cross, then this Divine worship is terminated on Christ's
Cross, which is certainly but a mere Creature. To this purpose are the words of
Almain, The Images of the Trinity, and of the Cross, are to be adored with the
worship of Latria; that is, Divine. Now if the Image of the Cross be the
intermedial, then the Cross it self, whose Image that is, must be the last
object of this Divine worship; and if this be not Idolatry, it can never be
told, what is the notion of the Word. But this passes also into other real
effects: And well may the Cross it self be worshipped by Divine worship, when
the Church places her hopes of salvation on the Cross; for so she does, says
Aquinas, and makes one the argument of the other, and proves that the Church
places her hopes of salvation on the Cross, that is, on the instrument of
Christ's Passion, by a hymn which she uses in her offices; but this thing we
have remarked above, upon another occasion. Now although things are brought to
a very ill state, when Christians are so probably and apparently charged with
Idolatry, and that the excuses are too sine to be understood by them that need
them; yet no excuse can acquit these things, when the most that is, or can be
said is this, that although that which is God's due, is given to a Creature,
yet it is given with some difference of intention, and metaphysical
abstraction, and separation; especially, since, if there can be Idolatry in the
worshipping of an Image, it is certain, that a relative Divine worship is this
Idolatry; for no man that worships an Image (in that consideration or
formality) can make the Image the last Object: Either therefore the Heathens
were not Idolaters in the worshipping of an Image, or else these men are. The
Heathens did indeed infinitely more violate the first Commandment; but against
the second, precisely and separately from the first, the transgression is alike.

THE same also is the case in their worshipping the consecrated Bread and Wine:
Of which how far they will be excused besore God by their ignorant pretensions
and suppositions, we know not; but they hope to save themselves harmless by
saying, that they believe the Bread to be their Savior, and that if they did
not believe so, they would not do so. We believe that they say true; but we are
afraid that this will no more excuse them, than it will excuse those who
worship the Sun and Moon, and the Queen of Heaven, whom they would not worship,
if they did not believe to have Divinity in them: And it may be observed, That
they are very fond of that persuasion, by which they are led into this worship.
The error might be some excuse, if it were probable, or if there were much
temptation to it: But when they choose this persuasion, and have nothing for it
but a tropical expression of Scripture, which rather than not believe in the
natural, useless, and impossible sense, they will desie all their own reason,
and four of the five operations of their soul, Seeing, Smelling, Tasting and
Feeling, and contradict the plain Doctrine of the (...) Church, before they can
consent to believe this error, that Bread is changed into God, and the Priest
can make his Maker: We have too much cause to fear, that the error is too gross
to admit an excuse; and it is hard to suppose it invincible and involuntary,
because it is so hard, and so untempting, and so unnatural to admit the error.
We do desire that God may find an excuse for it, and that they would not. But
this we are most sure of, that they might, if they pleased, find many excuses,
or rather just causes for not giving (...) honor to the Consecrated Elements;
because there are so many contingencies in the whole conduct of this affair,
and we are so uncertain of the Priests intention, and we can never be made
certain, that there is not in the whole order of causes any invalidity in the
Consecration; and it is so impossible that any man should be sure that Here,
and Now, and This Bread is Transubstantiated, and is really the Natural body of
Christ; that it were fit to omit the giving Gods due to that which they do not
know to be any thing but a piece of bread; and it cannot consist with holiness,
and our duty to God, certainly to give Divine Worship to that thing, which
though their doctrine were Nemini potest per fidem constare se recepisse vel
minimum sacramentum. Estque hoc ita certum ex fide ac clarum est nos vivere.
Nulla est via, qua citra revelationem nosse possumus intentionem ministrantis,
vel evidenter, vel certo ex side. Andreas Vega, lib. 9. de (...). c. 17.
Non potest quis esse certus certitudine sidei se percipere verum Sacramentum:
Cum Sacramentum sine intention Ministri non conficiatur, and intentionem
alterius nemo videre potest. Bellarm. lib. 3. cap. 8. sect. Dicent.
true, they cannot know certainly to have a Divine being.

SECT. XIII.
A recapitulation of matters foregoing: showing the injury they do to Christian
Religion; in its Faith, Hope, Repentance and Charity, its Divine Worship,
Celebration of Sacraments, and keeping the Commandments of God. So that if
there are good Christians in the Roman Communion, yet they are not such, as
they are Papists; it is by Gods grace they are so, not by their Opinions, which
tend to diminish and destroy Goodness in them.

AND now we shall plainly represent to our Charges, how this whole matter
stands. The case is this, the Religion of a Christian consists in Faith, and
Hope, Repentance and Charity, Divine Worship and Celebration of the Sacraments,
and finally in keeping the Commandments of God. Now in all these, both in
Doctrines and Practices, the Church of Rome does dangerously err, and teaches
men so to do.

THEY do injury to Faith, by creating new Articles, and enjoining them as of
necessity to salvation. * They spoil their Hope, by placing it upon Creatures,
and devices of their own. * They greatly sin against Charity, by damning all
that are not of their opinion, in things false or uncertain, right or wrong. *
They break in pieces the salutary Doctrine of Repentance, making it to be
consistent with a wicked life, and little or no amendment. * They worship they
know not what, and pray to them that hear them not, and trust on that which
helps them not. * And as for the Commandments, they leave one of them out of
their Catechisms and Manuals, and while they contend earnestly against some
Opponents for the possibility of keeping them all, they do not insist upon the
Necessity of keeping any in the course of their lives, till the danger or
article of their death. * And concerning the Sacraments, they have egregiously
prevaricated in two points. For not to mention their reckoning of seven
Sacraments, which we only (...) to be an unnecessary, and unscholastical error;
they take the one half of the principal away from the Laity; and they institute
little Sacraments of their own, they invent Rites, and annex spiritual graces
to them, what they please themselves, of their own heads, without a Divine
Warrant or Institution: and, * At last persuade their people to that which can
never be excused, at least, from Material Idolatry.

IF these things can consist with the duty of Christians, not only to eat what
they worship, but to adore those things with Divine Worship, which are not God:
To reconcile a wicked life with certain hopes and expectations of Heaven at
last, and to place these hopes upon other things than God, and to damn all the
World that are not Christians at this rate, then we have lost the true measures
of Christianity; and the Doctrine and Discipline of Christ is not a Natural and
Rational Religion; not a Religion that makes men holy, but a confederacy under
the conduct of a Sect, and it must rest in Forms and Ceremonies, and Devices of
Man's Invention. And although we do not doubt, but that the goodness of God does
so prevail over all the follies and malice of mankind, that there are in the
Roman communion many very good Christians, yet they are not such as they are
Papists, but by some thing that is higher, and before that, something that is
of an abstract and more sublime consideration. And though the good people
amongst them are what they are by the grace and goodness of God, yet by all or
any of these opinions they are not so: But the very best suffer diminution, and
alloy by these things; and very many more are wholly subverted and destroyed.

CHAP. III.
The Church of Rome teaches Doctrines, which in many things are destructive of
Christian Society in general, and of Monarchy in special: Both which, the
Religion of the Church of England and Ireland does by her Doctrines greatly,
and Christianly support.

SECT. I.
Instances of Doctrines taught in the Church of Rome destructive of Societies.
As Lying and Equivocating, especially before a Magistrate to elude his
examinations. No Contracts, Vows, Oaths, a sufficient security in dealing with
them. Council of Constance was against keeping Faith with Heretics; and Hus
and Hierome of Prague felt the sad effects of it: They would have done the same
to Luther at Worms, had not the Emperor hindered. Of the Popes dispensing with
Oaths and Vows, and in Contracts of Marriage and Divorces.

THAT in the Church of Rome, it is publicly taught by their greatest Doctors,
That it is lawful to lie, or deceive the question of the Magistrate, to conceal
their name, and to tell a false one, to elude all examinations, and make them
insignificant and toothless, cannot be doubted by any man that knows how the
English Priests have behaved themselves in the times of Queen Elizabeth, King
James, and the Blessed Martyr King Charles 1. (...) wrote in defense of it; and
Father Barnes who wrote a Book against Lying and Equivocating, was suspected
for a Heretic, and smarted severely under their hands.

To him that asks you again for what you have paid him already, you may safely
say, you never had any thing of him, meaning so as to owe it him now. It is the
Doctrine of Emanuel Sa and Sanchez; which we understand to be a great lie, and
a great sin, it being at the best a deceiving of the Law, that you be not
deceived by your Creditor; that is, a doing evil to prevent one; a sin, to
prevent the losing of your money.

IF a man asks his wife if she be an Adulteress, though she be, yet she may
say, she is not, if in her mind secretly she say [ not with a Instruct. (...).
l. 4. c. 21, 22.
purpose to tell you:] so Cardinal Tolet teaches. And if a man swears he will
take such a one to his wife, being compelled to swear; he may secretly mean,
[if hereafter she do please me.] And if a man swears to a Thief, that he will
give him Twenty Crowns, he may secretly say, [If I please to do so,] and In 3.
Tom. 4. qu. 93. art. 5. (...). 13.
then he is not bound. And of this Doctrine Vasquez brags, as of a rare, though
new invention, saying, it is gathered out of St. Austin, and Thomas Aquinas,
who only found out the way of saying nothing in such cases and questions, asked
by Judges; but this invention was drawn out by assiduous disputations. * He
that promises to say an Manual. c. 18. n 7.
Ave Mary, and swears he will, or vows to do it, yet sins not mortally, though
he does not do it, said the great Navar, and others whom he follows. * There is
yet a further degree of this iniquity; not only in words, but in real actions;
it is lawful to deceive or rob your Brother, when to do so is necessary for the
preservation of your fame: For no man is bound to restore stolen goods, (that
is) to cease from doing injury, with the peril of his credit. So Navar, and
Cardinal Apud Tolet. instruct. Sacerd. l. (...). c. 27.
Cajetan and Tolet teaches; who adds also, Hoc multi dicunt, quorum sententiam
potest quis tuta conscientia sequi. Many say the same thing; whose Doctrine any
man may follow with a safe Conscience. Nay, to save a man's credit, an honest
man that is ashamed to beg, may steal what is necessary for him, says Diana.

NOW by these Doctrines a man is taught In compend. p. (...) Lugduni, A. D.
(...)
how to be an honest Thief, and to keep what he is bound to restore; and by
these we may not only deceive our Brother, but the Law; and not the Law only,
but God also, even with an Oath, if the matter be but small: It never makes God
angry with you; or puts you out of the state of grace. But if the matter be
great, yet to prevent a great trouble to your self, you may conceal a truth, by
saying that which is false; according to the general Doctrine of the late
Casuists. So that a man is bound to keep truth and honesty, when it is for his
turn; but not, if it be to his own hinderance; and (...) David was not in the
right, but was something too nice in the resolution of the like case in the
fifteenth Psalm. Now although we do not affirm, that these particulars are the
Doctrine of the whole Church of Rome, because little things, and of this
nature, never are considered in their public Articles of Confession; yet a man
may do these vile things (for so we understand them to be) and find
justifications and warranty, and shall not be affirghted with the terrors of
damnation, nor the imposition of penances: he may for all these things be a
good Catholic, though it may be, not a very good Christian. But since these
things are affirmed by so many, the opinion is probable, and the practice safe,
says Cardinal Tolet. (...) supra.


BUT we shall instance in things of more public concern, and Catholic
Authority. No Contracts, Leagues, Societies, Promises, Vows, or Oaths, are a
sufficient security to him that deals with one of the Church of Rome, if he
shall please to make use of that liberty, which may and many times is, and
always can be granted to him. For first, it is affirmed, and was practiced by a
whole Council of Bishops at Constance, that Faith is not to be kept with
Heretics; and John Hus, and Hierom of Prague, and Savanarola, felt the
mischief of violation of public faith; and the same thing was disputed
fiercely at Worms, in the case of Luther, to whom Coesar had given a
safe conduct, and very many would have had it to be broken; but Coesar was a
better Christian than the Ecclesiastics and their party, and more a Gentleman.
But that no scrupulous Princes may keep their words any more in such cases, or
think themselves tied to perform their safe-conducts given to Heretics, there
is a way found out by a new Catholic Doctrine; Becanus shall speak this point
instead of the rest, [ There are two distinct Theol. (...) la.
Tribunals, and the Ecclesiastical is the Superior; and therefore if a Secular
Prince gives his Subjects a safe conduct, he cannot extend it to the Superior
Tribunal; nor by any security given, hinder the Bishop or the Pope to exercise
their jurisdiction:] And upon the account of this, or the like Doctrine, the
Pope and the other Ecclesiastics did prevail at Constance, for the burning of
their Prisoners, to whom safe conduct had been granted. But these things are
sufficiently known by the complaints of the injured persons.

BUT not only to Heretics, but to our friends also we may break our promises,
if the Pope give us leave. It is a public and an avowed Doctrine, That if a
man have taken an Oath of a thing lawful and honest, and in his power, yet if
it hinders him from doing a greater good, the Pope can dispense with his oath,
and take off the Obligation. This is expressly (...) by one of the most moderate
of them, Canus Bishop of the Canaries. Relect. de poenitent.
But beyond dispute, and even without a dispensation, they all of them own it,
That if a man have promised to a woman to marry her, and is betrothed to her,
and has sworn it, yet if he will before the consummation, enter into a
Monastery, his Oath shall not bind him, his promise is null; but his second
promise, that shall stand. And he that denies this, is accursed by the Council
(...). 8. (...). 6
of Trent.

NOT only husbands and wives espoused may break their vows and mutual
obligation, against the will of one another; but in the Church of Rome children
have leave given them to disobey their Parents, so they will but turn Friars:
And this they might do, Girls at twelve, and Boys at the age of fourteen years;
but the Council of Trent enlarged it to sixteen: But the thing was taught and
decreed by Pope Clement the III. Cap. cum virum de regularibus. Aquin. 2. 2. q.
88. art. 9 Lib. 1. c. 101.
and Thomas Aquinas did so, and then it was made lawful by him and his
Scholars; though it was expressly against the Doctrine and Laws of the preceding
ages of the Church, as appears in the Capitulars of Charles the Great. But thus
did the Pharisees teach their Children to Cry Corban, and neglect their
Parents; to pretend Religion, in prejudice of filial piety. In this particular
Aerodius a French Lawyer, an excellently learned man, suffered sadly by the
loss, and foreing of a hopeful Son from him, and he complained most excellently
in a Book written on purpose upon this subject.

BUT these mischiefs are Doctrinal, and accounted lawful: But in the matter of
Marriages and Contracts, Promises and Vows, where a Doctrine fails, it can be
supplied by the Pope's power: Which thing is avowed and owned, without a cover:
For when Pope Clement the V. condemned the Order of Knights Templers, he
disowned any justice or right in doing it, but stuck to his power, Quanquam de
jure Thom Walsingham.
non possumus, tamen ex plenitudine potestatis dictum ordinem reprobamus; that
is, though by right we cannot do it, yet by the fullness of power we condemn the
said Order: For he can dispense always, and in all things where there is cause,
and in many things where there is no cause; sed sub majori pretio, under a
greater price, said the tax of the Datary; where the price of the several
dispensations, even in causa turpi, in base and filthy causes, are set down.
Intranti nummo quasi quodam Principe (...) aurum and (...) and (...) Car. (...)
summo
Exiliunt valvae, nihil auditur nisi salve.


Nay the Pope can dispense supra jus, contra (...); above Law, and against Law
and right, said Mosconius in his books of the Majesty Lib. 1. de Jummo (...).
vide (...) Terano: and (...) de council du (...).
of the Militant Church: For the Popes Tribunal and Gods is but one; and
therefore every reasonable creature is subject to the Popes Empire, said the
same Author: And what Dispensations he usually gives, we are best informed by a
gloss of their own upon the Canon Law, Not a mirabile, quod cum co qui peccat
Dispensatur, cum illo autem (...). quia circa extra de Bigamis.
qui non peccat non Dispensatur: It is a wonderful thing that they should
dispense with a Fornicator, but not with him who marries after the death of his
first wife. * They give Divorces for Marriages in the fourth degree, and give
Dispensation to marry in the second. These things are a sufficient charge, and
yet evidently so, and publicly owned.

WE need not aggravate this matter, by Cap. (...) de (...). (...) n. 20.
what Panormitan and others do say, that the Pope has power to dispense in all
the Laws of God, except the Articles of Faith; and how much of this they own
and practice, needs no greater instance, than that which Volaterran tells of
Pope Innocent the VIII. that he gave the Norvegians a Dispensation, not only to
communicate, but to consecrate in bread only.

As the Pope by his Dispensations undertakes to dissolve the Ordinances of God;
so also the most solemn Contracts of men: Of which a very great instance was
given by Pope Clement the VII. who dispensed with the Oath which Francis the I.
of France solemnly swore to Charles the V. Emperor, after the Battle of Pavy,
and gave him leave to be perjured. And one of the late Popes dispensed with the
Bastard Son of the Conde D' Olivarez, or rather, plainly dissolved his marriage
which he made and consummated with Isabella D' Azueta, whom he had publicly
married when he was but a mean person, the son of Donna Marguerita Spinola, and
under the name of Julian Valeazar. But when the Conde had declared him his son
and heir, the Pope dissolved the first marriage, and gave him leave under the
name of Henry Philip de Guzman, to marry D. Juana de Valesco, Daughter to the
Constable of Castile.

AND now if it be considered, what influence these Doctrines have upon
Societies and Communities of men, they will need no further reproof than a mere
enumeration of the mischiefs they produce. They by this means legitimate
adulterous and incestuous marriages, and disannul lawful Contracts: They give
leave to a Spouse to break his or her Vow and Promise; and to Children to
disobey their Parents, and perhaps to break their Mothers heart, or to undo a
Family. No words can bind your faith, because you can be dispensed with; and if
you swear you will not procure a Dispensation, you can as well be dispensed
with for that perjury as the other; and you cannot be tied so fast, but the
Pope can unloose you. So that there is no certainty in your promise to God, or
faith to men, in Judicatories to Magistrates, or in Contracts with Merchants;
in the duty of Children to their Parents, of Husbands to their Wives, or Wives
to their contracted Husbands, of a Catholic to a Heretic; and last of all a
Subject to his Prince cannot be bound so strictly, but if the Prince be not of
the Popes persuasion, or be by him judged a Tyrant, his Subjects shall owe him
no obedience. But this is of particular consideration, and reserved for the
Third Section.

SECT. II.
Exemption of the Clergy from the Jurisdiction of Secular Princes. This
pretended to be by Divine right. The evil consequences of it. Plain Scripture
against it. The Sacredness of the Seal of Confession: not to be broken to
prevent the greatest evil and mischief.

THERE is yet another instance, by which the Church of Rome does intolerable
prejudice to Governments and Societies: In which although the Impiety is not so
apparent; yet the evil is more owned, and notorious, and defended; and that is,
the Exemption of their Clergy from the Jurisdiction of Secular Princes and
Magistrates, both in their Estates and Persons: Not only in the matters of
Simony, Heresy, and Apostasy, but in matters of Theft, Perjury, Murder,
Adultery, Blasphemy and Treason: In which cases they suffer not a Clergy man to
be judged by the Secular power, until the Church has quit him, and turned him
over, and given them leave to proceed. This was verified in the Synod of
Dalmatia, held by the Legates of Pope Innocent the III. and is now in the Si
Imperator. did. 96. etc. Ecclesia S M. de constitut.
Church of Rome, pretended to be by Divine Right: [ For it cannot be proved,
that Secular Princes are the Lawful Superiors and Judges of Clergy men, unless
it can be proved, A D 1199 Can 5 de Clericis l. 1. c 30. sect. quarto objiciunt.
that the Sheep are better than the Shepherd, or Sons than the Fathers, or
Temporals than Spirituals,] said Bellarmine: And therefore it is a shame (says
he) to see Princes contending with Bishops for precedence, or De Offic.
Christiani Prin. l. 1. c. 5.
for Lands. For the truth is this, (whatever the custom be) the Prince is the
Bishops Subject, not the Bishop the Princes: For no man can serve two Masters,
the Pope is their own Superior, and therefore the Secular Prince cannot be. So
both Bellarmine (...). defens. contra sect. Angl. l. 4. c. 17. sect. 15, 16,
and 18.
and (...) conclude this Doctrine out of Scripture.

AND although in this, as in all things else, when he finds it for the
advantage of the Church, the Pope can dispense, and diverse Popes of Rome did
give power to the Commonwealth of Venice, to judge Clergy men, and punish them
for great offenses; yet how ill this was taken by Paulus V. at their hands, and
what stirs he made in Christendom concerning it, the World was witness; and it
is to be read in the History of the Venetian Interdict, and not without great
difficulty defended by Marcus Antonius Perogrinus, M. Antonius Othelius, and
Joachim Scaynus of Padua, beside the Doctors of Venice.

NOW if it be considered, how great a part of mankind in the Roman Communion
are Clergy men, and how great a portion of the Lands and Revenues in each
Kingdom they have; to pretend a Divine Right of Exemption of their Persons from
Secular Judicatories, and their Lands from Secular burdens and charges of the
Commonwealth, is to make Religion a very little friend to the Public; and
causes, that by how much there is more of Religion, by so much there is the
less of Piety and Public Duty. Princes have many times felt the evil, and are
always subject to it, when so many thousand persons are in their Kingdoms, and
yet Subjects to a Foreign Power. But we need not trouble our selves to reckon
the evils consequent to this procedure, themselves have owned them, even the
very worst of things, [ The Rebellion of a Clergy man against his Prince is not
Treason, because he is not his Princes Subject.] It is expressly taught by
Emanuel Sa; and because the Aphor. ver. (...).
Frenchmen in zeal to their own King, could not endure this Doctrine, these
words were left out of the Edition of Paris, but still remain in the Editions
of Antwerp and Collen. But the thing is a general Rule, [ That all
Ecclesiastical persons are free from Secular Jurisdiction in causes Criminal,
whether Civil or Ecclesiastical: and this Rule is so general, that it admits no
exception; and so certain that it cannot be denied, unless you Defens. (...).
l. 4. c. 15. sect. 1.
will contradict the principles of Faith:] So Father Suarez. And this is
pretended to be allowed by Councils, Sacred Canons, and all the Doctors of Laws
Humane and Divine; for so Bellarmine affirms. Against Apol. p. 57.
which, since it is a matter of Faith and Doctrine, which we now charge upon
the Church of Rome, as an Enemy to public Government, we shall think it
sufficient to oppose against their Pretension, the plain and easy words of S.
Paul, Let every soul Romans 13. 1.
be subject to the higher Powers. Every Soul,] That is, says S. Chrysostom,
whether he In (...) lccum.
be a Monk or an Evangelist, a Prophet or an Apostle.

(...) the like iniquity, when it is extended to its utmost Commentary, which
the Commenters of the Church of Rome put upon it, is, the Divine Right of the
Seal of Confession; which they make so Sacred, to serve such ends as they have
chosen, that it may not be broken up to save the lives of Princes, or of the
whole Republic, says Instruct. Sacerd. l. 3. c. 16.
Tolet: No, not to save all the World, said De poenit. l. 2. c. 19. n. 5.
Henriquez: Not to save an Innocent, not to keep the World from burning, or
Religion from perversion, or all the Sacraments from demolition. Indeed it is
lawful, says Apol. con. Reg. M. Brit. c. 13.
Bellarmine, if a Treason be known to a Priest in Confession, and he may in
general words give notice to a pious and Catholic Prince, but not to a
Heretic; and that was acutely and prudently said by him, said Father (...).
Father Binet is not so kind even to the Cont. Reg. Ang. l. 9. c. 3.
Catholic Princes; for he says, that it is better that all the Kings of the
World should perish, than that the Seal of Confession should be so much as once
broken; and this is the Catholic Doctrine, said Eudaemon Joannes in his
Apology for Garnet: and for it he also quotes Suarez. But it is enough to have
Cap. 13.
named this. How little care these men take of the lives of Princes, and the
Public Interest; which they so greatly undervalue to every (...) fancy of
their own, is but too evident by these Doctrines.

SECT. III.
Their Doctrines enemies to the (...) Powers and Lives of Princes. The whole
Order of Jesuits subject Princes to the Pope. Whose power extends to Temporal
punishments and depriving them of their Kingdoms. The method of doing it, and
how they answer the precepts of obeying Kings. Instances of putting the
deposing power in execution. Answer to the Objection that this is but the
private opinion of some Doctors, not the Doctrine of the Church. A Conclusion,
exhorting all that desire to be saved, to decline these horrid Doctrines.

THE last thing we shall remark for the instruction and caution of our Charges
is not the least. The Doctrines of the Church of Rome are great enemies to the
Dignity and Security, to the Powers and Lives of Princes: And this we shall
briefly prove by setting down the Doctrines themselves, and their consequent
practices.

AND here we observe, That not only the whole Order of Jesuits is a great enemy
to Monarchy, by subjecting the Dignity of Princes to the Pope, by making the
Pope the Supreme Monarch of Christians; but they also teach, That it is a
Catholic Doctrine, the Doctrine of the Church.

THE Pope has a Supreme power of De sum. Pontif. l 5. c. 6.
disposing the Temporal things of all Christians in order to a Spiritual good,
says Bellarmine. And Becanus discourses of this very largely in his book of
the English Controversy, printed by Albin at Mentz, 1612. But because this
book was ordered to be purged, ( Vna litura potest) we shall not insist upon
it; but there is as bad which was never censured. Bellarmine says, that the
Ibid. c. 7.
Ecclesiastical Republic can command and compel the Temporal, which is indeed
its Subject, to change the Administration, and to depose Princes, and to
appoint others, when it cannot otherwise defend the Spiritual good: And Father
Suarez says the same. The power of the Pope extends it Defens. Fid. Cath. l.
(...). c. 23. sect. 10. and (...). 18. and 20.
self to the coercion of Kings with Temporal punishments, and depriving them of
their Kingdoms, when necessity requires; nay, this power is more necessary over
Princes than over Subjects. The same also is taught by Santarel in his book of
Heresy and Schism, printed at Rome, 1626.

BUT the mischief of this Doctrine proceeds a little further.

CARDINAL Tolet affirms, and our Countryman (...). (...). in Angl fol. 336.
Father Bridgewater commends the saying; That when a Prince is Excommunicate,
before the Denunciation the Subjects are not absolved from their Oath of
Allegiance, (as Cajet an says well;) yet when it is denounced, they are not
only absolved from their Obedience, but are bound not to obey, unless the fear
of death, or loss of goods excuse them; which was the case of the English
Catholics in the time of Henry the VIII. And F. Creswel says, it is the
sentence of all In Philopat. sect. 2. n. 160. and 162.
Catholics, that Subjects are bound to expel Heretical Princes, if they have
strength enough; and that to this they are tied by the Commandment of God, the
most strict tie of Conscience, and the extreme danger of their souls. Nay, even
before the sentence is declared, though the Subjects are not bound to it, yet
lawfully they may deny Tom. 3 disp. 1. q. 12. punct. 2.
obedience to an Heretical Prince, said Gregory de Valentia.

IT were an endless labor to transcribe the horrible Doctrines which are
preached in the Jesuits School, to the shaking off the Regal Power of such
Princes which are not of the Roman Communion. The whole economy Cont. Barcl.
c. 7.
of it is well described by Bellarmine, who affirms, That it does not belong to
Monks, or other Ecclesiastics, to commit Murders, neither do the Popes use to
proceed that way. But their manner is, first Fatherly to correct Princes, then
by Ecclesiastical Censures to deprive them of the Communion, then to absolve
their Subjects from the Oath of Allegiance, and to deprive them of their Kingly
Dignity. And what then? The Execution belongs to others.] This is the way of
the Popes, thus wisely and moderately to break Kings in pieces.

WE delight not to aggravate evil things. We therefore forbear to set down
those horrid things spoken by Sa, Mariana, Santarel, Carolus Scribanius, and
some others. It is enough that Suarez says, An Excommunicate Vbi supra. 1. 6.
c. 6. sect. 24.
King may with impunity be deposed or killed by any one. This is the case of
Kings and Princes by the Sentence of the chiefest Roman Doctors. And if it be
objected, that we are commanded to obey Kings, not to speak evil of them, not
to curse them, no not in our heart: There is a way found out to answer these
little things. For though the Apostle commands that we should be subject to
higher powers, and obey Kings, and all that are in Authority: It is true, you
must, and so you may well enough for all this; for the Pope can make that he
who is a King shall be no King, and then you are disobliged: so Bellarmine.
Cont. (...). c. 7.
And if after all this there remains any (...) of Conscience, it ought to be
remembered, that though even after a Prince is excommunicated, it should be of
it self a sin to depose or kill the Prince; yet if the Pope commands you, it is
no sin. For if the Pope should err by commanding sin, or forbidding virtues,
yet the Church were bound to believe that the vices were good, and the virtues
evil; unless she would sin against her Conscience. They are the very words of
De Romans Pontif. l. 4. c. 5.
Bellarmine.

BUT they add more particulars of the same Bran. The Sons of an Heretical
Father are made sui juris, that is, free from their Fathers power. A Catholic
Wife is not tied to pay her duty to an Heretical Husband, and the Servants are
not bound to do service to such Masters. These are the Doctrines of their great
Azorius; and as for Kings, he affirms, they may be deposed for Heresy. But all
this is only in the case of Heretical Princes: But what for others?

EVEN the Roman Catholic Princes are not free from this danger. All the World
knows what the Pope did to King Chilperick of France: He deposed him, and put
Pipin in his place; and did what he could to have put Albert King of the Romans
in the Throne of Philip surnamed the Fair. They were the Popes of Rome who
armed the Son against the Father, the Emperor Henry IV. and the Son fought
against him, took him prisoner, shaved him, and thrust him into a Monastery,
where he died with grief and hunger. We will not speak of the Emperor
Frederick, Henry the sixth, Emperor; the Duke of Savoy, against whom he caused
Charles the V. and Francis the I. of France, to take Arms; nor of Francis
Dandalus, Duke of Venice, whom he bound with chains, and fed him as Dogs are
fed, with bones and scraps under his Table: Our own Henry the II. and King John
were great Instances of what Princes in their case may expect from that
Religion. These were the piety of the Father of Christendom. But these were the
product of the Doctrine which Clement the V. vented in the Council of Vienna,
Omne jus Regum a se pendere: The rights of all Kings depend upon the Pope. And
therefore (...) their Catholic Princes are at their (...), and they would if
they durst use them (...): If they do but favor Heretics or Schismatics,
receive them or defend them; if the (...) be perjured, if he rashly break a
League made with the Sea Apostolic, (...) he do not keep the peace promised to
the Church, if he be sacrilegious, if he dissipate the goods of the Church, the
Pope Instit. Moral. part. 2. l. 10. c. 9.
may depose him, said Azorius. And (...); says, he may do it, in case the
Prince or Emperor be insufficient, (...) he be wicked, if he be unprofitable,
if he does not defend the Church. This is very much, Vbi supra.
but yet there is something more; this may be done, if he impose new Gabels or
Imposts upon his Subjects, without the Pope's leave; for if they do not pretend
to this See Mart. Vivaldus de bulla (...) Dominici.
also, why does the Pope in Bulla Coenae Dominici excommunicate all Princes
that do it?

NOW if it be inquired, by what Authority the Pope does these things? It is
answered, That the Pope has a Supreme and Absolute Authority; both the
Spiritual and the Temporal Power is in the Pope as Christ's Vicar, said Azorius
and Santarel. The Church has the right of a superior Lord over the rights of
Princes and their Temporalties; and that by her Jurisdiction she disposes of
Temporals ut de suo peculio, as of her own proper goods, said our Countreyman
Weston, Rector of the College at (...) Jur Pontificii qu. 15. sect. 5 qu. 17
sect. 6. and qu. 27. sect. 7. Catal. glor. mundi part. 4. consid. 7. ex Zo.
lcrico.
Doway. Nay, the Pope has power in omnia, per omnia, super omnia, in all
things, thorough all things, and over all things; and the sublimity and
immensity of the Supreme Bishop is so great, that no mortal man can comprehend
it, said Cassenaeus; no man can express it, no man can think it: So that it is
no wonder what Papirius Massonus said of Pope Boniface the VIII. that he owned
himself not only as the Lord of France, Verb, (...). 8.
but of all the World.

NOW we are sure it will be said, That this is but the private opinion of some
Doctors, not the Doctrine of the Church of Rome. To this we reply: 1. It is not
the private opinion of a few, but their public Doctrine owned, and offered to
be justified to all the World, as appears in the preceding testimonies. 2. It
is the (...) of all the Jesuit Order, which is now the greatest and most
glorious in the Church of Rome, and the maintenance of it, is the subject
matter of their new Vow of obedience to the Pope, that is to advance his
Grandeur. 3. Not only the Jesuits, but all the Canonists in the Church of Rome
contend earnestly for these Doctrines. 4. This they do upon the Authority of
the Decretals, their own Law De major. and obedicnt unam Sanctam. In extrav.
Bonis. 8. council. Lucr. sub Julio 2. In Extrav. Job. 22. cap. Cum inter
nonnullos. In gloss. final. edit. Paris. 1503. council. Viennens. sub Clem. 5.
, and the Decrees of Councils. 5. Not only the Jesuits, and Canonists, but
others also of great note amongst them, earnestly contend sor these Doctrines;
particularly Cassenaeus, Zodericus Vbi supra in Cassenaeo.
, the Archbishop of Florence Sum. 3. part. l. 22 c. 6. sect 4.
, Petrus de Monte In sua Monarchia quem citat Felinus in cap. Si quando, ubi
per eum extrav. de rescript.
, St. Thomas Aquinas In tract. de Rege and Regno ad Regem Cypri.
, Bozius, Baronius, and many others. 6. Themselves tell us it is a matter of
Faith; F. Creswell In Philopair sect. 2. n. 160, 162.
says, it is the sentence of all Catholics; and they that do not admit these
Doctrines, Father Rosweyd Lib. de side (...). servanda.
calls them half Christians, Grinners, barking Royalists, and a new Sect of
Catholics; and Eudaemon Joannes In epist monitor. ad (...). (...).
says, That without question it is a Heresy in the judgment of all Catholics.
Now in such things which are not in their Creeds, and public Confessions, from
whence should we know the Doctrines of their Church, but from their chiefest
and most leading Doctors; who it is certain, would fain have all the World
believe it to be the Doctrine of their Church? And therefore as it is certain
that any Roman Catholic may with allowance be of this opinion; so he will be
esteemed the better and more zealous Catholic if he be; and if it were not for
fear of Princes, who will not lose their Crowns for their foolish Doctrines,
there is no peradventure but it would be declared to be de fide, a matter of
faith, as diverse of them of late, do not stick to say. And of this the Pope
gives but too much evidence, since he will not take away the scandal, which is
so greatly given to all Christian Kings and Republics, by a public and a just
condemnation of it. Nay, it is worse than thus; for Sixtus Quintus upon the XI.
of September, A. D. 1589. in an Oration in a Conclave of Cardinals, did
solemnly commend the Monk that killed Henry the III. of France. The Oration was
printed at Paris by them that had rebelled against that Prince, and avouched
for Authentic by Boucher, Decreil, and Ancelein: And though some would fain
have it In resp ad Apolog. pro juram. sidelit.
thought to be none of his, yet Bellarmine dares not deny it, but makes for it
a crude, and a cold Apology.

NOW concerning this Article, it will not be necessary to declare the Sentence
of the Church of England and Ireland; because it is notorious to all the World;
and is expressly opposed against this Roman Doctrine, by Laws, Articles,
Consessions, Homilies, the Oath of Allegiance and Supremacy, the Book of
Christian Institution, and the many excellent Writings of King James of Blessed
Memory, of our Bishops and other Learned persons against Bellarmine, Parsons,
Eudaemon Johannes, Creswel, and others: And nothing is more notorious than that
the Church of England is most (...), most zealous for the right of Kings; and
within these four and twenty years, she has had many Martyrs, and very, very
many Confessors in this cause.

IT is true, that the Church of Rome does recriminate in this point, and
charges some Calvinists and Presbyterians with Doctrines which indeed they
borrowed from Rome, (...) their Arguments, making use of their Expressions, and
pursuing their Principles. But with them in this Article we have nothing to do,
but to reprove the men, and condemn their Doctrine, as we have done all along,
by private Writings, and public Instruments.

WE conclude these our reproofs with an Exhortation to our respective Charges,
to all that desire to be saved in the day of the Lord Jesus, that they decline
from these horrid Doctrines, which in their birth are new, in their growth are
scandalous, in their proper consequents are insinitely dangerous to their
souls, and hunt for their precious life: But therefore it is highly (...) that
they also should perceive their own advantages, and give God praise, that they
are immured from such infinite dangers, by the (...) Precepts, and holy Faith
taught and commanded in the Church of England and Ireland; in which the Word of
God is set before them as a Lantern to their feet, and a light unto their eyes;
and the Sacraments are fully administered according to Christ's Institution, and
Repentance is preached according to the measures of the Gospel, and Faith in
Christ is propounded according to the rule of the Apostles, and the measures of
the Churches Apostolical; and obedience to Kings is greatly and sacredly urged,
and the Authority and Order of Bishops is preserved, against the usurpation of
the Pope, and the invasion of Schismatics and Aerians new and old; and Truth
and Faith to all men is kept and preached to be necessary and inviolable, and
the Commandments are expounded with just severity, and without scruples; and
holiness of life is urged upon all men, as indispensably necessary to
salvation, and therefore without any allowances, tricks, and little artifices
of escaping from it by easy and imperfect Doctrines; and every thing is
practiced which is useful to the saving of our souls; and Christ's Merits and
Satisfaction are entirely relied upon for the pardon of our sins; and the
necessity of good works is universally taught; and our prayers are holy,
unblameable, edisying and understood; they are according to the measures of the
Word of God, and the practice of all Saints. In this Church the children are
duly, carefully, and rightly baptized, and the baptized, in their due time are
Confirmed, and the Confirmed are Communicated; and Penitents are absolved, and
the Impenitents punished and discouraged; and Holy Marriage in all men is
preferred before unclean Concubinate in any; and Nothing is wanting that God
and his Christ has made necessary to salvation.

Behold we set before you Life and Death, Blessing and Cursing, Safety and
Danger. Choose which you will; but remember that the Prophets who are among
you, have declared to you the way of salvation. Now the Lord give you
understanding in all things, and reveal even this also unto you.

Amen.
THE END.
TWO LETTERS TO PERSONS Changed in their RELIGION.

The I. LETTER. A Copy of the first Letter written to a Gentlewoman newly
seduced to the Church of Rome.
M. B.
I WAS desirous of an opportunity in London to have discoursed with you
concerning something of nearest concernment to you, but the multitude of my
little affairs hindered me, and have brought upon you this trouble to read a
long Letter, which yet I hope you will be more willing to do, because it comes
from one who has a great respect to your person, and a very great charity to
your soul: I must confess I was on your behalf troubled when I heard you were
fallen from the Communion of the Church of England, and entered into a
voluntary, unnecessary schism, and departure from the Laws of the King, and the
Communion of those with whom you have always lived in charity, going against
those Laws in the defense and profession of which your Husband died, going from
the Religion in which you were Baptized, in which for so many years, you lived
piously and hoped for Heaven, and all this without any sufficient reason,
without necessity or just scandal ministered to you; and to aggravate all this,
you did it in a time when the Church of England was persecuted, when she was
marked with the Characterisms of her Lord, the marks of the Cross of Jesus,
that is, when she suffered for a holy cause and a holy conscience, when the
Church of England was more glorious than at any time before; Even when she
could show more Martyrs and Confessors than any Church this day in Christendom,
even then when a King died in the profession of her Religion, and thousands of
Priests, learned and pious men suffered the spoiling of their goods rather than
they would forsake one Article of so excellent a Religion; So that seriously it
is not easily to be imagined that any thing should move you, unless it be that
which troubled the perverse Jews, and the Heathen Greek, Scandalum crucis, the
scandal of the Cross; You stumbled at that Rock of offense; You left us because
we were afflicted, lessened in outward circumstances, and wrapped in a cloud;
but give me leave only to remind you of that sad saying of the Scripture, that
you may avoid the consequent of it; They that fall on this stone shall be
broken in pieces, but they on whom it shall fall shall be grinded to powder.
And if we should consider things but prudently, it is a great argument that the
sons of our Church are very conscientious and just in their persuasions, when
it is evident, that we have no temporal end to serve, nothing but the great end
of our souls, all our hopes of preferment are gone, all secular regards, only
we still have truth on our sides, and we are not willing with the loss of truth
to change from a persecuted to a prosperous Church, from a Reformed to a Church
that will not be reformed; lest we give scandal to good people that suffer for
a holy conscience, and weaken the hands of the afflicted; of which if you had
been more careful, you would have remained much more innocent.

BUT I pray, give me leave to consider for you, because you in your change
considered so little for your self, what fault, what false doctrine, what
wicked and dangerous proposition, what defect, what amiss did you find in the
Doctrine and Liturgy and Discipline of the Church of England?

For its doctrine, It is certain it professes the belief of all that is written
in the Old and New Testament, all that which is in the three Creeds, the
Apostolical, the Nicene, and that of Athanasius, and whatsoever was decreed in
the four General Councils, or in any other truly such, and whatsoever was
condemned in these, our Church has legally declared it to be Heresy. And upon
these accounts above four whole ages of the Church went to Heaven; they
baptized all their Catechumens into this faith, their hopes of heaven was upon
this and a good life, their Saints and Martyrs lived and died in this alone,
they denied Communion to none that professed this faith. This is the Catholic
faith, so says the Creed of Athanasius; and unless a company of men have power
to alter the faith of God, whosoever live and die in this faith, are entirely
Catholic and Christian. So that the Church of England has the same faith
without dispute that the Church had for 400 or 500 years, and therefore there
could be nothing wanting here to saving faith, if we live according to our
belief.

2. For the Liturgy of the Church of England, I shall not need to say much,
because the case will be very evident; First, Because the disputers of the
Church of Rome have not been very forward to object any thing against it, they
cannot charge it with any evil: 2. Because for all the time of King Edward VI.
and till the eleventh year of Queen Elizabeth, your people came to our Churches
and prayed with us till the Bull of Pius Quintus came out upon temporal
regards, and made a Schism by forbidding the Queens Subjects to pray as by Law
was here appointed, though the prayers were good and holy, as themselves did
believe. That Bull enjoined Recusancy, and made that which was an act of
Rebellion, and Disobedience, and Schism, to be the character of your Roman
Catholics. And after this, what can be supposed wanting in order to salvation?
We have the Word of God, the Faith of the Apostles, the Creeds of the Primitive
Church, the Articles of the four first general Councils, a holy Liturgy,
excellent Prayers, perfect Sacraments, Faith and Repentance, the ten
Commandments, and the Sermons of Christ, and all the precepts and counsels of
the Gospel; We teach the necessity of good works, and require and strictly
exact the severity of a holy life; We live in obedience to God, and are ready
to die for him, and do so when he requires us so to do; We speak honorably of
his most holy Name, we worship him at the mention of his Name, we confess his
Attributes, we love his Servants, we pray for all men, we love all Christians,
even our most erring Brethren, we confess our sins to God and to our Brethren
whom we have offended, and to Gods Ministers in cases of Scandal, or of a
troubled Conscience; We communicate often, we are enjoined to receive the holy
Sacrament thrice every year at least; Our Priests absolve the penitent, our
Bishops ordain Priests, and confirm baptized persons, and bless their people
and intercede for them; and what could here be wanting to Salvation? what
necessity forced you from us? I dare not suspect it was a temporal regard that
drew you away, but I am sure it could be no spiritual.

BUT now that I have told you, and made you to consider from whence you went,
give me leave to represent to you, and tell you whither you are gone, that you
may understand the nature and conditions of your change: For do not think your
self safe, because they tell you that you are come to the Church; You are
indeed gone from one Church to another, from a better to a worse, as will
appear in the induction, the particulars of which before I reckon, give me
leave to give you this advice; if you mean in this affair to understand what
you do; it were better you enquired what your Religion is, than what your
Church is; for that which is a true Religion, to day, will be so to morrow and
for ever; but that which is a holy Church to day, may be heretical at the next
change, or may betray her trust, or obtrude new Articles in contradiction to
the old, or by new interpretations may clude ancient truths, or may change your
Creed, or may pretend to be the Spouse of Christ when she is idolatrous, that
is, adulterous to God: Your Religion is that which you must, and therefore may
competently understand; You must live in it; and grow in it, and govern all the
actions of your life by it; and in all questions concerning the Church, you are
to choose your Church by the Religion, and therefore this ought first and last
to be enquired after. Whether the Roman Church be the Catholic Church, must
depend upon so many uncertain enquires, is offered to be proved by so long, so
tedious a method, has in it so many intrigues and Labyrinths of Question, and
is (like a long line) so impossible to be perfectly strait, and to have no
declination in it when it is held by such a hand as yours, that unless it be by
material enquiries into the Articles of the Religion, you can never hope to
have just grounds of confidence. In the mean time you can consider this; if the
Roman Church were the Catholic, that is, so as to exclude all that are not of
her communion, then the Greek Churches had as good turn Turks as remain damned
Christians, and all that are in the communion of all the other Patriarchal
Churches in Christendom, must also perish like Heathens, which thing before any
man can believe, he must have put off all reason, and all modesty, and all
charity; And who can with any probability think that the Communion of Saints in
the Creed is nothing but the Communion of Roman Subjects, and the Article of
the Catholic Church was made up to dispark the enclosures of Jerusalem, but to
turn them into the pale of Rome, and the Church is as limited as ever it was,
save only that the Synagogue is translated to Rome, which I think you will
easily believe was a Proposition the Apostles understood not. But though it be
hard to trust to it, it is also so hard to prove it, that you shall never be
able to understand the measures of that question, and therefore your salvation
can never depend upon it. For no good or wise person can believe that God has
tied our Salvation to impossible measures, or bound us to an Article that is
not by us cognoscible, or intends to have us conducted by that which we cannot
understand, and when you shall know that Learned men, even of the Roman party
are not agreed concerning the Catholic Church that is infallibly to guide you,
some saying that it is the virtual Church, that is, the Pope; some, that it is
the representative Church, that is, a Council; Some that it is the Pope and the
Council, the virtual Church and the representative Church together; Some, that
neither of these, nor both together are infallible; but only, the essential
Church, or the diffusive Church is the Catholic, from whom we must at no hand
dissent; you will quickly find your self in a wood, and uncertain whether you
have more than a word in exchange for your soul, when you are told you are in
the Catholic Church. But I will tell you what you may understand, and see and
feel, something that your self can tell whether I say true or no concerning it.
You are now gone to a Church that protects it self by arts of subtilty and
arms, by violence and persecuting all that are not of their minds, to a Church
in which you are to be a Subject of the King so long as it pleases the Pope: In
which you may be absolved from your Vows made to God, your Oaths to the King,
your Promises to Men, your duty to your Parents in some cases: A Church in
which men pray to God and to Saints in the same Form of words in which they
pray to God, as you may see in the Offices of Saints, and particularly of our
Lady: a Church in which men are taught by most of the principal Leaders to
worship Images with the same worship with which they worship God and Christ, or
him or her whose Image it is, and in which they usually picture God the Father,
and the holy Trinity, to the great dishonor of that sacred mystery, against
the doctrine and practice of the Primitive Church, against the express doctrine
of Scripture, against the honor of a Divine Attribute; I mean, the immensity
and spirituality of the Divine Nature; You are gone to a Church that pretends
to be Infallible, and yet is infinitely deceived in many particulars, and yet
endures no contradiction, and is impatient her children should enquire into any
thing the Priests obtrude. You are gone from receiving the whole Sacrament to
receive it but half; from Christ's Institution to a humane invention, from
Scripture to uncertain Traditions, and from ancient Traditions to new
pretenses, from prayers which ye understood to prayers which ye understand not,
from confidence in God to rely upon creatures, from entire dependence upon
inward acts to a dangerous temptation of resting too much in outward
ministeries, in the external work of Sacraments and of Sacramentals: you are
gone from a Church whose worshipping is simple, Christian and Apostolical, to a
Church where men's consciences are laden with a burden of Ceremonies greater
than that in the days of the Jewish Religion (for the Ceremonial of the Church
of Rome is a great Book in Folio) greater I say than all the Ceremonies of the
Jews contained in Leviticus, etc. You are gone from a Church where you were
exhorted to read the Word of God, the holy Scriptures from whence you found
instruction, institution, comfort, reproof, a treasure of all excellencies, to
a Church that seals up that fountain from you, and gives you drink by drops out
of such Cisterns as they first make, and then stain, and then reach out: and if
it be told you that some men abuse Scripture, it is true, for if your Priests
had not abused Scripture, they could not thus have abused you, but there is no
necessity they should, and you need not, unless you list; any more than you
need to abuse the Sacraments or Decrees of the Church, or the messages of your
friend, or the Letters you receive, or the Laws of the Land, all which are
liable to be abused by evil persons, but not by good people and modest
understandings. It is now become a part of your Religion to be ignorant, to
walk in blindness, to believe the man that hears your Confessions, to hear none
but him, not to hear God speaking but by him, and so you are liable to be
abused by him, as he please, without remedy. You are gone from us, where you
were only taught to worship God through Jesus Christ, and now you are taught to
worship Saints and Angels with a worship at least dangerous, and in some things
proper to God; for your Church worships the Virgin Mary with burning incense
and candles to her, and you give her presents, which by the consent of all
Nations used to be esteemed a worship peculiar to God, and it is the same thing
which was condemned for Heresy in the Collyridians, who offered a Cake to the
Virgin Mary; A Candle and a Cake make no difference in the worship; and your
joining God and the Saints in your worship and devotions, is like the device of
them that (...) for King and Parliament, the latter destroys the former. I will
trouble you with no more particulars, because if these move you not to consider
better, nothing can.

(...) yet I have two things more to add of another nature, one of which at
least may prevail upon you, whom I suppose to have a tender and a religious
Conscience.

(...) first is, That all the points of difference between us and your Church
are such as do evidently serve the ends of Covetousness and ambition, of power
and riches, and so stand vehemently suspected of design, and art, rather than
truth of the Article and designs upon Heaven. I instance in the Pope's power
over Princes and all the world; his power of dispensation, The exemption of the
Clergy from jurisdiction of Princes, The doctrine of Purgatory and Indulgences
which was once made means to raise a portion for a Lady, the Niece of Pope Leo
the (...); The Priests power advanced beyond authority of any warrant from
Scripture, a doctrine apt to bring absolute obedience to the Papacy; but
because this is possibly too nice for you to suspect or consider, that which I
am sure ought to move you is this:

THAT you are gone to a Religion in which though (...) God's grace prevailing
over the follies of men, there are I hope, and charitably suppose, many pious
men that love God, and live good lives, yet there are very many doctrines
taught by your men, which are very ill Friends to a good life. I instance in
your Indulgences and pardons, in which vicious men put a great confidence, and
rely greatly upon them. The doctrine of Purgatory which gives countenance to a
sort of Christians who live half to God and half to the world, and for them
this doctrine has found out a way that they may go to Hell and to Heaven too.
The Doctrine that the Priests absolution can turn a tristing repentance into a
perfect and a good, and that suddenly too, and at any time, even on our Death
bed, or the minute before your death, is a dangerous heap of falsehoods, and
gives license to wicked people, and teaches men to reconcile a wicked debauched
life, with the hopes of Heaven. And then for penances and temporal
satisfaction, which might seem to be as a plank after the shipwreck of the duty
of Repentance, to keep men in awe, and to preserve them from sinking in an
Ocean of Impiety, it comes to just nothing by your doctrine; for there are so
many easy ways of Indulgences and getting Pardons, so many con-fraternities,
stations, privileged Altars, little Offices, Agnus Dei's, amulets, hallowed
devices, swords, roses, hats, Churchyards, and the fountain of these annexed
Indulgences the Pope himself, and his power of granting what, and when, and to
whom he list, that he is a very unfortunate man that needs to smart with
penances; and after all, he may choose to suffer any at all, for he may pay
them in Purgatory if he please, and he may come out of Purgatory upon
reasonable terms, in case he should think it fit to go thither; So that all the
whole duty of Repentance seems to be destroyed with devices of men that seek
power and gain, and sind error and folly; insomuch that if I had a mind to
live an evil Life, and yet hope for Heaven at last, I would be of your religion
above any in the world.

BUT I forget I am writing a Letter: I shall therefore desire you to consider
upon the premises, which is the safer way. For surely it is lawful for a man to
serve God without Images; but that to worship Images is lawful, is not so sure.
It is lawful to pray to God alone, to confess him to be true, and every man a
liar, to call no man Master upon Earth, but to rely upon God teaching us; But it
is at least hugely disputable and not at all certain that any man, or society
of men can be infallible, that we may put our trust in Saints, in certain
extraordinary Images, or burn Incense and offer consumptive oblations to the
Virgin Mary, or make vows to persons, of whose state, or place, or capacities,
or condition we have no certain revelation: we are sure we do well when in the
holy Communion we worship God and Jesus Christ our Savior, but they who also
worship what seems to be bread, are put to strange shifts to make themselves
believe it to be lawful. It is certainly lawful to believe what we see and
feel; but it is an unnatural thing upon pretense of faith to disbelieve our
eyes, when our sense and our faith can better be reconciled, as it is in the
question of the Real presence, as it is taught by the Church of England.

SO that unless you mean to prefer a danger before safety, temptation to
unholiness before a severe and a holy religion, unless you mean to lose the
benefit of your prayers by praying what you perceive not, and the benefit of
the Sacrament in great degrees by faling from Christ's institution, and taking
half instead of all; unless you desire to provoke God to jealousy by Images,
and Man to jealousy in professing a Religion in which you may in many cases
have leave to forfeit your faith and lawful trust, unless you will still
continue to give scandal to those good people with whom you have lived in a
common Religion, and weaken the hearts of God's afflicted ones, unless you will
choose a Catechism without the second Commandment, and a Faith that grows
bigger or less as men please, and a Hope that in many degrees relies on men and
vain confidences, and a Charity that damns all the world but your selves,
unless you will do all this, that is, suffer an abuse in your Prayers, in the
Sacrament, in the Commandments, in Faith, in Hope, in Charity, in the Communion
of Saints, and your duty to your Supreme, you must return to the bosom of your
Mother the Church of England from whence you have fallen, rather weakly than
maliciously, and I doubt not but you will find the Comfort of it all your Life,
and in the Day of your Death, and in the Day of Judgment. If you will not, yet
I have freed mine own soul, and done an act of Duty and Charity, which at least
you are bound to take kindly if you will not entertain it obediently.

NOW let me add this, that although most of these objections are such things
which are the open and avowed doctrines or practices of your Church, and need
not to be proved as being either notorious or confessed; yet if any of your
Guides shall seem to question any thing of it, I will bind my self to verify
it to a tittle, and in that too which I intend them, that is, so as to be an
objection obliging you to return, under the pain of folly or heresy, or
disobedience, according to the subject matter. And though I have propounded
these things now to your consideration, yet if it be desired I shall represent
them to your eye, so that even your self shall be able to give sentence in the
behalf of truth. In the mean time give me leave to tell you of how much folly
you are guilty in being moved by such mock-arguments as your men use when they
meet with women and tender consciences and weaker understandings.

THE first is; where was your Church before Luther? Now if you had called upon
them to speak something against your religion from Scripture, or right reason,
or Universal Tradition, you had been secure as a Tortoise in her shell; a cart
pressed with sheaves could not have oppressed your cause or person; though you
had confessed you understood nothing of the mysteries of succession doctrinal
or personal. For if we can make it appear that our religion was that which
Christ and his Apostles taught, let the truth suffer what eclipses or
prejudices can be supposed, let it be hid like the holy fire in the captivity,
yet what Christ and his Apostles taught us is eternally true, and shall by some
means or other be conveyed to us; even the enemies of truth have been
conservators of that truth by which we can confute their errors. But if you
still ask where it was before Luther? I answer it was there where it was after;
even in the Scriptures of the Old and New Testament; and I know no warrant for
any other religion; and if you will expect I should show any society of men who
professed all the doctrines which are now expressed in the confession of the
Church of England; I shall tell you it is unreasonable; because some of our
truths are now brought into our public confessions that they might be opposed
against your errors; before the occasion of which there was no need of any such
confessions, till you made many things necessary to be professed, which are not
lawful to be believed. For if we believe your superinduced follies we shall do
unreasonably, unconscionably, and wickedly; but the questions themselves are so
useless abstracting from the accidental necessity which your follies have
brought upon us, that it had been happy if we had never heard of them more than
the Saints and Martyrs did in the first Ages of the Church; but because your
Clergy have invaded the liberty of the Church, and multiplied the dangers of
damnation, and pretend new necessities, and have introduced new articles, and
affright the simple upon new pretensions, and slight the very institution and
the Commands of Christ and of the Apostles, and invent new Sacramentals,
constituting Ceremonies of their own head, and promise grace along with the use
of them, as if they were not Ministers but Lords of the Spirit, and teach for
doctrines the commandments of men, and make void the Commandment of God by
their tradition, and have made a strange body of Divinity, therefore it is
necessary that we should immure our Faith by the refusal of such vain and
superstitious dreams: but our faith was completed at first, it is no other than
that which was delivered to the Saints, and can be no more for ever.

So that it is a foolish demand to require that we should show before Luther a
systeme of Articles declaring our sense in these questions: It was long before
they were questions at all: and when they were made questions, they remained
so, a long time; and when by their several pieces they were determined, this
part of the Church was oppressed with a violent power; and when God gave
opportunity, then the yoke was broken; and this is the whole progress of this
affair. But if you will still insist upon it, then let the matter be put into
equal balances, and (...) them show any Church whose confession of Faith was
such as was obtruded upon you at Trent: and if your Religion be Pius Quartus
his Creed at Trent, then we also have a question to ask, and that is, Where was
your Religion before Trent?

THE Council of Trent determined that the souls departed before the day of
Judgment enjoy the Beatisical Vision. It is certain this Article could not be
shown in the Confession of any of the ancient Churches; for most of the Fathers
were of another opinion. But that which is the greatest offense of Christendom
is not only that these doctrines which we say are false were yet affirmed, but
that those things which the Church of God did always reject, or held as
uncertain, should be made Articles of Faith, and so become parts of your
religion; and of these it is that I again ask the question which none of your
side shall ever be able to answer for you: Where was your Religion before
Trent? I could instance in many particulars? but I shall name one to you, which
because the thing of it self is of no great consequence, it will appear the
more unreasonable and intolerable that your Church should adopt it into the
things of necessary belief, especially since it was only a matter of fact, and
they took the false part too. For in the 21. Sess. chap. 4. it is affirmed,
That although the holy Fathers did give the (...) of the Eucharist to Infants,
yet they did it without any necessity of salvation; that is, they did not
believe it necessary to their salvation, which is notoriously false, and the
contrary is marked out with the black-lead of every man almost that reads their
Works; and yet your Council says this is sine controversia credendum; to be
believed without all controversy: and all Christians forbidden to believe or
teach otherwise. So that here it is made an Article of Faith amongst you, that
a man shall neither believe his reason nor his eyes: and who can show any
confession of Faith in which all the Trent doctrine was professed and enjoined
under pain of damnation? and before the Council of Constance, the doctrine
touching the De potest. Eccles. cons. 12.
Popes power was so new, so decried, that as Gerson says he hardly should have
escaped the note of Heresy that would have said so much as was there defined:
so that in that Article which now makes a great part of your belief, Where was
your Religion before the Council of Constance? and it is notorious that your
Council of Constance determined the doctrine of the half-communion with a Non
obstante to Christ's institution, that is, with a defiance to it, or a noted,
observed neglect of it, and with a profession it was otherwise in the Primitive
Church. Where then was your Religion before John Hus and Hierom of Prague's
time, against whom that Council was convened? But by this instance it appears
most certainly that your Church cannot show her confessions (...) after Christ,
and therefore if we could not show ours immediately before Luther, it were not
half so much; for since you receded from Christ's Doctrine, we might well
recede from yours; and it matters not who or how many or how long they
prosessed your doctrine, if neither Christ nor his Apostles did teach it: so
that if these Articles constitute your Church, your Church was (...) at the
first, and if ours was invisible afterward it matters not; For yours was
invisible in the days of light, and ours was invisible in the days of darkness.
For our Church was always visible in the (...) of Scripture, and he that had
his eyes of Faith and reason might easily have seen these truths all the way
which constitute our Church. But I add yet farther, that our Church before
Luther was there where your Church was, in the same place and in the same
persons; for diverse of the errors which have been amongst us reformed, were not
the constituent Articles of your Church before Luther's time; for before the
last Councils of your Church a man might have been of your Communion upon
easier terms; and Indulgences were indeed a practice, but no Article of Faith
before your men made it so, and that very lately, and so were many other things
besides. So that although your men cozen the credulous and the simple by
calling yours The old Religion, yet the difference is vast between Truth and
their affirmative, even as much as between old Errors and new Articles. For
although Ignorance and Superstition had prepared the ore, yet the Councils of
Constance and Basil, and Trent especially, were the forges and the mint.

Lastly, if your men had not by all the vile and violent arts of the world
stopped the mouths of dissenters, the question would quickly have been
answered, or our Articles would have been so confessed, so owned and so
public, that the question could never have been asked; but in despite of all
opposition, there were great numbers of professors who did protest and profess
and practice our doctrines contrary to your Articles; as it is demonstrated by
the Divines of Germany in Illyricus his Catalogus testium veritatis, and in
Bishop Morton's appeal.

BUT with your next objection you are better pleased, and your men make most
noise with it. For you pretend that by our confession Salvation may be had in
your Church; but your men deny it to us; and therefore by the confession of
both sides you may be safe, and there is no question concerning you; but of us
there is great question, for none but our selves say that we can be saved.

I answer, 1. That Salvation may be had in your Church, is it ever the truer
because we say it? If it be not, it can add no considence to you, for the
proposition gets no strength by your affirmative. But if it be, then our
authority is good or else our reason; and if either be, then we have more
reason to be believed speaking of our selves; because we are concerned to see
that our selves may be in a state of hope; and therefore we would not venture
on this side if we had not greater reason to believe well of our selves than of
you. And therefore believe us when it is more likely that we have greater
reason, because we have greater concernments, and therefore greater
considerations.

2. As much charity as your men pretend us to speak of you, yet it is a clear
case our hope of your Salvation is so (...) that we dare (...) venture our
selves on your side. The Burger of Oldwater being to pass a river in his
journey to Daventry, bad his man try the ford; telling him he hoped he should
not be drowned, for though he was afraid the River was too deep, yet he thought
his horse would carry him out, or at least, the boats would fetch him off. Such
a considence we may have of you, but you will find that but little warranty, if
you remember how great an interest it is that you venture.

3. IT would be remembered that though the best ground of your hope is not the
goodness of your own Faith, but the greatness of our charity; yet we that
charitably hope well of you, have a fullness of assurance of the truth and
certainty of our own way; and however you can please your selves with Images of
things as having no firm footing for your trisling confidence, yet you can
never with your tricks outface us of just and firm adherencies; and if you were
not empty of supports, and greedy of bulrushes, snatching at any thing to
support your sinking cause, you would with fear and trembling consider the
direct dangers which we demonstrate to you to be in your Religion rather than
slatter your selves with collateral, weak, and deceitful hopes of accidental
possibilities, that some of you may escape.

4. IF we be more charitable to you than you are to us, acknowledge in us the
beauty and essential form of Christian Religion; be sure you love as well as
make use of our charity; but if you make our charity an argument against us,
remember that you render us evil in exchange for good; and let it be no brag to
you that you have not that charity to us; for therefore the Donatists were
condemned for Heretics and Schismatics because they damned all the world, and
afforded no charity to any that was not of their Communion.

5. BUT that our charity may be such indeed, that is, that it may do you a real
benefit, and not turn into Wormwood and Colliquintida, I pray take notice in
what sense it is that we allow Salvation may possibly be had in your Church. We
warrant it not to any, we only hope it for some, we allow it to them as to the
Sadduces in the Law, and to the Corinthians in the Gospel who denied the
resurrection; that is, till they were sufficiently instructed, and competently
convinced, and had time and powers to out wear their prejudices and the
impresses of their education and long persuasion. But to them amongst you who
can and do consider and yet determine for error and interest, we have a greater
charity, even so much as to labor and pray for their conversion, but not so
much fondness as (...) slatter them into boldness and (...) adherencies to
matters of so great danger.

6. BUT in all this affair, though your men are very bold with God and leap
into his judgment seat before him, and give wild sentences concerning the
salvation of your own party and the damnation of all that disagree, yet that
which is our charity to you, is indeed the fear of God, and the reverence of
his judgments; we do not say that all Papists are certainly damned; we wish and
desire vehemently that none of you may perish; but then this charity of
judgment relates not to you, nor is derived from any probability which we see
in your doctrines that differ from ours; but because we know not what rate and
value God puts upon the article; It concerns neither you nor us to say, this or
that man shall be damned for his opinion; for besides that this is a bold
intrusion into that secret of God which shall not be opened till the day of
judgment, and besides that we know not what allays and abatements are to be
made by the good meaning and the ignorance of the man; all that can concern us
is to tell you that you are in error, that you depart from Scripture, that you
exercise tyranny over souls, that you leave the Divine institution, and
prevaricate Gods Commandment, that you divide the Church without truth and
without necessity, that you tie men to believe things under pain of damnation
which cannot be made very probable, much less certain; and therefore that you
sin against God and are in danger of his eternal displeasure; but in giving the
sinal sentence as we have no more to do than your men have, yet so we refuse to
follow your evil example; and we follow the glorious precedent of our Blessed
Lord; who decreed and declared against the crime, but not against the Criminal
before the day. He that does this, or that, is in danger of the Council, or in
danger of judgment, or liable and obnoxious to the danger of hell fire; so we
say of your greatest errors; they put you in the danger of perishing; but that
you shall or shall not perish, we leave it to your Judge; and if you call this
charity, it is well, I am sure it is piety and the fear of God.

7. WHETHER you may be saved, or whether you shall be damned for your errors,
does neither depend upon our affirmative nor your negative, but according to
the rate and value which God sets upon things. Whatever we talk, things are as
they are, not as we dispute, or grant, or hope; and therefore it were well if
your men would leave abusing you and themselves with these little arts of
indirect support. For many men that are warranted, yet do eternally perish, and
you in your Church damn millions who I doubt not shall reign with Jesus
eternally in the Heavens.

8. I wish you would consider, that if any of our men say salvation may be had
in your Church, it is not for the goodness of your new propositions, but only
because you do keep so much of that which is our Religion, that (...) the
confidence of that we hope well concerning you. And we do not hope any thing at
all that is good of you or your Religion as it distinguishes from us and ours:
we hope that the good which you have common with us may obtain pardon directly
or indirectly, or may be an antidote of the venom, and an amulet against the
danger of your very great errors, so that if you can derive any considence from
our concession, you must remember where it takes root; not upon any thing of
yours, but wholly upon the excellency of ours; you are not at all sase, or
warranted for being Papists, but we hope well of some of you, sor having so
much of the Protestant: and if that will do you any good, proceed in it, and
follow it whither soever it leads you.

9. THE safety that you dream of which we say to be on your side, is nothing of
allowance or warranty, but a hope that is collateral, indirect and relative; we
do not say any thing whereby you can conclude yours to be safer than ours, for
it is not safe at all, but extremely dangerous; we affirm those errors in
themselves to be damnable, some to contain in them Impiety, some to have
Sacrilege, some Idolatry, some Superstition, some practices to be conjuring
and charming, and very like to Witchcraft, as in your hallowing of Water, and
baptizing Bells, and exorcizing Demoniacks; and what safety there can be in
these, or what you can fancy we should allow to you, I suppose you need not
boast of. Now because we hope some are saved amongst you, you must not conclude
yours to be safe; for our hope relies upon this. There are many of your
propositions in which we differ from you, that thousands amongst you understand
and know nothing of, it is to them as if they were not, it is to them now as it
was before the Council, they hear not of it. And though your Priests have taken
a course that the most ignorant do practice some of your abominations most
grossly, yet we hope this will not be laid upon them who (as S. Austin's
expression is) cauta sollicitudine quaerunt veritatem, corrigi parati cum
invenerint: do according as they are able warily and diligently seek for truth,
and are ready to follow it when they find it; men who live good lives, and
repent of all their evils known and unknown. Now if we are not deceived in our
hopes, these men shall rejoice in the eternal goodness of God, which prevails
over the malice of them that misguide you; but if we be deceived in our hopes
of you, your guides have abused you, and the blind leaders of the blind will
fall together. For,

10. IF you will have the secret of this whole (...), this it is. The hopes we
have of any of you, (as it is known) principally relies upon the hopes of your
repentance. Now we say that a man may repent of an error which he knows not of;
as he that prays heartily for the pardon of all his sins and errors known and
unknown; by his general repentance may obtain many degrees and instances of
mercy. Now thus much also your men allow to us; these who live well, and die in
a (...) though but general repentance of their sins and errors even amongst us
your best and wisest men pronounce to be in a savable condition. Here then we
are equal, and we are as safe by your consession as you are by ours. But
because there are some Bigots of your faction fierce and siery who say that a
general repentance will not serve our turns, but it must be a particular
renunciation of Protestancy: these men deny not only to us but to themselves
too, all that comsort which they derive from our Concession, and indeed which
they can hope for from the mercies of God. For be you sure we think as ill of
vour errors as you can suppose of our (...); and therefore if for errors (be
they on which side it chances) a general (...) will not serve the turn without
an actual dereliction, then slatter not your selves by any thing of our
kindness to your party; for you must have a particular if a general be not
(...). But if it be sufficient for you, it is so for us, in case we be in error
as your men suppose us; but if it will not (...) us sor remedy to those errors
you charge us with, neither will it suffice you; for the case must needs be
equal as to the value of repentance and malignity of the error: and therefore
these men condemn themselves, and will not allow us to hope well of them; but
if they will allow us to hope, it must be by (...) the value of a general
repentance; and if they allow that, they must hope as well of ours as we of
theirs: but if they deny it to us, they deny it to themselves, and then they
can no more brag of any thing of our concession. This only I add to this
consideration; that your men do not, cannot charge upon us any doctrine that is
in its matter and effect impious; there is nothing positive in our doctrine,
but is either true or innocent, but we are accused for denying your
superstructures: ours therefore (if we be deceived) is but like a sin of
omission; yours are sins of commission in case you are in the wrong (as we
believe you to be) and therefore you must needs be in the greater danger than
we can be supposed, by how much sins of omission are less than sins of
commission.

11. YOUR very way of arguing from our charity is a very fallacy and a trick
that must needs deceive you if you rely upon it. For whereas your men argue
thus: The Protestants say we Papists may be saved; and so say we too: but we
Papists say that you Protestants cannot, therefore it is safest to be a Papist;
consider that of this argument if it shall be accepted, any bold Heretic can
make use, against any modest Christian of a true persuasion. For, if he can but
outface the modesty of the good man, and tell him he shall be damned; unless
that modest man say as much of him, you see impudence shall get the better of
the day. But it is thus in every error. Fifteen Bishops of Jerusalem in
immediate succession were circumcised, believing it to be necessary so to be:
with these, other Christian Churches who were of the uncircumcision did
communicate: Suppose now that these Bishops had not only thought it necessary
for themselves but for others too; this argument you see was ready: you of the
uncircumcision who do communicate with us, think that we may be saved though we
are circumcised, but we do not think that you who are not circumcised can be
saved, therefore it is the safest way to be circumcised: I suppose you would
not have thought their argument good, neither would you have had your children
circumcised. But this argument may serve the Presbyterians as well as the
Papists. We are indeed very kind to them in our sentences concerning their
salvation; and they are many of them as unkind to us; If they should argue so
as you do, and say, you Episcopal men think we Presbyterians though in errors
can be saved, and we say so too: but we think you Episcopal men are Enemies of
the Kingdom of Jesus Christ; and therefore we think you in a damnable
condition, therefore it is safer to be a Presbyterian: I know not what your men
would think of the argument in their hands, I am sure we had reason to complain
that we are used very ill on (...) hands for no other cause but because we are
charitable. But it is not our case alone; but the old Catholics were used just
so by the Donatists in this very argument, as we are used by your men. The
Donatists were so sierce against the Catholics, that they would re-baptize all
them who came to their Churches from the other: But the Catholics, as knowing
the Donatists did give right Baptism, admitted their Converts to Repentance,
but did not re-baptize them. Upon this score, the Donatists triumphed, saying,
You Catholics confess our Baptism to be good, and so say we: But we Donatists
deny your Baptism to be good; therefore it is (...) to be of our side than
yours. Now what should the Catholics say or do? Should they lie for God and
for Religion, and to serve the ends of Truth say the Donatists Baptism was not
good? That they ought not. Should they damn all the Donatists, and make the
rent wider? It was too great already. What then? They were quiet, and knew that
the Donatists sought advantages by their own sierceness, and trampled upon the
others charity; but so they hardened themselves in error, and became evil,
because the others were good.

I shall trouble you no further now, but desire you to consider of these things
with as much caution, as they were written with charity.

TILL I hear from you, I shall pray to God to open your heart and your
understanding, that you may return from whence you are fallen, and repent, and
do your first work; Which that you may do, is the hearty desire of

Your very affectionate Friend and Servant, JER. TAILOR.

The II. LETTER, Written to a Person newly converted to the Church of England.
Madam,
I Bless God I am safely arrived where I desired to be after my unwilling
departure from the place of your abode and danger: And now because I can have
no other expression of my tenderness, I account that I have a treble Obligation
to signisie it by my care of your biggest and eternal interest. And because it
has pleased God to make me an Instrument of making you to understand in some
fair measure the excellencies of a true and holy Religion, and that I have
pointed out such (...) and errors in the Roman Church, at which your
understanding being forward and pregnant, did of it self start at as impersect
ill-looking Propositions, give me leave to do that now which is the purpose of
my Charity, that is, teach you to turn this to the advantage of a holy life,
that you may not only be changed but converted. For the Church of England
whither you are now come is not in condition to boast her self in the
reputation of changing the opinion of a single person, though never so
excellent; She has no temporal ends to serve which must stand upon fame and
noises; all that she can design, is to serve God, to advance the honor of the
Lord, and the good of souls, and to rejoice in the Cross of Christ.

First, therefore I desire you to remember that as now you are taught to pray
both publicly and privately, in a Language understood, so it is intended your
(...) should be (...), in proportion to the advantages which your prayer has
in the understanding part. For though you have been often told and have heard,
that ignorance is the mother of devotion, you will sind that the proposition is
unnatural and against common sense and experience; because it is impossible to
desire that of which we know nothing, unless the desire it self be fantastical
and illusive: it is necessary that in the same proportion in which we
understand any good thing, in the same we shall also desire it, and the more
particular and minute your notices are, the more passionate and material also
your affections will be toward it; and if they be good things for which we are
taught to pray, the more you know them, the more reason you have to love them;
It is monstrous to think that devotion, that is, passionate desires of
religious things, and the earnest prosecutions of them should be produced by
any thing of ignorance or less perfect notices in any sense. Since therefore
you are taught to pray, so that your understanding is the praecentor or the
Master of the Quire, and you know what you say; your desires are made humanc,
religious, express, material (for these are the advantages of Prayers and
Liturgies well understood) be pleased also to remember, that now if you be not
also passionate and devout for the things you mention, you will want the Spirit
of prayer, and be more inexcusable than before. In many of your prayers before
(especially the public) you heard a voice but saw and perceived nothing of the
sense, and what you understood of it was like the man in the Gospel that was
half blind, he saw men walking like Trees, and so you possibly might perceive
the meaning of it in general; You knew where they came to the Epistle, when to
the Gospel, when the Introit, when the Pax, when any of the other more general
periods were; but you could have nothing of the Spirit of prayer, that is,
nothing of the devotion and the holy affections to the particular excellencies
which could or ought there to have been represented, but now you are taught how
you may be really devout, it is made facil and easy, and there can want
nothing but your consent and observation.

2. WHEREAS now you are taken off from all humane considences, from relying
wholly and almost ultimately upon the Priests power and external act, from
(...) prayers by numbers, from forms and outsides, you are not to think that
the Priests power is less, that the Sacraments are not effective, that your
prayers may not be repeated frequently; but you are to remember, that all
outward things and Ceremonies, all Sacraments and Institutions work their
effect in the virtue of Christ, by some moral instrument; The Priests in the
Church of England can absolve you as much as the Roman Priests could fairly
pretend; but then we teach that you must first be a penitent and a returning
person, and our absolution does but manifest the work of God, and comfort and
instruct your Conscience, direct and (...) it: You shall be absolved here, but
not (...) you live an holy life; So that in this you will (...) no change but
to the advantage of a strict life; we will not slatter you and cozen your dear
soul by pretended minisieries, but we so order our discourses and directions
that all our (...) may be really effective, and when you receive the holy
Sacrament of the Eucharist, or the Lords Supper, it does more good here than
they do there; because if they consecrate rightly, yet they do not communicate
you fully; and if they offer the whole representative Sacrifice, yet they do
not give you the whole Sacrament; only we enjoin that you come with so much
holiness, that the grace of God in your heart may be the principal, and the
Sacrament in our hands may be the ministering and assisting part: we do not
promise great effects to easy trifling dispositions, because we would not
deceive, but really procure to you great effects; and therefore you are now to
come to our offices with the same expectations as before, of pardon, of grace,
of sanctification; but you must do something more of the work your self, that
we may not do less in effect than you have in your expectation; We will not to
advance the reputation of our power deceive you into a less blessing.

3. BE careful that you do not flatter your self, that in our Communion you may
have more ease and liberty of life; for though I know your pious soul desires
passionately to please God and to live religiously, yet I ought to be careful
to prevent a temptation, lest it at any time should discompose your severity:
Therefore as to confession to a Priest (which how it is usually practiced among
the Roman party, your self can very well account, and you have complained
sadly, that it is made an ordinary act, easy and transient, sometime matter of
temptation, oftentimes impertinent, but) suppose it free from such scandal to
which some men's folly did betray it, yet the same severity you will find among us;
for though we will not tell a lie to help a sinner, and say that is necessary
which is only appointed to make men do themselves good, yet we advise and
commend it, and do all the work of souls to all those people that will be saved
by all means; to devout persons, that make Religion the business of their
lives, and they that do not so in the Churches of the Roman Communion, as they
find but little advantage by periodical confessions, so they feel but little
awfulness and severity by the injunction; you must confess to God all your
secret actions, you must advise with a holy man in all the affairs of your
soul, you will be but an ill friend to your self if you conceal from him the
state of your spiritual affairs: We desire not to hear the circumstance of
every sin, but when matter of justice is concerned, or the nature of the sin is
changed, that is, when it ought to be made a Question; and you will find that
though the Church of England gives you much liberty from the bondage of
innumerable Ceremonies and humane devices, yet in the matter of holiness you
will be tied to very great service, but such a service as is perfect freedom,
that is, the service of God and the love of the holy Jesus, and a very strict
religious life; for we do not promise heaven, but upon the same terms it is
promised us, that is, Repentance toward God, and Faith in our Lord Jesus: and
as in Faith we make no more to be necessary than what is made so in holy
Scripture, so in the matter of Repentance we give you no easy devices, and
suffer no lessening desinitions of it, but oblige you to that strictness which
is the condition of being saved, and so expressed to be by the infallible Word
of God; but such as in the Church of Rome they do not so much stand upon.

MADAM, I am weary of my Journey, and although I did purpose to have spoken
many things more, yet I desire that my not doing it may be laid upon the
account of my weariness, all that I shall add to the main business is this:

4. READ the Scripture diligently, and with an humble spirit, and in it observe
what is plain, and believe and live accordingly. Trouble not your self with
what is difficult, for in that your duty is not described.

5. PRAY frequently and effectually; I had rather your prayers should be often
than long. It was well said of Petrarch, Magno verborum (...) uti decet cum
superiore (...). When you speak to your superior you ought to have a bridle
upon your tongue, much more when you speak to God. I speak of what is decent in
respect of our selves and our infinite distances from God: but if love makes
you speak, speak on, so shall your prayers be full of charity and devotion,
Nullus est amore superior, ille te coget ad veniam, qui me ad multiloquium;
Love makes God to be our friend, and our approches more united and acceptable;
and therefore you may say to God, the same love which made me speak, will also
move me to hear and pardon: Love and devotion may enlarge your Letanies, but
nothing else can, unless Authority does interpose.

6. BE curious not to communicate but with the true Sons of the Church of
England, lest (if you follow them that were amongst us, but are gone out from
us, because they were not of us) you be offended and tempted to impute their
follies to the Church of England.

7. TROUELE your self with no controversies willingly, but how you may best
please God by a strict and severe conversation.

8. IF any Protestant live loosely, remember that he dishonours an excellent
Religion, and that it may be no more laid upon the charge of our Church, than
the ill lives of most Christians may upon the whole Religion.

9. LET no man or woman affright you with declamations and scaring words of
Heretic, and Damnation, and Changeable; for these words may be spoken against
them that return to light, as well as to those that go to darkness, and that
which men of all sides can say, it can be of effect to no side upon its own
strength or pretension.

THE END.
BOOKS written by J. Tailor, D. D. Lord Bishop of Down.
(...), A Course of Sermons for all the Sundays of the year; together with a
discourse of the Divine Institution, Necessity, Sacredness and Separation of
the Office Ministerial, in fol.

The History of the Life and Death of the Ever-blessed Jesus Christ, in fol.
the 7. Edit.

The Rule and Exercises of holy living and dying, oct.

The Golden Grove, or a Manual of daily Prayers, sitted to the days of the
week, together with a short Method of Peace and Holiness: to which is added a
Guide to the Penitent, in 12.

A Collection of Polemical and Moral discourses, in fol.

A Discourse of the Nature, Offices and Measure of Friendship, in 12.

Ductor Dubitantium, or the Rule of Conscience, fol.

(...), A Supplement to the '(...), or course of Sermons for the whole year.
All that have been Preached and Published (since the Restoration) to which is
adjoined, his Advice to the Clergy of his Diocese.

A Discourse of Confirmation, in oct.

Several Chirurgical Treatises by Richard Wiseman Serjeant-Chirurgeon, the
Second Edition, in fol.

The Catholic doctrine of the Eucharist in all Ages, in Answer to what Mr.
Arnaud, Doctor of the Sorborn alleges, touching the Belief of the Greek
Moscovite, Armenian, Jacobite, Nestorian, Coptic, Maronite, and other Eastern
Churches, in fol.

XXII. Sermons preached before His MAJESTY King CHARLES II. at Whitehal, by H.
Killigrew, D. D. and published by the Reverend Dr. Patrick, Quarto.

Winter-Evening Conserence, in three parts, between Neighbors. The third part
being newly printed, in octavo.

Animadversions upon a book Entitled, Fanaticism Fanatically imputed to the
Catholic Church, by Dr. Stilling fleet, in Vindication of the Church of
England, by a person of Honor.

ALL Sold by R. Royston, Book seller at the Angel in Amen-Corner.


