CHARITY RECOMMENDED, IN A SERMON Preached at the ASSIZES HELD AT NORWICH, Upon
Thursday the 29th of July, 1686.

By JOHN TVRNER Hospitaller of St. Thomas Southwark.

And now made Public at the request of the Gentlemen that heard it.

Simmias Rhodius, de Amore Divino. Cui cuncta obtemperant, and ab eodem
originem sui arcessunt.

(...). (...). (...), (...) (...).
LONDON, Printed by Henry Hills Junior, for Walter Kettilby at the Bishops-Head
in St. Paul's Churchyard, 1686.

To the Right Worshipful, Sir Robert Nightingale, High Sheriff of the County of
Norfolk.
SIR,
I Am very sensible, it is too great an Honor that is done me by the general
Approbation, which this Sermon met with; not that out of Real, or which is
still worse, out of a Counterfeit and Pretended Modesty, I would put an Affront
upon so great an Audience, by seeming to suspect the Judgments of so many
excellent Persons; but the Subject being Charity, was it self a natural
Preservative against Censure; and that very word so often repeated to any Man
that understands and feels the Sense of it in himself, as every good Man
unquestionably does, has an incredible Charm belonging to it, so as together
with its Name, to insinuate its kindly and propitious Nature into every Breast,
and with an Eloquence peculiar to it self, to bribe even Censure and Criticism
themselves into a favorable Opinion of the Speaker. However, it is enough for
me, though I had no other reason, that you, who have so great a right to
dispose of me as you please, have Commanded me to Publish what I Preached; and
though I know very well, your Friendship is too great to let you judge
otherwise, than too too kindly of any Performance of mine; yet I have no power
to do any thing but obey, though it be to my own disadvantage: Only, I confess,
I am not a little ashamed, that so mean, and as you know, so tumultuary a
Discourse, being written in very great have, when I had scarce time to turn my
self, should open so Glorious and Magnificent an Assize: But as it is, the
World is welcome to it, and I have nothing further to say, but that it is very
much in my Nature to wish and pray, that such a Charitable Spirit as I have
recommended, might universally obtain, that I am very much in earnest in what I
have written, and that I hope that will atone somewhat for other defects.

May you live as long, and as happily as you deserve; and may the King never
want such Generous and Obliging Ministers in every Station, to disperse the
happy Influences of his Government over a satisfied and contented People.

I am, Sir, Your most Affectionate, Humble, and for ever most Obliged Servant,
JOHN TVRNER.

JOHN XIII. 35. By this shall all men know that ye are my Disciples, if ye have
love one to another.
WHen God had determined with himself to exert that wondrous act of his
omnipotent Will, by which this Universe was created out of nothing; the next
thing he did was to consult the Eternal Ideas of his own infinitely large and
comprehensive Mind, and by that excellent Platform which he found within
himself, to reduce the universal Rubbish into a regular and comely Frame and
such as might at once declare, not only the Wisdom, but also the Peace, the
Equability, and the Constancy of his Nature. For in a Mind harras'd and
discomposed by troublesome and anxious thoughts ruffled and distempered by
insatiable appetites, and eternally impotent desires; a Mind that has no
government, no mastery of it self, it is impossible there should be a true and
adequate comprehension of things, any more than a man in a Fever can be wise,
or play the Stoique in the midst of the most exquisite and ingenious Torments.
And therefore the Poets, when they go about to describe the happiness and
serenity of the Divine Nature, which is unquestionably omnipresent, have yet
notwithstanding Mythologically confined it to those peaceful Regions above this
troublesome and noisy Atmosphere, where Storms and Tempests are denied to enter,
where a profound Silence and unshaken Calm makes self-enjoyment easy and
delightful. So Homer describes his poetical Olympus the supposed Habitation of
the Immortal Gods.

(...)
(...)
(...)
(...).
Heaven the sweet place where happy Gods reside,
And where Peace flows with an Eternal Tide;
There no fierce Winds disturb the troubled Air,
No Rains descend, no threatening Clouds appeal,
Nor Hail, nor Snow, nor pinching Frosts are seen,
But all is warm and silent and serene.
That Power of God by which he made the Chaos, and called it out of nothing
into a dark, horrid and unhewn Existence, is apt only to fill us with
astonishment and wonder; it presents us only with the terrors of the Lord, and
fills our minds naturally with dismal apprehensions, not knowing what use he
may make of so exorbitant a Power as this, till his Goodness comes in to
succor and relieve us in the midst of this black and dreadful contemplation;
as the Angels themselves, when they at first beheld such an unweildy Mass of
indigested Matter, without any use, distinction or contrivance, were silent
with astonishment and possessed with fear, expecting some dangerous and
destructive Issue of such an ill-bodeing, unpleasant, and deformed Beginning:
But when they saw this confusion by the divine Architect reduced into such
admirable and perfect Order, which gave them so firm and irrafragable
demonstration, of the wisdom, the peace, and serenity of their Maker, then the
morning stars imediately sang-together, and all the Sons of God shouted for joy.

Neither are we only instructed as well in the Wisdom, as in the Peace and
Tranquillity of the Divine Nature, which is immoveably blessed and happy in it
self, from the Harmony and symmetry of the sensible creation, which argues
undeniably a Mind that is perfectly at leisure and at ease, and free from all
manner of tumult and disorder: But when we reflect upon the Animal World, upon
the several orders and degrees of Beings, that are endued with a specific
life, agreeable and suitable to the respective ends for which they were
designed, furnished with organs exquisitely fitted for their support and
comfortable enjoyment, and with Provisions every were flowing round about them,
and inviting them to refresh, exhilarate and enjoy themselves in the best
manner their Natures will allow: When for our selves we find provided ready to
our hands, not only a competence of Meat, Drink and Raiment, barely to supply
the necessities of Life; not only a large Train of innocent and lawful
pleasures that attends all our motions, and wearies out even self-denial it
self, with a perpetual and restless invitation; but also a stately and
magnificent Theater, ready prepared and furnished for our Entertainment, a Scene
of things worthy of a reasonable Soul, fitted for the noble and exalted
operations of a contemplative and active mind, that leads us thorough sensible
apartments into the presence of the invisible God, and by acquainting us first
with his Existence, brings us by gentle steps to the study of his Nature, and
to the imitation and enjoyment of it.

I say, when we reflect considerately and duly upon these things, we are then
plainly and certainly convinced, not only that God is, and that he is a Being
at rest within himself, that there are no Storms, no Billows in his Notion, no
Troubles or Anxieties belong to his Idea; but also in the language of the
Psalmist, that his mercy is over all his works, and that the Emanations of that
mercy upon his Creatures in proportion to their respective capacity to be the
Objects of it, are every whit as kind and gracious with respect to them, as the
reflex acts of his own eternal mind, the sense and self-enjoyment of his
immortal Nature, are kind and propitious and happy to himself.

Lastly, when we consider attentively with our selves, that these things are
not thus peradventure, or by chance, or at certain times and seasons, like the
Ebbing and Flowing of the Sea, or the increase and waining of the Moon, as it
were some lucid intervals of the Divine goodness, some certain fits of mercy
and compassion, which have rather the appearance of infirmity than perfection;
but that they are all of them regular and constant, and that his Providence
goes on in an uninterrupted course thorough all Times and Ages, to let us know
and feel, that his mercy is everlasting, and that his truth endures from
generation to generation; from hence we learn, that his goodness is every whit
as steady and as constant, as it is diffusive and large, that in the Ancient of
days, there is no vicissitude, no decay of Nature, but that he is the same
yesterday, to day, and for ever, in whom is no variableness, neither shadow of
turning; that he is not a being of Arbitrary Will and Power, but that Goodness
is rooted and riveted in his Nature, and that it is altogether inseparable from
it; nay, that it is his Essence, his very Life and Being, according to that
expression of St. John, that God is love, he that loves not, says he, knows
not God, for God is love. He is not Arbitrary, undetermind's power, indifferent
either to cruelty or mercy, unaccountable to himself as well as to his
Creatures. He is not giddy humor, or alterable fancy, or wavering and
uncertain caprice, but though he be infinite in himself, yet he has measures
of Action, and Governs himself in all things by eternal Rules, from which he
can no more Divaricate or flinch, than he can cease to be himself, or bid a
long farewell to all his Brightness, Blessedness and Perfection. He is Mercy,
he is Kindness, he is all over Love, he is at once the most lovely, and the
most loving Nature, and with an equal stream of never failing Goodness, he
waters his Creatures, and enjoys Himself, O God who is like unto thee, gracious
and merciful, long suffering and plenteous in goodness and truth; as the Heart
pants after the water brooks, so pants my Soul after thee, O God, the
Fountain of Pleasure, the everspringing Well of Living waters, and the Eternal
source of inexhaustible Mercy.

There are two things required to the happiness of any being whatsoever, the
first is an indolency and tranquillity, a calm and quiet sense within it self,
not discomposed by turbulent and uneasy passions, nor tossed too and fro without
any conduct or steerage of it self, by infinite and uncertain desires. The
Second is, that every thing without, have so far at least a Congruity, harmony
and agreement with it, that nothing may disturb or shake this inward sense. So
that the whole being with relation to it self, and with respect to objects that
are external to it, is to be like a smooth Sea upon a still and silent Evening,
where Tritons dance, and Dolphins play, and Sirens all around rejoice and Sing,
and all the Sea Nymphs revel and caress each other upon the gladsome surface of
the great Abyss, which drinks in nothing but light and peace from without, and
is surrounded by nothing but a serene and Azure Sky.

But wherever there is an aversion or antipathy of one Being to another,
whether it proceed out of fickleness, uncertainty, and vicissitude of Nature,
or out of fear, or out of some peculiar and unaccountable hatred, which it
cannot exempt or deliver it self from, the first of these argues so great a
want of Judgment, which proceeds upon immutable and certain reasons, the Second
so great weakness and infirmity, and the Third is in it self so troublesome and
tormenting wherever it is found, that all these are perfectly inconsistent with
the happyness of any Being, and therefore must not be ascribed to God, who is
infinitely wise, and therefore cannot be mistaken as to his judgment of things,
and infinitely powerful, so that he need not fear any cross or dangerous event,
and who must be happy if any such thing there be, because all perfection is
contained in himself, and happyness without question is the best Accomplishment
that can belong to any Being whatsoever; it is that without which Existence it
self would be a burden, and all other attributes whatsoever they are, even
Power, Wisdom, Justice, and Goodness themselves, would be but a rack and
torment to the Possessor. And who can dwell with Everlasting burnings? What
Being could be so miserable as the Supreme and self-existent, if any fastidious
aversion or dislike, any desperate animosity or inconciliable hatred, which in
so great a Mind must be proportioned to it, had the power Eternally to disturb
him?

It is true indeed, that in Scripture we find a frequent mention of his wrath,
his indignation, his fierce anger, and his sore displeasure, and his jealousy
that burns like fire, and the like; but yet these things do not argue him to be
of a passible Nature, but only first, they refer to those punishments of our
sins which in the course of his Providence are inflicted upon us, or which are
denounced against us by such expressions as these, in case we do not Repent,
and according to the proportion, the greater or lesser weight and heaviness of
these Punishments; so in an humane way of speaking we say, because it is
usually so in cases of revenge and animosity among Men, that he is more or less
angry or displeased, not that he is more or less happy than he was before, or
that any impressions can be made upon him, that can unsettle or discompose the
equality of his mind, but only he beholds every foolish and unreasonable
Action, which is the very nature and notion of all Sin, with an impassible
contempt, and with a dislike that has no other effect upon him, but only to
move him upon reasons of Justice, to Punish the Offense as it deserves, for the
Good of the World, and for an Example to others.

Very frequently in our own persons he Chastises us so lightly, that it is
plain he desires our amendment, not our destruction; but when the Punishment is
never so severe, yet still there is a gracious meaning and intention in it, for
the good of the Universe, which is infinitely more precious to him than the
safety of any single person whatsoever, that other People warned by our Example
may hear and fear, and do no more so wickedly. So that his Anger is indeed but
an effect of his Love, and that which we call his Wrath and his Iudignation, is
in truth nothing else but a particular and distinct branch of his infinite and
incomprehensible Mercy.

Or Secondly, when such things as these are spoken of him in Scripture, they
are to be referred to the purity of his Nature, to which all sin has the
greatest incongruity that any two things can have to one another; not that
there arises any painful or tormenting sense, to trouble or disquiet his
enjoyment of himself, but only according to an humane way of speaking, the Holy
Scripture in this case ascribes those passions to God, which good Men upon the
like occasion experience in themselves, when they see his Divinity Blasphemed,
his Altars Profaned, his Churches Sacrilegiously robbed and spoiled, his
Priesthood persecuted or neglected, his Laws disappointed and frustrated by
Enthusiasm, or by open Wickedness affronted, his Religion and his Honor
trampled under foot, either by Schism and Heresy on the one hand, or by
Licentiousness and Lewdness on the other: And to this purpose there are two
things very remarkable.

First, That though the Scripture be sometimes very fierce in the Denunciation
of Gods Anger against Sin, yet it frequently dilutes and blends those sharp
expressions with kind and gracious assurances of his Love, and tells us
plainly, that it is this alone which is truly agreeable and suitable to his
Nature; but that the other, that is, his Anger, or that which in the
administration of his providence has the outward semblance and appearance of
it, is a thing which is put upon him by the necessities of Justice, and that he
finds no other Complacency or satisfaction in the Punishments he inflicts, but
what arises from the inward sense and consciousness of those gracious ends for
which those unwilling severities are designed.

Secondly, It is to be observed, that God in Scripture is not always
represented, as Angry and incensed at sin, but sometimes as laughing at it, and
treating it with contempt and scorn: and indeed, both of these are ascribed
together to him in that Prophetic rapture of David, in the second Psalm, Why
do the Heathen rage? And the people imagine a vain thing? the Kings of the Earth
set themselves and the Rulers take council together against the Lord and
against his Anointed, saying, let us break their bands asunder and cast away
their cords from us, he that sits in the Heavens shall laugh, the Lord shall
have them in derision, then shall he speak unto them in his wrath, and vex them
in his sore displeasure, not that these two passions are indeed consistent or
competible together at one and the same time, they being directly opposite and
contrary to each other, nor that God whose Nature is perfectly impassible, is
really capable of either of these habits or dispositions of mind. But by the
later of these was signified that just and condign Punishment that was in the
fullness of time to overtake those Kings and Nations that were Enemies to the
Gospel of Christ, and opposed Christianity by bitter Persecutions,
notwithstanding all the innocence and the reason of its Principles, and
notwithstanding all that supernatural Evidence of Signs and Miracles, and
extraordinary Gifts by which it received its confirmation from above, and by
the First of them, by Gods Laughing and Scorning at the vain designs of Men
that reject the offers of his Grace, and endeavor to no purpose to reverse his
immutable Decrees, is meant, that his happiness cannot be injured or impaired
by any attempt of ours, that he is not to be disappointed in his intentions or
designs by any humane Policy or Strength, that he despises, disregards and
perfectly sets at naught such vain imaginations of the Sons of Men, that his
Nature is impassible, inaccessible, irresistible, that when he stretches out
his mighty Arm, it is not an Arm of Flesh that can oppose it, and that he is no
otherwise concerned at the wickedness of Men, than only to punish and restrain
it by his Providence, and by the Eternal measures of his Power and Justice.

And thus I have shown more largely than I intended, what the Nature of God is,
that he is a Merciful and Gracious Being, slow to Anger and of great Pity, that
he delights not in Punishment, and that in the midst of Judgment he remembers
Mercy, that the Emanations of his Goodness are truly Natural and Congenerous to
him, but that his Judgments are only Secondary things, things that are not
inflicted for themselves, but for ends of Mercy and Compassion, for amendment
and example, for preserving the Government of the World, from moldring into
Anarchy and Confusion, and keeping it from falling foul upon it self; and this
though it may be sufficient to have shown by the plain Instances already
produced, yet there is a greater instance than all this yet behind, and that is
his sending his Son into the World to be a Propitiation and Atonement for us
miserable Sinners, who lay in darkness, and in the shadow of death, and he,
when he came, to show us that he was the true and genuin Offspring of so
Gracious a Father, the peculiar Character which is given of him in Scripture
is, that he went about doing Good, and this was the general strain and drift of
all his Miracles, he did not spend his time in removing of Mountains, or in
calling the Sun out of its place, or in any other thing that might create
wonder without any real use, but he healed Diseases and he cast out Devils, he
restored the Lame to their Feet, the Blind to their Sight, the Paralytick to
their full Strength and Youthful Vigor, his Miracles were exactly like his
Doctrine, useful and practical, not vain, puffy, Ostentatious things, performed
to raise Wonder and Astonishment in the spectators, without any real Benefit or
Advantage; and when he left the World, he left his Spirit behind him with his
Disciples, which was not only a Spirit of Instruction to guide them into all
necessary and saving Truth, a Spirit of Courage, to support them in and under
Persecution, a Spirit of Power, to work Supernatural and extraordinary effects
for the propagation and spreading of the Gospel, but also a Spirit of Dilection
and Love, to unite them to one another, and to him their Head; and though this
mutual Love and Helpfulness to one another, in our frail condition of humanity
be a thing that is tied upon us by reasons of Interest, and by principles of
Nature, yet in a more peculiar and distinguishing manner, he made it the Badg
and Character of his Disciples, who were tied and linked more closely to one
another, by supernatural assistances of Divine grace, by the unity of the
Spirit in the bond of Peace. By this shall all Men know, says he, that ye are
my Disciples, if ye have Love one to another.

In my Discourse upon which words, I shall do these Three things.

First, I shall show upon what Reasons or Principles the Obligation to mutual
Charity, and good Will is Founded.

Secondly, In what Instances, and to what Degrees it is to exert it self.

And Thirdly, What are the great and glorious Advantages that may be reaped
from it.

I begin with the First of these, Upon what Reasons or Principles the
Obligation to mutual Charity and good Will is Founded, and they are these Three.

First, The Love, Imitation, and Fear of God.

Secondly, The Example and Command of Christ our Savior.

And Thirdly, The undoubted Interest and Advantage of any humane Society
whatsoever.

First, The Love, Imitation, and Fear of God.

That God is a Being infinitely Lovely, he being the Source and Fountain of all
Created perfection, which in himself is contained, in an infinitely more
Eminent and Transcendent manner, has been already represented; and this
loveliness of his, for the great Excellence and Perfection of his Nature, is
that which is the proper food of a reasonable mind to Meditate and Exercise it
self upon, there being nothing else that will afford it, either so suitable or
so lasting entertainment; and it is likewise undoubtedly the noblest object for
its Imitation, so far as humane frailty is capable of aspiring to the Glory and
Excellence of so Illustrious and bright a Pattern. The Nature of God after
whose Image and Resemblance, the Soul of Man was Created, is that, which if it
were not for the Cloggs and Impediments of the Corporeal part, if we were not
dazzled by the Pomps and Gaieties, carried away Captive by the false
enticements, and blinded by the steams of sense, through which our finer part
is weakened and refracted, to which we should always naturally desire to be more
closely and intimately united; it is that, in the study and contemplation of
which, when our minds are once fitted and prepared for so sublime an
Employment, we find the most perfect joy and satisfaction; and it is impossible
for us to think him as we always do, when our thoughts are at leisure from
prejudice and passion, and have emerged out of the sink of Bodily
entertainments, to be so very excellent a Being, to love him according to that
loveliness, with which he then displaies and manifests his Nature to us, but at
the same time we must be studying to be like him, and to Copy out every day
more and more exactly those Beauties in our selves, which we Contemplate and
Adore in him.

But if the Love of God will not persuade us to endeavor to be like him, if
the Excellence of his Nature will not entice and Charm us into an humble
Imitation of it, let his Terrors engage us, let his Vengeance affright us, let
the consideration of his Omnipotence compel and force us, let our Flesh tremble
for fear of him, and let us be afraid of his judgments, who expects and
requires from us, that as he has been so Gracious and Merciful toward us, so
we should be Kind, and Charitable, and Helpful to each other. For God is not
only the Maker, but he is also the great Guardian and Protector of the World,
he is the King of the Universe, and it his peace that is broken, or in a way of
tendency toward a breach and rupture, by all uncharitable habits and
dispositions of Mind; and therefore it belongs to his Government, it is
included in the notion of his Providence, and is a part of that great task, and
business which he has imposed perpetually upon himself, for the preserving by
his Goodness the effects of his Power, and for the Good more especially of the
rational and intellectual Creation, which is more peculiarly the object of his
care, not to suffer ill tempers, and mischievous inclinations, morose,
contentious and uncharitable Spirits, so far as we Indulge and Cherish them in
our selves, to go unpunished, either in this World or the other, unless by a
timely and sincere Repentance, we return to the Love of God, and of our
Neighbor.

But Secondly, The second Reason or Principle upon which the Obligation to
mutual Love is Founded, is the Example and Command of Christ our Savior, which
with us, who pretend to embrace his holy Profession, and to have listed our
selves, as true and faithful Soldiers under his Spiritual Banner, ought
certainly to have very great Authority and Weight.

For his Example, there is nothing more clear, than that his whole Life was
nothing else, but one continued course of Patience, Humility, Meekness,
Condescension, Charity, Constancy and Equability of Mind, of doing Good to
others, and of forgiving Injuries done to himself; and for his Doctrine, what a
mighty stress he laid upon these excellent. Virtues, will appear undeniably by
these Four particulars.

First, That he sums up the whole Duty of Man under these Two general Heads,
the Love of God, and our Neighbor. Thou shall love the Lord thy God with all
thy Heart and with all thy Soul, and with all thy Mind; this is the First and
Great Commandment, and the Second is like unto it, Thou shall love thy Neigbour
as thy self; on these Two Commandments hang all the Law and the Prophets.

Secondly, In summing up the Duties of the Second Table, he reduces them all
under this single Aphorism, Whatsoever ye would that Men should do to you, do
ye even so to them: For this is the Law and the Prophets: And under this
general Precept there is no question to be made, but all the instances of
Charity and good Will are comprised, for there is no Man certainly by his own
consent, that would be Injured or Defamed, that would be Killed or Murdered,
Wounded or Beaten, that would be Censured too severely, Watched too narrowly,
Interpreted too hardly, Punished with a rigor altogether disproportioned to the
guilt and heinousness of his Crime; there is no Man, if it were at all times
perfectly at his own Choice, but he would be well thought of, well spoken of,
kindly, courteously and favorably entreated, and therefore this Precept
obliges us not only not to do any injustice, but in all cases whatsoever, to
show as much Mercy, as the thing will bear, to show the same Friendship,
Gentleness and good Nature in all the particular instances that can happen,
which we our selves in such circumstances should reasonably expect, or should
be glad to receive, and to interpret all Men, not by particular Prejudices and
Passions of our own, but with an universal Justice, Ingenuity and Candor.

Thirdly, he gives it us in charge in his Holy Gospel, not only in general
terms, to approve our selves, as Men of Candid, Courteous, and Merciful
Dispositions, but to be so toward our very Enemies and Persecutors themselves.
If ye love them which love you, says he, what reward have ye? do not even the
Publicans the same? And if ye salute your Brethren only, what do ye more than
others? do not even the Publicans so? But I say unto you, Love your Enemies,
Bless them that Curse you, do good to them that hate you, and pray for them
which despitefully use you and persecute you. Which Command of his to his
Disciples, though it were certainly at that time when it was uttered, of
greater Extent and Obligation than it is now adays, they being then under great
and heavy Persecution for Righteousness sake, against which there was no Humane
Remedy but Patience, unless they would forsake their Master and their
Profession together; In which manner we must likewise interpret those other
hard Injunctions in this very Chapter, Whosoever shall smite thee on thy Right
Cheek, turn to him the other also; and if any Man will sue thee at Law and take
away thy Coat, let him have thy Cloak also; and whosoever shall compel thee to
go a Mile, go with him twain; which are not now Precepts of so great Obligation
as they were then, when the Christians oppressed by the Roman and the Jewish
Power, were in no capacity legally to right themselves, and therefore it was
their best and only way to conquer their Enemies, if it might be, by an
obstinate Patience, and a firm Resolution of undergoing quietly and cheerfully
the worst they could inflict; whereas if these Commands were now also to be put
in practice by Real or Pretended Christians in their converse with one another,
as the Christians of that Age were obliged to do it, with reference to their
Jewish and their Heathen Persecutours; it is manifest in this case, that the
simplicity of well meaning Men would but expose it self to be the Prey and
Spoil of every sturdy Vagrant; every Midnight Thief, every Covetous, Envious,
or Injurious Neighbor, every Lawless, Unconscionable, or Unreasonable Person;
so that no Christian Society could continue for one Moment, but all would
presently be thrown into the utmost disorder and confusion, which our Blessed
Lord, whose Gospel was the Gospel of Peace, as he himself is styled the Prince
of it, cannot be supposed to have intended; and the same was the case of that
severe Maxim of his, It is easier for a Camel to go through the Eye of a
Needle, than for a Rich Man* to enter into the Kingdom of Heaven; which though
it were very true in those days, when a Man that embraced the profession of
Christianity was either Sequestered and Plundered of his Estate, or else was
forced to sell it for the use of his poor Brethren, who could not otherwise
subsist, so that it was morally impossible for him to keep his Estate and his
Profession together; yet now the Case is clean altered, and it is now very
possible for us to make to our selves Friends of the unrighteous Mammon, not
only by giving Alms, to which notwithstanding we are obliged in a reasonable
proportion, but even by heaping up Riches for our selves, so long as they be
honestly and justly gotten, without incurring the danger of Damnation. And
after all, in this hard Chapter of the Sermon on the Mount, wherein so many
difficult and severe Lessons are set before the Disciples, there are these four
things as to the business of forgiving Enemies, which do and will always
continue to retain their first latitude and extent of Truth.

First, That Christianity lays the practice of this duty much more strictly and
indispensably upon us than any former Dispensation ever did, or than was ever
practiced in the World by any other Sect or Party of Men, as appears undeniably
by those words of our Savior, If ye love them that love you, what reward have
ye? do not even Publicans the same? And if ye salute your Brethren only, what
do ye more than others? do not even the Publicans so? Which is as much as to
say, that Christianity lays stronger and more extensive Obligations of Charity
and Good Will upon us, than ever were submitted to either by the Jewish or the
Heathen World, out of both of which at that time in Judea the Publicans were
indifferently chosen.

Secondly, we are not to prosecute, and avenge our selves of our Enemies
without necessity, to preserve our own Life, Liberty, Reputation or Fortune, to
vindicate the innocent or afflicted, when it lies in our Power, against their
unjust and unreasonable Oppressors, who are common Enemies to Mankind; or out
of Kindness and Justice to the Commonwealth, which may and does suffer in very
many Cases by the impunity of private and personal Offenders.

Thirdly, As we are not to punish without necessity, so we are not willingly to
punish beyond it neither; we are not to exercise Cruelty but Justice, not to
gratify an implacable and revengeful temper, that sets no Bounds or Limits to
its Wrath, but we are to mind only the amendment of the offending party, or the
due and just satisfaction of the wrongs that are done us, or the advantage
which the Public may and will receive by the necessary warning and example;
and if the Offense be such as will admit it, after satisfaction is made us, we
are not to decline a Familiarity and Friendship with the Offending Party, upon
account of former grudges or misunderstandings, if for the future it shall
appear to be either prudent or safe, of which we our selves are naturally the
Judges.

Fourthly, In the midst of those punishments or Forfeitures, which our
Adversary incurs upon account of the injuries which either we or the public
have received from him, we are not to let go our Christian equability of
temper, we must not suffer our selves to mock at his Calamity, or insolently
vaunt at his Affliction, or take any other fort of Satisfaction or Complacency
in his Punishment, than what redounds from the hopes of his amendment by this
means, or from the sense of our own preservation, or the foresight of a Public
Service, which we may reasonably expect from the Example. We may Pity him, we
may Pray for him, and wish, though in vain, that he had not deserved this
Punishment, as much as we please, but we must still endeavor to preserve a
gracious and a candid frame of Spirit, we must not insult, we must not triumph
over him, we must not make him the subject of our Laughter, or the unsavory
Food of our Revenge. And in these Four Senses which I have now newly mentioned,
the Obligation to forgive our Enemies continues still as strong and pressing
upon us, as it was upon the first Converts in our Saviors time.

In the Fourth and last place, though it were our Blessed Saviors Express and
avowed Intention to promote and establish an universal Charity, yet this he
pressed much more strongly and warmly upon his Disciples with respect to one
another, than in reference to their Enemies, or to Strangers and Aliens abroad;
that we should Love one another to the same Degree, to which he Loved us, who
lived a Life laden with Reproach and Scorn, and died a painful and ignominious
Death for our sakes; and this therefore he calls a new Commandment, a
Friendship so strict, inviolable and Sacred, that it was never heard of in the
World before. A new Commandment I give unto you, that ye Love one another, as I
have Loved you, that ye also Love one another; by this shall all Men know that
ye are my Disciples, if ye have Love one to another. And how very great stress
the Apostles in their Writings lay upon this eminent Gift and Grace of Charity,
I need not tell you, but shall content my self barely to take notice, First,
That St. Paul in the Thirteenth Chapter of his First Epistle to the
Corinthians, imputes so very much to this one Grace of Charity, that without it
he makes all other things, however Pompous or Specious they may seem, to
signify just nothing at all. Though I speak, says he, with the Tongue of Men
and Angels, and have not Charity, I am become as sounding Brass, or a tinkling
Cymbal; and though I have the Gift of Prophecy, and understand all Mysteries,
and all knowledge, so that I could remove Mountains, and have not Charity, I am
nothing; and though I bestow all my Goods to feed the Poor, and though I give
my Body to be burned, and have not Charity, it profits me nothing.

Secondly, Whereas most other Miraculous Gifts and Graces, were in due time to
cease, having done the Errant upon which they were employed, which was to give
sufficient evidence, and such as without willful blindness could not be
resisted to the Truth and Divine Authority of our most holy Religion; yet
Charity was still to remain to the very end of the World: So that wherever
there is a true Church of Christ, there must be a charitable Spirit visible and
reigning in it. Charity, says he, never fails; but whether there be
Prophecies, they shall fail; whether there be Tongues, they shall cease;
whether there be Knowledge, it shall vanish away. And again a little after, And
now abides Faith, Hope, Charity, these three, but the greatest of these is
Charity: As it were to answer that Passage in St. John, There are three that
bear record in Heaven, the Father, the Word, and the Holy Ghost: and these
three are one. And there are three that bear witness in earth, the spirit, and
the water, and the blood, and these three agree in one. For in this partition
of St. Paul, Faith answers to the Blood; it is Faith in a crucified and
bleeding Savior. Hope to the Water or the Sacrament of Baptism, in which we
make Profession of this Faith, and of the Hope that is in us, which is built
upon it. And Charity, which is the best and most peculiar Gift of the Holy
Ghost, that answers to the Spirit, which is a Spirit of universal Friendship
and Love, the essential root, and spring, and source of Kindness, abstractum in
concreto, the utmost mercy, compassion, and good will, assuming a Person, and
breathing forth its likeness upon every Subject capable of receiving it. Faith
and Hope are like Pisgah with respect to Canaan, they afford us a prospect of
the Land of Promise, but they are not the Land flowing with milk and honey
themselves; but Charity in its utmost perfection and extent, is that which in
other words we call Salvation and Heaven; it is the single Food, and it affords
the mutual relish and enjoyment of God and Angels, and of the spirits of just
men made perfect, through all the vast Periods of an eternal Duration.

But woe to us vile wretches and miserable sinners, if without Charity there be
no true Church, nor any true Disciple! O generation of vipers that we are, who
shall deliver us from the wrath to come? or will it not be more tolerable for
Tire and Sidon, for Chorazin and Bethsaida, nay, for Gomorrah and for Sodom
too, at the great and dreadful Day, than for us, who professing outwardly the
Religion, are yet so far removed from the inward Spirit of Christ; and, as if
we had reason to blush and be ashamed of him and of his Gospel, which is the
power of God unto salvation, have cast away the Badge of Charity, that Men
might not know us to be his Disciples. We are unjust in our Dealings,
uncharitable in our Censures, irreconcilable and implacable in our
Animosities; turbulent and uneasy in our Tempers, contentious and litigious in
our Conversations, false to our Promises, treacherous to our Friendships,
hypocritical in our Pretenses, and yet we pretend to be Christians all this
while: Nay, so very far have we revolted from the true Christian Spirit, so far
is it now from being thought the Characteristick and essential Mark of a
Christian, to be of an humble, meek, and charitable Disposition, that even
Religion it self, or at least the vain pretense and color of it, is made the
fatal Bone of Contention, and the Apple of Strife. We quarrel about that very
thing which was intended to unite us, and which has made no Promises but to
Unity and Peace, to the candid, quiet, and ingenuous frame of Spirit, as if the
nature of our Profession were inverted since the Apostolical Times, when it was
pronounced as a certain Maxim, If any Man among you seem to be Religious, and
bridleth not his Tongue, but deceives his own Heart, that Man's Religion is
vain; We mistake Brawling and Contention for Zeal, and when our Tongues are set
on fire of Hell, we imagine them tipped and sanctified by a Coal from the Altar;
not but that every Man ought to be very obstinate in what he firmly believes
upon his best Enquiry to be the very Truth, every Man's own Conscience being
without question his only rule and measure of Action; and to relinquish or
disown that of whose truth we have all the inward assurance our present light
is capable of giving us, is to betray the great Pillar and Principle of Life,
by which all Humane Society is supported, which is bound up in truth, and
consists in the faithfulness of its Members to each other: But there may be a
Charity every whit as obstinate as the most fierce and most intemperate rage;
and Humility will stand its ground, and gain upon its Adversaries by gentle,
but resistless Motions, when Clamor an^ Passion shall be put to silence, and
will be ashamed o^ themselves: or if there appear reason sufficient to persuade
it, Humility can own a conquest without shame, and is easily induced to change
its mistaken Sentiments for the better, when Passion, though it be inwardly
convinced, yet blushes, nay faints and even dies to think of being reconciled.

But though I have said, what I believe to be true, That every Man's private
Conscience is his only private and personal measure of Action; yet I would not
by any means be so interpreted, as if I were about to insinuate, That the
non-execution of Laws against religious Dissenters were a necessary Branch of
that Charity to which we are so indispensibly obliged; no, the Charity lies
manifestly on the other side, and he that is the Author and the God of Peace,
cannot certainly be displeased with those necessary Methods, without which that
Peace can never be obtained. Since Men are so apt to quarrel about religious
Matters, there must be a standing Rule in every Nation, to which an outward
Conformity must be exacted. If a Man cannot comply, he must be content to
suffer, whether he be in the right or wrong: for it is not fit that the Peace
of a Nation should be put in hazard, and much less Embroiled and openly
Disturbed by the particular Sentiments of private Persons, so long as the great
Rules of Morality are not invaded. And though no Man ought ever to forsake the
Truth, or to deny so much as the appearance of it, so long as upon the best
Information he can get, he takes it to be the very substance it self; yet, I
presume, there is no question, but God is less displeased with Obedience, which
is the certain Instrument of Peace, though it be founded upon our mutual
Agreement to some Proposition speculatively false, th^^ with a speculative
Truth zealously and contentiously urged against the common Sentiments, to the
disturbance of the Public Peace and Welfare.

Much less are we to abandon our Senses, and to betray the common Safety by a
too destructive Indulgence, for the sake of those who have neither the
understanding to discern what is fit in Practice, or true in Speculation; nor
the moderation to set any bounds to that innovating Humor, which will end in
Anarchy if it be not timely restrained, and overwhelm all Orders and Degrees of
Men in a Deluge of Blood more fatal than any of those of Water, whether of
Noah, Deucalion, or Ogyges, which either Scripture or Antiquity have recorded.

Wherefore we have no more liberty left us in this Case, but only to inflict
Punishments with a merciful Temper, and to pity those in the midst of legal
Inflictions, which they do well to undergo for Conscience sake, if they cannot
better inform themselves, whom to be sure without, and sometimes with such
Remedies, we cannot reclaim: But this is a general Rule to be observed in this
and all other Instances whatsoever, That we are never to gratify Revenge under
pretense of Justice. And as we are not upon any terms to let go the Reins of
Government, and leave the giddy Multitude without any Curb or Bridle, so though
we hold them in never so hard, according to the quality of the Persons we have
to deal with, yet we must do it at the same time with a generous trouble and
uneasiness to our selves, not with a revengeful, cruel and implacable, but with
a pitiful and relenting Hand, and with a compassionate sense even of those very
Frailties, which we are forced so sharply to chastise. Malice, Envy and Hatred,
and all Incharitableness, are of their Father the Devil, and his works they do;
they are not Plants of our heavenly Father's planting, they are the bane, the
poison, the canker of the Mind, and like the Tares, the Cockle and the Darnel
of the Field, they are not content barely to insinuate themselves and grow up
among the Wheat, unless they also stifle it and choke it, unless they eat away
its heart and life, and hinder it from coming to maturity and perfection.

It is true indeed, there is an antipathy and aversion in every wise and good
Man, while his Mind continues in its due frame, against the very Notion and
Idea of all kinds of sin and folly, they appear so ugly and so deformed to him,
they strike so ungrateful and so harsh a Note upon his Understanding; and
sometimes it is very difficult, and next kin to impossible, for frail and
passionate Creatures as we are, to separate personal hatred from the hatred of
the cause; as when our Fortunes or Good-names are violently and maliciously
invaded, or when our Lives are treacherously and unjustly assaulted; and these
Passions in these and the like Cases, are so far excuseable as they are
necessary, or as, it may be, they may be intended by Nature, upon such
important Emergencies as these, for our safety, defense and preservation; but
otherwise there is no question, but it is the Duty of every good Man, to
separate as much as is possible, the Cause from the Person, and to punish the
one out of no private account, but only for the sake of the other, for our own
just and necessary defense, or for the sake of Example to the World: But he
that encourages and pampers personal Aversions for the Person's sake, will
proceed from one degree of malice to another in pursuance of this implacable
Disposition, till at length this excellent Gift of Charity shall take its
flight, and the Spirit of God, which is a Spirit of Peace, Tranquillity and
Love, shall refuse to dwell in such a Mind any longer, but shall leave it to
become the Habitation of evil Spirits, and an Hell full of torments and
inquietudes to it self. Our Savior will not own such an one to be his
Disciple; and there is still the greater danger of his Salvation, if he profess
himself outwardly to be one of that number.

And this was the Second Reason or Principle of Obligation to our mutual love
of one another, viz. the Example and Command of Christ our Savior. And
certainly if we seriously consider, that Christ, who shed his precious Blood
for us, did also do the same for the greatest and the bitterest Enemies we
have, and that at a time when all Mankind were in a state of Enmity to himself,
nothing can appear more criminal and heinous, than for us to own any
Sentiments, but those of the highest Charity and Goodwill toward him, for
whom, as for our selves, our blessed Savior did not refuse to Bleed, and who,
though really he be never so bad, may yet, upon his hearty and sincere
Repentance, be made partaker of those heavenly Joys, into which we without
Charity shall never enter.

But Thirdly and Lastly, which I shall but name. The Third and Last Principle
of Obligation upon which this great Duty of Charity is founded, is the
undoubted Interest and Advantage of any Humane Society whatsoever. And
certainly, without any painful or elaborate Proof, it is in it self a plain
Case, That kind and merciful, and charitable Dispositions, are the natural and
proper Means to preserve the Public Order and Establishment from falling into
ruin and decay; That the contrary Habits of our Minds do break out by degrees
into Intestine Strife and Hatred, and that they have a fatal tendency to the
Dissolution of Kingdoms, the Downfall of Empires, and the Subversion of every
Civil Constitution, let it be Established never so well or wisely.

Aristophanes, Hesiod, Parmenides, and others, have delivered it down to us
according to ancient Tradition, That Divine Love was the Principle that reduced
the jarring Elements into this comely Frame, which, if it had not been for
that, would still have been a disorderly and confused Chaos, and without its
help and assistance every moment, would immediately return into it: And I am
very sensible there is a great deal of truth and weight in what they say; but
yet it is much more true of the Moral and Intellectual, than of the Natural
World, that it is supported by Love, it is supported by Divine Love from
without as well as the other; but even this would hardly do, as powerful as it
is, without a Principle of Love within it self.

I should now, as I promised under the Second general Head, proceed to show in
what Instances, and to what Degrees this Duty of mutual Kindness and Good Will
is to exert it self; but this having been already sufficiently done in my
Discourse upon the former Head, as opportunity presented it self, I may excuse
my self and you from any farther trouble upon that account, and betake my self
very briefly to the last thing proposed, which was of the Advantages redounding
from this happy Temper; the bare Enumeration of which, since it is so that my
Time will give me leave to do no more, may supply the place of an Exhortation
to it.

And the First thing I shall mention is, That it is in general the most blessed
Constitution of the Soul of Man, which it is capable of being endued withal.
For certainly the most pleasing Disposition of the Soul is Love, if all the
World be not very widely mistaken in their Sense and Sentiment of things; and
the most eligible Estate which it can wish for it self, is to converse with
Objects which it delights in; and such this Temper, this sweet and amiable
Habit of the Mind makes every Object more or less to be.

Secondly, It is not only a Temper the most blessed in it self, it is not only
an imitation of God, who is the best Example, as has been already shown, but
it also draws down the Influences of his Spirit upon us, which have a natural
and a vital congruity to the charitable Man. It is effectually at the same time
a participation of the Divine Nature, and brings us into an intimate and close
Communion with the Supreme Love, which is glad of every suitable occasion to
diffuse and enlarge it self; and so St. John at large represents the matter:
Beloved, says he, let us love one another: for love is of God; and every one
that loves, is born of God, and knows God. He that loves not, knows not
God, for God is love. No man has seen God at any time. If we love one another,
God dwells in us, and his love is perfected in us. Hereby we know that we
dwell in him, and he in us, because he has given us of his Spirit; that is,
the Spirit of Love, of Charity and Good Will, of which he had been speaking
before.

Thirdly, By keeping our Minds cool, and disengaged from any turbulent and
uneasy Passions. This Temper is perhaps the best natural Judge of
Controversies in the World; and if it could universally obtain, by bringing all
things to the arbitrage of Reason, it would soon put an end to our religions
Broils, or at least, it would hinder those particular Differences in Opinion
from being dangerous to our Peace and Welfare.

Fourthly, By preserving our Souls, as it is naturally disposed to do, in their
true sagacity, clearness, and untainted strength, it prevents those
entanglements and perplexities of thought, which are the cause of most of those
Ills to which Mankind is usually exposed, which run us very frequently upon
desperate Courses, and bring us in the end to Misery and Confusion.

Fifthly and Lastly, It is not only the best preparation to the Joys and
Glories of another World; but when in the end of our Days we arrive happily at
the end of our Hopes, the salvation of our precious and immortal Souls, it will
be the greatest part of their Fruition and Enjoyment, which consists mainly, if
not altogether, in the love God and his Angels, and of one another.

To which most happy and eternally blessed State, God of his infinite Mercy
bring us all, by the Merits and Mediation of his Son, our Savior, the ever
blessed Jesus. To whom, with the Father and the Holy Ghost, be ascribed all
Glory for ever. Amen.

NOTES.
P. 2. SO Homer describes his Poetical Olympus.] After the same manner
Lucretius also describes those blessed and peaceful Places, though he reject
them as fabulous at the same time; and he takes the Copy of his Description
manifestly from Homer.

Illud item non est ut possis credere seeds
Esse Deum sanctas in mundi partibus ullis;
Quas neque concutiunt venti, neque nubila nimbis
Aspergunt, neque nix acri concreta pruina
Cana cadens violat semperque innubilus ether
Integit, and large diffuso lumine ridet.
P. 18. The Publicans were indifferently chosen.] The Administration of the
Vectigalia, or Customs of the Roman State, was primarily in all the Provinces
in the Hands of the Romans themselves, but under them certain of the Natives of
the respective Provinces were employed, as being best acquainted with their own
Nation, and so best able to manage the Collection of the Tribute in it. That it
was so among the Jews, is evident by the Instances of Matthew, Levi, and
Zaccheus in the Gospels, the two first of which are mentioned as Sitting at the
Receipt of Custom, and the last is called (...), the chief of the Publicans, or
Customers, that is to say among the Jews. And from this I will take occasion to
correct, as I conceive, a very great Mistake, which has hitherto generally
obtained among Learned Men, as if Levi and Matthew were the same, only because
they are both mentioned by several Evangelists as Sitting at the Receipt of
Custom; and out of this number I do not except Grotius himself: whereas indeed,
they are the Names of two several and distinct Publicans, as appears by Matthew.
10. 3. where there is distinct mention made of Matthew the Publican, and of
Lebbaeus, whose surname was Thaddaeus; which Lebbaeus, by the change of the V
Consonant into a double B, the Greeks having no such Letter as the V Consonant
in use among them, but always expressing it either by (...) or (...), is the
same with Levi, and Levi is (...), as Chivi is (...), Emori (...), Chitti
(...), and the like; and when it is added (...), whose Surname was Thaddaeus:
This Surname is to be understood of his Roman Name, as the other is of his
Jewish, as there is mention made of John, whose Surname was Mark, Acts 12. 12,
25. and cap. 15. 37. where John is Jochanan, the Jewish Name, as Mark, is the
Roman. So that it seems it was familiar in those Times, when Judea was a Roman
Province, for Men to have two Names, the one a Jewish, by which they were
better known to their own Countrymen and Kinsfolks, being the Name that was
given them at their Circumcision; and the other a Roman, or rather in this
Instance a Greek, though at that time very familiar among the Romans, who
called this Lebbaeus by the Name of (...), which is a contraction of
Theodosius, who is by Claudian somewhere called Theudosius, as (...), and (...)
is Epaphroditus, and many others of the like nature; and of one that was called
by this Name express mention is made Acts 5. 36. which Name by the Jews was
corruptly called Thaddai; as Dositheus they call Dosthai, Prolomaeus Talmai,
after a barbarous and corrupt manner: and indeed all Proper Names of Foreign
Nations, the Jews, who were a very ignorant, unlettered People, were used to
corrupt after a strange rate; as Drusius conjectures the Jewish Terphon or
Tarphon, to have been the same with the (...) of Justin Martyr. And I make no
question but Baithos, who was the fabulous Companion of Sadoc, the Founder of
the Saducean Sect or Heresy among the Jews, is the same with the Greek (...),
from whence is the Latin Name Boethius, signifying an Helper or Assistant. And
they who by St. Paul are called Jannes and Jambres, who are said to have
withstood Moses and the Truth, are by the Rabbis corruptly named sometimes
Jonos and Jombros, and at others, Jochanna and Mamre. And other Instances might
be given, as well in Appellative as Proper Names; but these are sufficient for
my purpose: And, I hope, by this time it is sufficiently clear, that Matthew
and Levi are two distinct Persons, notwithstanding the general cry of
Expositors to the contrary, who having taken a false scent from one another,
are never like to find out the truth. V. Drus. de trib. Sect. lib. 2. cap. 2.
and lib. 3. cap. 4. and B^xt. Lex. Talmud. in Talmai. page 2598. and in
Jochanna, page 945, etc.

P. 20. And though I bestow all my Goods to feed the Poor, and though I give my
Body to be burned.] These are very proper and genuine Effects of that Charity
which the Apostle describes, but it seems without Charity it self, unless they
proceed out of an inward Principle of Love to God on the one hand, and our
Neighbor on the other; the bare Acts considered by themselves, will be of no
profit or avail to us.

P. 27. Aristophanes, Hesiod, Parmenides, and others.] The particular
Testimonies to this purpose you may see in Grotius, in his Learned Notes upon
his Book De V. R. C. and in Dr. Cudworth in his Intellectual System; and those
others whom I mean, are Simmias the Rhodian, and Orpheus the Writer of the
Argonautiques, whose Testimonies are likewise produced by Dr. C.

FINIS.

