BOAZ and RVTH.

A Disquisition upon Deuteronomy 25.5. concerning the BROTHERS Propagating the NAME
and MEMORY OF HIS Elder Brother deceased.

IN Which the Antiquity, Reason, and circumstances of that Law are explained,
the mistakes and impositions of the Jewish Rabbis, in this and other matters
detected, and a fair way opened for a clearer understanding of the most obscure
and dark passages in the Law of Moses.

TOGETHER With a discovery of several things, as well in the Eastern, as the
Roman Antiquities, never yet explained or understood by any.

By John Turner, Hospitaller of St. Thomas Southwark, and late fellow of
Christs-College in Cambridge.

-- Credat Judaeus Apella
Non ego --
Qualiacunque voles, Judaei somnia vendent.
Si veritas Nobiseum, quis contra nos?
LONDON, Printed by H. Hills Jun. for Walter Kettilby, at the Bishops-Head, in
St. Paul's Churchyard. 1685.

To the Right Honorable, and my very Good Lord, George Lord Jefferies, Baron
of Wem, Lord Chief Justice of England, and one of His Majesty's most Honorable
Privy Council.
My Lord,
I Do humbly Dedicate this disquisition to your Lordship, after some small,
though very Hearty endeavors, to let your Lordship and the World see how
extremely sensible I am of your goodness to me, not only out of a principle of
gratitude, but interest too, in gratitude I was obliged to bethink my self of a
present more suitable to your Lordships deserved Character and Greatness, than
any I have yet had the hardiness or opportunity to make; and in interest, I
considered with my self, that having engaged with so potent adversaries as the
memory of Mr. Seldom, who was the glory of the last Age, and the living fame of
a Person yet in being, it concerned me to look out some Patron of the Highest
Quality and the most universally acknowledged merit, to give some countenance
to my undertakings, which are intended purely for the discovery of truth, and
for the benefit and advantage of the World.

I have in this Essay given a deadly blow to the Rabbinical Learning, not that
I pretend or would be thought to suggest, as if they were not to be believed in
any thing they say, for who is so guilty of mistakes and impositions as not to
speak truth sometimes? But if by virtue of a pretended Tradition, they shall
impose any falsity upon us, as I have proved in this Treatise, they have done
very many, we are not to believe any thing upon account of any such precarious
Tradition, without other circumstances and probabilities to vouch it, as a
witness of cracked credit and profligate reputation, may yet put new wait into
the Scale of Truth, if he have eitheir other circumstances or more allowable
testimony to concur with him, but upon his own account he is nothing, and if
any have a mind to support the credit of the Rabbis, it is not to be done by
proving that in some things they have been in the right, but that they are so
in those particulars, wherein I have laid falsehood and forgery to their charge.

If Mr. Seldom were alive, I should not despair but he would acknowledge his
Error and that of those upon whose authority and credit he depended, but of the
other I have no other hope, then only that he will not pretend in scriptis to
confute me, though he may possibly whisper in the dark, where I can neither
hear nor see him, and may have a party in the Coffee-house to stand by him.

But not content barely to have confuted these two Learned Gentlemen, I have
substituted positive and affirmative Doctrines in the room of those which they
would have obtruded upon us, I have, I hope, held out a Key to the Learned
World, by which the most difficult passages in the Law of Moses may be
explained, and have besides given so fair an entrance into the Antiquities of
Rome, and shown so plainly their dependence upon those of the East, from whence
they are unquestionably derived, that it is clearly a new sort of Learning
scarce ever yet so much as pointed at by any, and capable of very great and
very useful improvements, all which I do humbly submit to your Lordships known
Candor, and unbyast Judgment, and with my most earnest Prayers to Almighty God
for the continuance of your Lordships health and safety, in which that of the
public has so great a share, I am, may it please your Lordship,

Your Lordships most Humble, Obedient, and Obliged Servant, John Turner.

TO THE READER.
Reader,
I Here Present you with a Discourse, the greatest part of which was long since
Written, upon that Law of Moses, by which the surviving younger Brother was
obliged to propagate the name and memory of his Elder Brother in his stead, in
which I will be bold to say, I have discovered more of the Jewish Antiquity,
then all the Rabbis put together have with the same certainty and
convincingness done, for most of what they tell us amounts to no more then hear
say, depends upon very uncertain and questionable Traditions, and is Jumbled
together with such an oglio of monstrous and impertinent Winter-tales, that it
is very difficult, where there is any Truth, to separate the Truth and Falsehood
from each other, and besides this, I have occasionally so far inquired into the
most remote Antiquities of Rome, as to show they were manifestly of Eastern
growth, and the comparing of the Customs and Language of the one with the
other, which I take it for granted is a subject, which neither one Man nor one
Age can exhaust, is that, that will give great light and certainty to both, and
may with much more reason be depended upon in our inquiries into Truths of this
nature, then any of those pompous Tales the Rabbis tell us, though dressed up in
Hebrew, and coming into the World in the shape and appearance of profound
Learning.

You will find by several passages, up and down in this Treatise, that what I
have now written, was designed as preparatory and introductory to another,
which it is now a long time, that I have promised or threatened, or what you
please to call it, concerning the Marriage of Cousin Germans, if you ask in what
sense, this may be thought preparatory to that, though it may seem an hard
Question, yet I will make it easy, by giving it a plain Answer, and indeed the
Answer is two fold.

First, This was a Matrimonial Case as well as the other, which though it be
now perfectly Antiquated and out of date, not only amongst us, but even the
Jews themselves, yet I had a mind to show by an Essay upon this subject, that I
was not altogether a stranger to subjects of this nature, that upon the Credit
of this performance, I might remove the prejudices that lie against me, and
might be thought possibly to understand what I said* better then those that
censure me* when I affirmed the Marriage of Cousin Germans to be in all
Christian Politics and in all ordinary Cases ex antecedenti prohibited and
Unlawful.

In the Second place, it is to be considered, That the Brothers Marrying the
Brothers Wife under the Law, was by virtue of a particular dispensation in a
particular Case, though otherwise the same Marriages were punishable with
death, and the Case is the same in any dispensation, it imports an Unlawfulness
in non exceptis, otherwise, if the thing dispensed with, were generally Lawful,
nothing could be more frivolous or more absurd, then a particular dispensation
in the Case proposed, let it be what it will; wherefore by the same reason that
the Leviratical or Anchistutical sanction of the Mosaic Law, being a particular
dispensation in a particular Case, did imply a prohibition, where that Case was
not concerned, by the very same reason does the Marriage of the Daughters of
Zelophehad in the 36 of Numbers, imply a prohibition in all other Cases, where
the same circumstances could not lay claim to any such particular and
extraordinary dispensation, which having only a regard to the partition of
Inheritances among the Jews, which partition is now finally destroyed, such
Marriages are now Unlawful to the Jews themselves, and much more certainly to
all Christian people, to whom the natural reasons upon which the Matrimonial
prohibitions depended are the same, that they were to the Jews, and the
obligation to all the instances of charity, friendship and good will, and all
the means conducing to it, is greater and more binding then it was upon them,
for the sake of our common Savior who loved us so much, and who made this the
Mark and Character of his Disciples, by which they might always be discerned
from the rest of the World, By this shall all men know that ye are my disciples
if ye love one another. But however this Christian Charity as great and as
universal, as it is or ought to be, yet it does not forbid us in Cases of
necessity, to defend our Persons or Possessions, or to assert or vindicate our
good Names against such as make it their business to injure and defame us,
therefore you are not to expect, that I should upon this Text, stand up and
Preach a Recantation Sermon for the late severities upon Dr. C. which I am so
far from, that in this very Discourse I have followed my blow and have resolved
of a long time, neither to give him any Quarter nor take any from him, and yet
now I think of it, I have given it notwithstanding, for there are faults in the
System, which I have not exposed, and there are faults in the Systemer, which
are not in the System, but if any else have a mind to try their parts upon the
same Arguments, I have engaged him upon, without making the Controversy
personal between us, I shall not be behind hand in Civility with them, only
there are two things in this following Discourse, for one of which I must
Apologize, and the other I find my self obliged to Recant that which needs an
Apology is this p. 205, etc. where speaking of the fact of Zimri, of whom it is
said, 1 Kings 16. that he went into the Palace of the Kings House and burnt the
Kings House over him with fire, and dyed. I may be thought upon this occasion
to have spoken too favorably concerning self homicide in some Cases, wherefore
since I have dipped into this controversy which is very nice, that I may set all
things right, and offer my most mature sentiments concerning it, I desire it
may be considered, First, That I have not in the least excused any who out of
fanciful Causes or a vincible Melancholy not yet improved into a state of
frenzy, have been the Authors of untimely death to themselves, because all
these Cases are manifestly supposed to be so many instances of unreasonable
Actions, and therefore can by no means justify themselves. Secondly, There are
some instances to be met with in the World, of mischiefs that are
unquestionably real, exquisitely painful, and utterly incurable, or such as at
present seem so, without any hopes of remedy, not only in the opinion of the
party affected, but also of the wisest, most experienced, and most discerning
Physicians themselves, and this was Seneca's Case by reason of a Chronical
suspirium, or shortness of breath which he complains of in several of his
Epistles, and in one of them he says, that if it had not been in consideration
of his Aged Father, and out of tenderness to his Relations, who might have
taken his death immoderately to heart, he would have made away with himself,
and I am far from discouraging any such considerations as these, to persuade a
Man even in the worst circumstances, yet notwithstanding to endure them with
constancy and steady resolution, and to expect with patience the call of
nature, rather then to get rid of them by any act of violence committed upon
himself.

Thirdly, As in the Case of bodily pain, so also in that of extreme and
irretrievable ignominy and disgrace, which is the most exquisite and
insupportable torment of a reasonable or a gallant mind, if I have spoken any
thing favorably concerning the practice of self-homicide likewise in this
Case; I did it only out of a charitable Principle to those gallant and good
Men, whose Virtue and Wisdom in all other respects were scarce ever called into
question by their greatest Enemies themselves; and such an instance as this
would Seneca have been, if he had done what he designed in the former Case of
pain, and such Cato was in the latter of disgrace, for the avoiding of which,
and that he might not fall into the hands of his inveterate and mortal enemies,
he thought it his wisest course to prevent, and anticipate their contempt of
his person, and all the barbarous outrages of a victorious Army, by a generous
contempt of that small remainder of life, which either his nature or his fate
had left him, and yet this is that Cato of whom Lucan gives so lofty and so
excellent a character, that no mortal Man can ever deserve a greater, and one
particular ingredient of it, is, that nature and reason were in all his actions
his perpetual guides. l. 2.

-- Hi mores, haec duri immota Catonis
Secta fuit, servare modum, finemque tenere,
Naturamque sequi, patriaeque impendere vitam,
Nec sibi, sed toti genitum se credere mundo.
Fourthly, It seems something hard and unequal to condemn that as unnatural,
and in all circumstances whatsoever prohibited and unlawful to a wise Man,
which the Stoics a wise sect, and the greatest Masters of their passions of
any other, did universally allow, when ever life became burdensome or uneasy
to its owners, and which notwithstanding that there are many instances of it to
be found in Scripture, yet it is no where, that I know of, mentioned with any
reprehension.

Fifthly, I say, that Life being the most precious and valuable gift that
nature can bestow, and Patience the greatest Ornament and Supporter of it, as
well in single persons, as in a society or body of Men, there being but few Men
whose circumstances would not be uneasy, and no society that could subsist
without it; it becomes a wise Man, and it is his duty upon natural reasons for
the good of the World, for the promoting of which pro virili part he is sent
into it, to be so far from giving way to fancy or to melancholy, or from
sinking into despair under small and tolerbale mischiefs, that even in the
worst of ills that can befall him, he ought to endeavor his utmost, and to
muster up all the strength of his body and mind, to give a remarkable example
of that virtue, which is so becoming and lovely in it self, and of such use and
service to mankind.

Sixthly, In Cases of pain or of disgrace, if they are the just consequence of
an ill spent life, as indeed for the most part they are, if they are owing to
intemperance or other crimes, a Man in this case owes an example to the World,
and as the best amends he can make for the guilt he has contracted, he ought
to endure patiently whatsoever befalls him, for the public good, that so his
sufferings may be the greater warning to others, not to tread in his steps, or
imitate his example; and therefore in this respect I confess, that Zimri and
Sardanapalus, whom I may seem to have justified for their last Act, which was
an Act of violence upon themselves, were guilty of as great and real a sin, as
any they committed in the whole course of their lives, because they ought
rather to have suffered the utmost indignities, and the most exquisite torments
in the view of Mankind, and from the hands of their Enemies, that so the memory
of their wickedness, and the dread of doing like them, might take the deeper
root in the minds of such as beheld it, but all that I have represented in
their behalf was only this, that it was an Argument of some gallantry, and
greatness of spirit to do as they did, in the extremity to which they were
reduced; however, when all things ^re impartially considered, it may and it
does appear to be a breach of Duty.

Besides, that upon supposition of a future life, of which not only revelation,
but nature does sufficiently assure us, wherein it shall be better or worse
with us for ever, according to our behavior or deportment here, it is foolish
and unreasonable for Men in such circumstances, that they may avoid less
painful, and less durable mischiefs, to leap into those by an untimely Fate,
which are at once more miserable and morel asting, and which it is utterly
impossible for them to escape without repentance; and he cannot properly be
said to repent him of his past crimes, who takes his leave of the World, by an
action including an offense against it, as I have shown all self-homicide in
this Case to do, but bating these reasons, and considering only what there is
else to be considered, I cannot understand the courage of encountering to no
purpose, with hopeless, helpless, endless, and insupportable calamities; and it
seems a kind of contradiction, that it should be thought a sign of magnanimity
for a man to continue any longer upon the stage of Life, when at the same time,
he either is or ought to be ashamed, and afraid to see the light any longer.

Seventhly, I am, notwithstanding any thing I have said, and have always been a
professed admirer of of the Wisdom of our Laws, which have loaded the Authors of
untimely death to themselves, with marks of the highest ignominy and disgrace,
and besides have punished them severely in their posterity, though they are past
the sense of any human punishment, in their own persons, the reason is, because
whatever may be said in some Cases, for private and single persons considered
by themselves, yet it is the undoubted wisdom of a society or body Politic, to
take the most effectual care for its own preservation, and not to suffer any
member to withdraw it self, from that Service and Duty which it owes to it,
without any brand of punishment or token of disgrace; besides, that since every
Man is the best judge of what he feels, and perceives within himself, that may
be insupportable or insufferable to him, which is not so to another, and
therefore, if it be not Lawful for every Man to quit his station, and shut up
the scene of Life, as often as guilt, or melancholy, or fancy shall make life
troublesome and uneasy to him, it must, and can only be restrained by an
universal and general prohibition, whose sanction shall be impartial and equal
in all Cases, and it must be acknowledged to have been a very great defect in
all those ancient Laws, before Christianity took place in the World, which do
not seem to have made that provision against so bad a practice, and so
pernicious to the welfare of society, which ours are known to have done.

Eighthly, Where the Laws of any Country or Society, do forbid and punish such
violencies as these, committed by Men wilfully upon themselves, there it is for
that very reason absolutely Unlawful, because this is the nature of Society,
that every Member of it, whatever natural liberty he had before, he has only
so much freedom left him after his entering into, and engaging in it, as the
Laws of that Society have not restrained, and with as much reason as one Lawful
Command of our Superiors, or our Legislators may be violated and broken, all
may, and so the Society is actually dissolved, which is fenced in by Laws and
cannot otherwise be preserved, then by a conscientious and dutiful observation
of them.

Ninthly, If against this it be objected, that he who is the cause of untimely
death to himself, is not bound before hand, when he deliberates concerning it,
to have any regard to the Laws of that Society, which by this fact he is about
to leave, and consequently expects no further favor or protection from it, and
after the execution of his intended design, is out of capacity of receiving
any, which is the true reason why every Man becomes or continues to be a member
of community, that the Laws of that community under which he lists himself may
guard and defend him against violence and wrong, and protect him in the pursuit
of all his reasonable projects and designs; To this there are three things to
be Answered.

First, When a Man enters and ingages himself in a Society, either he looses
all that liberty of action, which the Laws have thought it necessary to
restrain, or he does not, if the former, then the prohibition of self-homicide,
as being ex hypothesi a branch of the said Laws, is as much and as firmly
obligatory and binding, as any other restraint or prohibition whatsoever; if
the latter, then the obligation to all Laws, and the Authority by which they
are Enacted, being equal and the same, it is manifest we may dispense with our
selves in any other instance, as well as in this, and so the whole Fabric of
Govenment falls to the ground.

But Secondly, We are not only tied to the observation of all the Lawful
commands of our Prince or Country, by the Authority of men, but by the Oath of
God, by which all the Laws of our Country are tied upon us, and nothing
certainly can be of more fatal consequence to a man in the other World, then,
that the last action of his life, should be a willful breach of that Oath,
which includes a defiance of the Divine Power and Justice, in this, and such a
defiance as frequently gives no time at all, but very rarely affords in the
disconsolate anguish, and perplexed hurry of a wounded mind and body, sufficient
means, opportunity and time for an hearty and a serious repentance.

Thirdly, By the same reason that a man shall pretend it Lawful to rid himself
of an uneasy World, notwithstanding the Laws of his Country forbid any such
practice, under pretense that the reason why he entered into Society, was only
to receive a safe guard and protection from it, and that now disclaiming all
benefit from its protection, he is under no obligation to its Laws, by the very
same reason an Highway-man, or a Midnight, house-breaker, may excuse himself;
for he also by affronting and violating the Laws, does disclaim all benefit and
protection from them, yet he is never the less guilty for all this, for he does
still break and violate the Oath of God, and disturb the peace and welfare of
mankind, one of which the Laws of nature, and the necessities of humane life,
do forbid him to do, and the other is a breach of a no less sacred, though a
superinduced and positive obligation, and this brings me to a Tenth thing to be
considered.

For in the Tenth place, Though the Laws of a Society should not peradventure
forbid the practice of self-homicide, yet it is sufficient that the nature of a
Society does, as if the Laws should not forbid Adultery or Theft, yet
notwithstanding they would be never the less unlawful, because they tend to
contention and strife, to the disturbance of the public peace, and to the
dissolution of Society, the end of which is mutual happyness, and mutual
preservation, and so in this case also, of self-homicide in any instance,
though it might perhaps be justifiable, or at least excusable as a single
instance considered by it self, and without relation to any civil Society; of
which he that committed it, was formerly a member, yet standing in this
relation, let the circumstances of his action be never so favorable, and
propitious to themselves, yet it is enough that the action it self, with
whatever circumstances it may happen to be clothed, yet it is of pernicious
consequence to the public, and that it would certainly produce very bad
effects, if it should be drawn into president or example, as if, we should
suppose a man otherwise of an exact, or at least an unusual and extraordinary
virtue, laboring under some hereditary distemper, of Gout or Stone, or
Consumption, languishing for a long time under the one, and afflicted with
frequent and violent returns of the other, against whom the above mentioned
Argument does not lie, that he owes an example of punishment to the World, to
which he is sensible he can be no longer useful, but is and is like to be,
without any hopes of remedy, a perpetual plague and torment to himself, I
should not much doubt the Lawfulness of this Man's action, considered as a
single person, and without regard to Society, (if such a supposition can or
ought to be made) though he should make use of some violence upon himself,
rather then conflict any longer with exquisite Torments and incurable Evils, to
little or no purpose; but if we consider this Man as a member of Community,
then whatever may be pleaded in excuse of his fact considered by it self,
though it may appear never so reasonable, so necessary, or so just, if you
respect no body but him, yet in its consequence it will Patronize Fancy, and
Melancholy, and Womanish fears or frantic despair, or any thing else that
shall be the occasion of the same violence, acted upon themselves, in others.
For this is certain, that incurable Fancies are as real things to those that
are actuated and possessed by them, and every whit as painful and tormenting, as
the most uneasy realities that the World affords, or the utmost possibility of
misfortune can aspire to, and every man being the best judge of what he endures
himself, for none knows the thoughts of a Man, but the spirit of a Man which
is in him; from hence it will unavoidably come to pass, that that action which
in another might have appeared reasonable, or excusable at least, will be drawn
in its consequence to Patronize all the Tragedies, which either Melancholy or
guilt shall act, and upon the same principle, upon which some have killed
themselves, to get rid of their own fears and Fancies, by which they were
incessantly pursued, others in a fit of Melancholy have been known to make away
their Wives and Children, to take them away from the evil to come, or to
prevent that Scene of mischiefs, which Fancy had painted as hanging over their
heads, and ready to fall down in showers of misery, and misfortune upon them:
now this is enough to make any action Unlawful, though by it self it might
possibly do no hurt, if Imitated by others upon the same or like pretenses, it
shall appear to be pernicious to the public, as I have elsewhere argued
concerning the Marriage of Cousin Germans, we are to consider what the
consequence would be, if it were frequently practiced, not what it is where the
instances are so few, for there is no doubt but public and private good, are
the measure of good and evil in these cases, and whatever that action is, which
growing fashionable, and being generally practiced, would redound to the
prejudice of the public, that action even in a single instance is Unlawful,
because every pattern has a tendency to imitation, and that imitation
propagated wide, would be of dangerous consequence to the public. So that I
must here inculcate once more, that if I have any where spoken favorably of
the practice of self-homicide, it was only in these respects, that in some
Cases it may appear to be an Argument of gallantry and courage, and that I am
very willing to entertain some Charity for those great Men, especially among
the Romans, who have been guilty of it, and who are so far from being blamed
for what they did, in the circumstances they were in, that they are mentioned
for it, with Honor and Commendation by the Roman Authors; not to add that they
seem to have received this, as well as other of their Customs from the East,
where it seems to have been a very common practice, we have several instances
of it in the Scripture, of Sampson and Saul and his Armor-bearer, and
Achitophel, and Judas, all of whom, whatever other personal faults they might
be guilty of, as some of them were guilty of the greatest that can be
committed, yet they are no where blamed for this last act of their lives, and
perhaps upon supposition that there was no life after this, which most if not
all of them seem to have believed, and a mystery it was with which Rome Pagan
was utterly unacquainted; it might appear more reasonable then it can do now,
after life and immortality are brought to light by the Gospel.

Eleventhly, What has been said above of wicked Men, that they owe an example
of punishment and disgrace to the World, and therefore that others may take the
more effectual warning by them, they are to endure with patience the worst
that can happen, which is the best amends they can make for the mischiefs, or
wickednesses of their life past, and which added to an hearty and sincere
repentance, may perhaps be available with God in their behalves to exact no
further punishment in the life to come; The same is true likewise of those that
suffer for a good and righteous Cause, that they are not to withdraw themselves
from any torment, or persecution by an untimely death, wilfully committed and
brought upon themselves, but are rather under a great and sacred obligation, if
they cannot avoid it by flight or by concealment in a dangerous time, to stand
the brunt of their adversaries, and expect the worst that can befall them,
though for another reason, viz. That they may bear the more effectual
Testimony, and do the more signal and remarkable service to the Cause and
Principles for which they suffer, it being natural for great and public
sufferings to create a pity for the worst of Men; but for such as die, or are
exposed to poverty, contempt or torments for the sake of goodness, or because
they will not start from their Principles, or flinch from their Religion, but
are resolved to bear a constant and unshaken Testimony to it, this has a
strange power of Rhetoric and persuasion, and is naturally apt to inspire, and
actuate the minds of Men with pity, love, and veneration for the persons of the
sufferers, and for the Cause for which they suffer, according to that known
saying, Sanguis martyrum semen Ecclesiae.

Twelfthly, If a Man perceive himself to labor under any such fearful
apprehension, and dejected prospect of the sufferings he is to undergo, that he
is in danger either to renounce the truth, to purchase his quiet and
deliverance, from those evils that hang over his head, and fill his mind with
terror and dreadful apprehension; or otherwise that he is not like to support
himself under his calamity, so as not to do disparagement to the Cause for
which he suffers, instead of giving reputation or advantage to it, yet even in
this case he is not by any means to cast away himself, but to call to his aid
the consideration of his Innocence, the pleasant and cheering reflections upon
his virtue, together with the hopes of a glorious recompense in the World to
come, which will have a natural tendency to create a contempt in him, of the
malice of his enemies, and of the utmost cruelty of the most ingenious
tormentors; and he ought besides to fly to God for the assistance of his Grace,
and to believe steadfastly that he will not fail to afford it in the Critical
time, (whatever dejection of Spirit he may labor under at present) which
whoever shall distrust, being placed in such circumstances as these, that do so
naturally require the assistance of Divine grace, and so powerfully draw down
its influence upon themselves, he is guilty of a crime that deserves a worse
punishment, than any his persecutors can inflict upon him.

Thirteenthly, Notwithstanding what has been said, yet it is certain that the
Mosaic Decalogue in that precept of it, which is conceived in these words, Thou
shall not Kill, or Thou shall do no Murder, did not forbid self-homicide, or
Self-murder, for it is manifest by our Saviors partition, that all of those
precepts concerned only God and our Neighbor, God as the object of Religious
worship, and our Neighbor as the object of Civil conversation, where he tells
us, that on these two Commandments hang all the Law and the Prophets; Thou
shall love the Lord thy God with all thy Heart, and with all thy Soul, and with
all thy Mind, and thy Neighbor as thy self.

And that this is plainly so, appears by this, that there are crimes whose
guilt was Capital by the Law of Moses, which yet are no where forbidden by the
Decalogue, or Ten Commandments, I will instance in the habitual Drunkard, which
was one of the crimes laid to the charge of the Rebellious Son in the Law, who
after admonition continuing unreclaimable, was to be brought forth, and stoned
by the Congregation, and yet this sin is no where forbidden in any of these
Commandments, the reason is, because it was only a personal crime, and did not
include any sin against God, in that sense in which the Decalogue forbids it,
which is concerned only in the prohibition of Idolatry, and Perjury, which
includes a denial of the Divine Existence, or which is worse, a manifest
defiance and contempt of it; and in separating the Sabbath from the rest of the
week, and devoting it to his peculiar, and incommunicable Worship and Service,
nor any breach of Duty toward our Neighbor, any otherwise then by the bad
example, which for the most part, is so far from being intended, that it is not
so much as thought of by the guilty person, and which it is always in his
Neighbors power either to imitate, or let alone as he pleases himself, so that
there is no violence committed either upon his person, or any of those rights,
privileges, or possessions which are external to him.

So also when the Law forbad Sodomy, or the use of Carnality contrary to
nature, and when it forbad incestuous Conjunctions, or Marriages within such
certain degrees, how severe soever the Sanction of these prohibitions is, in
those places of Leviticus, and Deuteronomy where they are found, yet the
Decalogue does not at all concern it self about them, the reason is, because
though in this case there be a mutual offense, committed between both of the
contracting parties, in one of these instances, and between the Pathicus and
the Cinaedus in the other, yet it was not an offense violently committed by one
of the parties upon the other, for then it could not be mutual in them both,
but it was by mutual, reciprocal and interchangeable consent; whereas the
Decalogue was only concerned in those injuries, which were done violently and
without his consent to our Neighbor, as will appear sufficiently, by
reflecting upon all the instances of prohibition in the second Table; so that
in this case, so far as these Commandments had any thing to do, the maxim was
as true then as it is now, volenti non sit injuria, neither indeed was the
injury, properly speaking, personal, since they were both consenting, but only
an injury of example, or an injury to the Public, by setting a Copy to it,
which it was against its interest to transcribe, or to propagate by imitation.

Neither is it sufficient in this matter to say, that when our Savior enjoins
us to love our Neighbor as our selves, that therefore whatever we may not do
to our Neighbor, we may not do to our selves, and consequently that
self-homicide is by this general precept interdicted, because it is Unlawful to
kill another man, for though I grant it to be Unlawful upon the considerations
above mentioned, and in general, whatsoever is against the interest of humane
Society, or the good of Common life, that is certainly Unlawful to every
Christian man; yet in this general rule there is nothing more understood, then
in that other of our blessed Lord, which is equivalent to it, whereby we are
enjoined in all cases that can happen, as a certain rule of life and action, to
do by others, as we would that others in the same circumstances should have
done by our selves; but yet this hinders not, but that there are several things
which I may do by my self, which yet it would be utterly unjust, unreasonable,
and unlawful for me to do by any other Man; as I may give away of mine own as I
please my self, according to that of our Savior, Matthew. 20. 15. Is it not
lawful for me to do what I will with mine own? but yet if I should do the same,
by the depositum of another committed to my trust and charge, this would be the
highest violation of the Laws of Friendship, Justice and Society, that can be
imagined, and so also in this case, let self-homicide be Lawful or Unlawful in
it self, and upon other considerations, yet there is no question, but a Man may
dispose of his own person, farther then he has any natural right to do of
another Man's, and that the one is by no means the measure of the other.

To conclude this Thirteenth particular, as it does not appear that
self-homicide, was any where forbidden by the Law of Moses, but on the contrary
there are several instances of it, mentioned without any severity of reflection
upon them, so that it seems to have been not unfrequently practiced in the
East, and from thence the Romans did probably derive, that piece of gallanty,
as they esteemed it; so it seems in a manner absolutely impracticable, that it
should have been prohibited by the Mosaic dispensation, for every Law must have
a Sanction to enforce it, and to him that fears not death, what Sanction can
there be? unless it be the consideration of his Family or Posterity, which
might suffer by the Alienation or Forfeiture of his Estate, as amongst us which
would have been one means to destroy the the partition of Inheritances, which
it was one great care of the Law religiously to preserve, as may be seen in
several passages of the following Treatise, and by consequence seems to have
been utterly inconsistent with the Jewish platform and economy of things.

Fourteenthly, Notwithstanding what has been said, I believe it to be the Duty
of every Man to run upon certain death, rather then break his trust or violate
a Lawful promise, which was the case of Attilius Regulus in the Roman Story,
because truth and faithfulness are the great and first supporters of Society,
the greatest ornaments and friends to humane Life, and therefore ought not to
be violated in any case whatsoever, the example being of so dangerous
consequence to the peace and welfare of Mankind.

Fifteenthly, If a Man by his death may free his Country or the World from any
present Calamity or epidemical Evil, which is said to have been the case of
Curtius in a violent Plague, or may deliver and rescue it out of the jaws of an
impending danger, as the Decii are said to have done, by devoting themselves as
Sacrifices for the safety of the Roman Army and State, in both of these cases
if there be a rational ground of hope, that my death or yours may be available
to the public good, and may be more beneficial then our lives could have
proved, we are bound by all the strictest obligations, that either nature or
religion can impose upon us, to deliver our selves up as victims to the
public, whose safety is more precious in the sight of God, and more to be
prised and valued in the esteem of all good Men, then that of any single person
can be.

Sixteenthly, Notwithstanding that there are several instances of self-homicide
in Scripture, and none of them mentioned with any thing of disallowance, yet
there are, as I have shown, reasons in nature that do make it in all cases
unlawful to a Man considered as a member of Society, whatever may be said in
behalf of single persons considered out of that state, if such a supposition
can or ought to be made, or whatever may be pleaded as to the Gallantry or
Courage of the Action, in Men that have not considered and deliberated the
whole case with that nicety that I have done, and this is fully represented in
the Book of Job, where when his Wife in the extremity of his misfortune, gave
him this advice, curse God and die, that is, make away with your self, as
others in such circumstances are wont to do, all the answer he gives is, thou
speak as one of the foolish Women speaks, that is, that though it were a
received opinion that it was Lawful in such cases, for a Man to dispatch
himself out of the way, and an ordinary practice to do it, yet it was an
opinion and practice founded upon rashness and want of consideration, and that
whoever laid all things impartially together, would patiently endure the
afflicting hand of God, which whether it were intended for a punishment of our
sins, or an exercise of our patience, or an instance of his Sovereignty and
Dominion over us, it ought in all these cases to be submitted to, and therefore
he used all the motives and Arguments he could think of with himself, to bring
his mind to an absolute resignation, shall we receive good, says he, at the
hands of God, and shall we not receive evil, and though he wished to die, and
longed for nothing more then to be rid of Life and Calamity together, O that I
might have my request, said he, and that God would grant me the thing that I
long for, even that it would please God to destroy me, that he would let loose
his hand and cut me off, yet would he not execute the sentence of death upon
himself, and by his example, which was no question inspired; as well as his
writings, he has taught us what a wise Man ought to do in such unfortunate
circumstances as his were.

Seventeenthly, If self-homicide be, as it has been shown in most, if not all
the instances that can be supposed, be so extreemly sinful, unreasonable and
unlawful, then all kinds of intemperance and excess are so too, especially
where they grow Customary and habitual in us, because these are so many willful
tendencies to a dissolution, and they are so much the more inexcusable, because
they are usually more deliberate, then most of the instances of self-homicide
are and are committed when we have or might have had a free use and exercise of
our reason.

Eighteenthly, If self-homicide be so Unlawful as it has been represented, how
much more impious and guilty must it needs be to imbrue our Hands in the Blood
of our Neighbor, whose person is certainly less at our disposal then our own,
and with whom, unless it be in our own just and necessary defense, we have
nothing more to do, then only to help and assist him what we can.

I shall conclude this business with saying, what I am sure is true, that no
affection of Novelty or love of Paradox drew me into a discourse of this
Subject in the following Treatise, but that I insensibly light upon it, before
I was aware, and that I should be very sorry, if any thing that I have said
upon that occasion should give offense to any wise or good Man, though, I hope,
in this review of that whole matter, which I have endeavored carefully to
consider, I have made some amends for what is amiss in the body of the Book, if
any man shall happen to be displeased at it.

The other thing which I have in my mind, and which I find my self obliged to
Recant, is concerning the Year of Numa, which I was very confident I had
discovered, but I have made a new discovery since that, and that is, that I
know nothing of it, and I conceive at this distance of time, it is impossible
to be explained; however upon the whole matter, I hope you will not repent the
perusal of this Book, nor I that I have written it.

Farewell.
THE PRINCIPAL HEADS OF THE Ensuing Treatise.
OF the great Antiquity of the usage in the Text, and of the cause wherein it
was warrantably dispensed with: From Page 1. to Page 60. Of the reasons upon
which it was Originally founded. From p. 60. to 79. Two mistakes of Mr. Seldom
and the Rabbis whom he follows. From p. 79. to 83. That the Marriage of Boaz
and Ruth was in consequence and pursuance of that Law of Moses, whereby the
Brother was obliged to raise up Seed to the deceased Brother, against Mr.
Seldom and the Rabbis. From p. 83. to 119. Two other mistakes of Mr. Seldom
and his Rabbis discovered. From p. 120. to 124. Of the signification of the
word Firstborn, in this controversy. From p. 124. to 138. Two objections
against what was asserted under the last head concerning the signification of
the word Firstborn, proposed and answered. From p. 138. to 147. Another
Argument to prove that by the Firstborn, the Daughter or Female was not
understood in the Law of Moses, and in what case a Woman was to inherit. From
p. 147. to 149 The Heiress obliged to Marry to some of the kindred, and to the
next of kin if he pleased. p. 150, 151. The Law of the Leviratus to be
understood only of Brethren by the Fathers side, and in this Mr. Seldom and his
Rabbis are in the right. From p. 151. to 158. An Answer to an objection
against the last position, that this Law concerned only the Paternal
consanguinity. From p. 158. to 161. Two objections remaining against what has
been said, the first an Argument of Mr. Seldens to prove that the Marriage of
Boaz and Ruth was not in consequence and by virtue of the Leviratical Law,
which is largly answered. From p. 161. to 183. Of the true time when this
Custom came to be Antiqu^ted* viz. at the division of the two Kingdoms of
Israel, and Judah, of the nature of Jeroboams Priesthood, and of the frequent
revolutions that happened in the Kingdom of Israel, after its division from
that of Judah, by reason of its Military Government and for want of a regular
and subordinate Clergy. From p. 183. to 237. That the Jews did not abstain from
any thing, merely because the Zabii or any other nation round about them
practiced it, and that this was no reason of any of their negative Precepts.
Proved largely against Dr. Cudworth, and the Jewish Rabbis whom he follows.
From p. 237. to 292. Of the practice of Usury among the Jews and other nations,
and that the Romans borrowed most, if not all their usages concerning it, out
of the East, together with an explanation of many things in the Roman and
Assyrian or Eastern Antiquities, hitherto unknown, which is concluded with two
observations; the First concerning the reason of Tithes being paid to the
Priesthood, the other concerning the Lawfulness of a moderate Usury in all but
such polities as the Jewish was. From p. 292. to 27. The whole is concluded
with an answer to a second objection against the Paternal consanguity, being
only concerned in the matter of the Leviratus, which is taken from the Account
of our Saviors Genealogy, as it is, or seems to be differently Related by the
two Evangelists, St. Matthew and St. Luke.
BOAZ and RVTH.
Deuteronomy 25. ver. 5. If Brethren dwell together, and one of them dye and
have no Child, the Wife of the dead shall not marry without unto a stranger,
her Husbands Brother shall go in unto her, and take her to him to Wife, and
perform the duty of an Husbands Brother unto her, etc.
THE reason of which is expressed in the next verse viz. That the name of the
Brother might not perish. For which cause it was that the first Child begotten
in such Wedlock, was not accounted the offspring of his or her natural Parent,
but of him whose person he did in this case sustain, that is, of his Brother or
near Kinsman.

V. 6. And it shall be, that the first born which she bears, shall succeed
in-the name of his Brother which is dead, that his name be not put out of
Israel. Which in the instance of a near Kinsman, tho not of an immediate
Brother was afterward the case of Ruth and Boaz, from whose Loins in a few
generations, K. David and in the fullness of time the Messiah himself, the Son
of David was descended. Which Custom, tho it was afterward, as we see,
confirmed by an express Law of God, yet it was in it self much ancienter than
the delivery of the Law by Moses, as is evident from the story of Er, Onan and
Shelah, the Sons of Judah, all of them successively married to Tamar, for the
reason already mentioned, as is very plainly intimated, I may say expressly
asserted, Genesis 38. v. 9. And Onan knew that the seed should not be his, and it
came to pass when he went in unto his Brothers Wife, (...). For which fact of
his it is said in the next verse. And the thing which he did displeased the
Lord, wherefore he slew him also, as he had done his Brother Er, for some other
wickedness, which was it seems no less displeasing to him, v. 7.

It is therefore very reasonable to believe, since we see this custom to have
obtained in the World so long before the delivery of the Law by Moses, that it
was the ancient usage of all those Easterly Countries, and constantly put in
practice in the earliest times, by the inhabitants of Syria, Mesopotamia,
Palestine and Egypt. Which is yet more probable, if you consider that even in
the Law it self, there are several things both prohibited, and commanded the
Jews, which were alike practiced or disallowed by their neighbor Nations, and
in all probability by themselves long before; only now they came to have the
Authority of a divine Law, which before they had not.

I will instance in the Egyptians abstinence from Swines Flesh and from Fish,
which tho it be ascribed by Porphyry and out of him by other Learned men, to
natural reasons, for the avoiding of the Leprosy the common disease of those
Countries, yet it might be upon such Symbolical reasons likewise, as were, if I
am not mistaken, the ground of the Jewish abstinence. And which I have in other
Papers more largely insisted upon. And tho it be not in other Instances so easy
to prove that the same prohibitions did obtain among the neighbor Nations, yet
there are two things to be considered which will make it very probable that
they did.

First. That the distinction of beasts into clean and unclean is manifestly of
greater Antiquity than the Flood, as is evident by this, that according to this
distinction they were admitted into the Ark either by two's or Sevens and being
spoken of there without giving any particular directions to Noah, by which he
should know the clean and unclean from one another. It seems plain that he and
his contemporaries were acquainted with this distinction and the bounds of it
before, and very probable that it had been constantly observed from the
Creation until then, there being no reason why it should not, nor any time
imaginable wherein it can be affirmed that it did not obtain.

You will say perhaps that before the Flood, the Flesh of animals was not
permitted to be eaten, which is true, and that the nature of this cleanness or
uncleanness in animals consisted in this, that the one were prohibited, the
other allowed in food; which is true likewise, but it is not the whole truth,
for they were allowed or prohibited respectively in Sacrifice as well as food,
therefore, since men did sacrifice Animals before the Flood, tho they did not
feed upon them, it is clear that this distinction might well enough obtain
before that time, which brings me to the Second thing; by which will it appear
highly reasonable to believe that the very distinction of clean and unclean
Beasts and Birds, and in the same instances, was observed before the delivery
of the Law, as well as after, and by other Nations as well as the Jews. And
that is,

That you no where meet with any instance as the common practice of a Nation,
at least for any so ancient, I dare boldly challenge you, that any of those
either Birds or Beasts mentioned in the unclean Catalogue have been offered up
for Sacrifice, neither do we or any Nation that I know of, use any, or but very
few, of them to this day in our food. The same may be said of Fishes, of which
those that want Fins and Scales, are even amongst us accounted the most
contemptible, as they are certainly the most unwholesome kind, and for the
Sacrifice of Fish, it will be as hard to meet with it, unless it be here and
there a particular, and perhaps a fabulous instance in profane Authors, as in
the writings of the Jews.

And as the prohibitions, so also the allowances for Food and Sacrifices, are
and have always been in almost all Nations and all times the same with those of
the Ancient Jews themselves, as is evident in part from the Sacrifices of Abel
and of Balak, from the Victims of the Priests of Baal being of the same kind
with those of Elijah, from the Historical and Poetical Writings of the most
Ancient times, In which you have frequent mention of Sheep, Oxen, Goats,
Turtles, Pigeons, Offered up in Sacrifice, and of the same or very like sorts
of Odours, Incense and Perfumes in the Heathen Temples, which were in use
either in the high places, Tabernacle or Temple of the Jews.

1. More instances of a like Nature may be produced, but this, being so
remarkable and being a complication of so many instances in one, is sufficient
to justify what I have affirmed, that many of those Rites among the Jews, which
had afterward the Authority of a divine Law, did prevail among themselves and
other Nations long before the delivery of that Law; of which nature this very
usage, of which we are now discoursing, of the Brothers raising up Seed to the
Brother, seems to have been one, since we see plainly that in the Family of
Jacob, that is, in the Nation of the Jews, it was in use from the very
beginning of it and was put in practice by Judah his immediate descendant, and
that not as a new thing, but as a known and common practice in such cases,
otherwise it could not be said of Onan v. 9. that he knew the Seed should not
be his, if he had not known this by former Precedents and examples of a like
nature, and by the design of such marriages in case the Brother died without
issue. The same thing appears likewise from that saying of Judah v. 26. She
has been more righteous than I. By which he plainly acknowledges a right which
Tamar had to the enjoyment of his youngest Son Shelah, which it was not in his
power to deny her. It must therefore of necessity depend upon some known Law or
usage of those and former times, which was the thing to be proved.

But you will say, it depended only upon his promise, v. 11. Then said Judah to
Tamar his Daughter in Law, remain a Widow at thy Fathers House, till Shelah my
Son be grown; which words do manifestly contain an implicit Promise, that when
Shelah was come to man's estate, he should be obliged to perform the Husbands
part to raise up Seed to his Eldest Brother Er, and Tamars performing the
condition on her own part, by putting on her Widows Garments, the better to
avoid all pretenders to her Bed, as we see she did, v. 14. makes this implicit
obligation still more binding upon Judah, so that he seems rather to be obliged
by virtue of a voluntary restraint which he by his promise had laid upon
himself than by any antecedent Law.

But to this I answer, that, though the instance of Shelah will not perhaps
prove it to have been a Law, yet that of onan, the intermediate Brother between
him and the Eldest, will; to which purpose it will be necessary for us to
observe, that in the 18th of Leviticus, where the degrees prohibited in
marriage are recited, that of the Brothers Wife is prohibited with no less
severity than any of the rest; the reason of which, together with the
prohibition it self, is expressed in those words, v. 16. Thou shall not uncover
the nakedness of thy Brothers Wife, it is thy Brothers nakedness, that is, Man
and Wife, in the very first institution of God himself, when our first Parents
came together, were to be one Flesh, i. e. the union betwixt them was to be so
strict and so inseparable, as if they were both of them united into one and the
same person, from whence it came to pass that the Wise was accounted every whit
as near, in the interpretation and esteem of Law, to all those to whom she was
allied by the affinity depending upon marriage, as the Husband himself was by
those degrees of Consanguinity, in which he stood respectively to them before
it.

2. This was the reason of all those Laws, Levit. 18. 8. The nakedness of thy
Fathers Wife shall thou not uncover, it is thy Fathers nakedness. v. 14. Thou
shall not uncover the nakedness of thy Fathers Brother, thou shall not approach
to his Wife, she is thy Aunt. That is, Uncles and Aunts, great Uncles and great
Aunts, and so all along in the Collateral Line, ascend as high as you will, are
in the interpretation of the Jewish as well as of the Civil Law Parentum loco,
in the stead of Parents, and are to have the same or a like respect paid them
by us, the same or a like Authority and rule over us, with our natural Fathers
and Mothers, which are the very reasons assigned for this and all further
prohibitions in the directly or collaterally ascending Lines by the Civil Laws
of the Empire, which are neither of them any way consistent with the conjugal
familiarities of Man and Wife, so that to uncover the nakedness of a man's
Uncle, is the same thing as to uncover that of his Father, and the Uncle and
Uncles Wife being both by the primitive Institution of God himself, considered
as the same person, to marry with his Aunt is to commit Incest with his Mother.
Again, v. 15. Thou shall not uncover the nakedness of thy Daughter-in-Law, she
is thy Sons Wife; that is, they are all one, and it is the same thing as if you
should uncover the nakedness of your own Daughter, and v. 17. Thou shall not
uncover the nakedness of a Woman and her Daughter; because the Woman is your
self and therefore her Daughter is yours; but then it follows: Neither shall
thou take her Sons Daughter, or her Daughters Daughter to uncover her
nakedness, because being united to the Mother from whom they are descended, He
is by interpretation a Common Parent, as well as she, to all that derive their
pedigree from her Loins.

3. This is sufficient to show, that by the first institution of things, the
Brothers Wife and the Brother are both of them considered as the same, so that
to uncover the nakedness of the Brothers Wife is, as the Law expresses it, to
uncover the nakedness of the Brother himself, and consequently the same thing
as to marry a Man's own Sister: Sister and Brother Germans being, tho in
different Sexes, the same degree of relation. It is clear therefore that, if to
marry a Sister German, or a Sister Uterine were prohibited before the Law, then
to marry the Brothers Wife, unless in the case before excepted, must be
prohibited also, because all these things depend upon that fundamental
position, that Man and Wife are to be considered as the same person, which is
as ancient as Adam, and depends upon no less Authority than that of God himself.

4. Now that to marry a Brother or Sister German, (bateing the first
intermatches between Cain and Seth and their Sisters, which the same necessity
that caused must excuse) has been always looked upon as unlawful, even before
the time of Moses and the delivery of the Law by him, I will prove by several
arguments.

5. First, Because all the prohibited Marriages and Lusts, mentioned in the
Chapter of Leviticus above cited, are reckoned amongst those sins which were
the reasons of Gods wrath amongst the Amorites, the Ancient Inhabitants of the
Land of Canaan v. 27. 28. For all these abominations have the men of the Land
done, which were before you, and the Land is defiled: That the Lord spue not
you out also, when ye defile it, as he spued out the Nations that were before
you. Again, v. 30. Therefore shall ye keep mine Ordinance, that ye commit not
any of these abominable customs which were committed before you. and chapter 20.
23. And ye shall not walk in the manners of the Nations, which I cast out
before you, for they committed all these things, and therefore I abhorred them.
Wherefore there being no punishment inflicted but for sin, nor any sin against
God that is not a Transgression of some divine Law, nor any divine Law but what
is either Natural or Positive, that is to say, revealed, it is manifest that
the marriage of the Sister German was an offense against one if not against
both these Laws, before the Mosaic dispensation was of any force or Authority
in the World.

6. And tho I am not ignorant, that some of the instances mentioned as
forbidden, were notwithstanding allowed and practiced by the permission of God
himself in former times; as in the case of marrying the half Sister, or the
Sister by the Fathers side, which was Abraham's case and yet is expressly
forbidden. Lev. 18. 9. yet that this of the Sister German was not of that
nature, I conjecture with great probability from the punishment annexed to it as
its sanction. Lev. 20. 20. If a man shall take his Brothers Wife, it is an
unclean thing, he has uncovered his Brothers nakedness, they shall be
Childless; that is, not that God would visit them by a particular judgment of
Barrenness, any more than in the other instances, mentioned in the same Chapter
where all the punishments are all along inflicted by the hands of men, but it
is meant, that they were immediately to be put to death, without giving them so
long a Reprieve as to prolong their memory by their issue, they were to be
utterly and totally cut off from their People, both in their own persons and
that of their posterity, as it is v. 18. they were to die Childless, as it is
v. 20. and so the Seventy have likewise rendered it in this verse, as well as
in the former, (...). It is the same thing with, they shall surely be put to
death, v. 10. their blood shall be upon them, v. 11, 12, 13. he or they shall
bear their iniquity, v. 17, 19. That is, there shall be no Atonement for them
by any Sacrifice or sin Offering, but they themselves shall bear their own
iniquity, and suffer death in their own proper persons.

7. But now it is not at all likely, that that which was no offense before the
Law, should under it be thought so heinous that no Sacrifice, no Lustration, no
Redemption, no Expiation would be admitted, but the person offending must
without mercy, without the least reprieve or respite of his sentence
immediately suffer death: I conclude therefore, what I design to prove, that
the marriage of the Brother to the Brothers Wife, and much more of the Brother
to to the Sister German was forbidden, and abominable in the sight of God,
before the promulgation of the Mosaic Law, which is my first argument.

8. But then Secondly, That the marriage of Brother and Sister Germans, and
consequently of the Brother to the Brothers Wife, which I have already shown to
be the same, is unlawful, will be sufficiently proved, if I can prove there was
any such thing as an incestuous or prohibited mixture before that time, which,
besides what has been said of the Amorites and other Nations the Ancient
Planters of the Land of Canaan, I can prove by other instances both before and
after the Flood.

9. And First before it. Genesis 6. 2. We find it thus written. The Sons of God saw
the Daughters of Men that they were fair, and they took them Wives of all which
they chose. that is, they made Intermarriages among one another, without any
regard to the prohibited degrees of Consanguinity, so that they made no scruple
of marrying even their own Sisters, if they were such as they could set their
affections upon, which practice of theirs was so provoking to Almighty God,
that it is said in the next verse, And the Lord said, My Spirit shall not
always strive with man. His days were immediately shortened upon it, and very
soon after, upon the continuance of this and other, as it seems to me,
somewhat less horrid impieties, for this is only mentioned to set the more
particular mark and brand upon it, that fatal Deluge happened by which the Old
World, and all that was in it, Eight Persons and the Creatures that were with
them only excepted, was destroyed. Now that incestuous marriages and
particularly those of Sister and Brother are here understood, I prove thus.

10. First, They took them Wives of all whom they chose, therefore it must not
be understood of any Rape or Violence, but it was the effect of choice which is
an easy and gentle as well as a deliberat thing. Secondly, They took them
Wives; which implies not a sudden Violence, but a lasting contract between the
parties, by which they were obliged mutually to enter into a Matrimonial
estate, and live at Bed and Board together.

And, which is a mighty confirmation of this interpretation, this is described
as the state and condition of the World just before the coming of the Flood, by
St. Matthew and St. Luke. Mat. 24. 38, 39. Luke 17. 27. They did Eat and Drink
they married Wives and were given in marriage, until the day that Noah entered
into the Ark, and the Flood came and destroyed them all. So likewise, 2 Pet. c.
2. v. 5, 6. God spared not the Old World, but saved Noah the Eighth person a,
Preacher of Righteousness, bringing in the Flood upon the World of the ungodly,
and turning the Cities of Sodom and Gomorrah into Ashes, condemned them with an
overthrow, making them an ensample unto those that after should live ungodly.
What is meant most especially in the latter verse by the word ungodly we know
very well from the History of those wicked places; but the Old World not being
charged with so unnatural a crime, which yet it is very probable it would have
been, had it been guilty of it, the best, as well as the most charitable, way
of interpreting the same word in the former verse, is by expounding it of
incestuous mixtures which have always in the esteem of the World been accounted
the next in guilt to it.

11. The same thing is likewise wonderfully confirmed from an expression in the
story of Zelophehad, Number. 36. 6. Let them marry to whom they think best, which
answers exactly to that other place in Genesis they took them Wives of all which
they chose, and is of the same import and signification: Let them marry into
their own family, for the better preservation of the inheritance, without
regard to those restrictions, within which the Law of Moses would otherwise
have circumscribed them, and accordingly, they all married to their Cousin
Germans, which were yet in other cases prohibited by the Law of Moses and by
the practice of the Jewish Church, as I shall prove more largely in another
discourse, wherein I shall state that whole case and show, that as well by the
Law of Christ, as that of Moses and not only so but by the Law of nature too,
such marriages are ex antecedenti, unlawful, tho after they be consummated by
fruition, they are upon the same reasons valid upon which before it they are
prohibited and void.

12. Thus much may serve for the first part of what I undertook to prove, that
the place in Genesis above cited is to be understood of Incestuous Mixtures: I
will now show that the Marriage of Sisters and Brothers Germans is chiefly, if
not only, pointed at in this place, by this Syllogism.

Either the Marriages both of Mothers and Sisters, with their Sons and Brethren
is to be understood in this place, or of Sisters and Brothers only.

But the Marriage of Mothers with their Sons is not at all pointed at in this
place.

Therefore it must of necessity be meant of the Marriage of Brothers and
Sisters only.

The Major I prove plainly from this, that all other degrees of Consanguinity
before the delivery of the Law were no obstruction to Marriage, for of the
Marriage of Cousin Germans, we have an instance in Jacob, who married Rachel
and Leah his Uncle Labans Daughters, of the Aunt in Amram the Father of Moses
himself, and of the half Sister by the Fathers side, in Abraham the Father of
the Jewish Nation. It remains therefore, since the very next degrees, both in
the ascending and in the collateral line were permitted that this Text cannot
possibly be understood of any other Incestuous Marriages, but those of Brothers
and Sisters Germans, or of Sons and their natural Mothers together; but of the
Marriage of Sons with their Mothers, it is absurd to understand it, for this
reason, that it is said, the Sons of God saw the Daughters of Men that they
were fair, in which it is plainly employed, that they were young and Virgins; at
least, thus much is true that the Epithet of fair, is by no means suitable to
Women in their declining Age, as they must needs be who are the Parents of
marriageable Children; it is therefore evident that it must be meant of the
Intermarriage of Brothers and Sisters Germans together, which was the thing I
undertook to prove.

13. And this being so great a provocation to Almighty God, that it was one of
the main causes of that dismal Flood with which the Old World was overtaken,
and it being inconsistent with the Justice of God, to punish an offense so
heavily and so universally, which they themselves who did it, did not know to
be a sin, it follows plainly that before the Flood such Marriages were, and
were accounted in the esteem of the World, unlawful.

14. Having thus proved that before the Flood there were prohibited degrees of
Consanguinity, and that the transgressing those bounds by Incestuous Mixtures,
which did then very frequently prevail in the World, was one great cause of
that universal calamity with which it was overtaken; it may seem an unnecessary
task to go about to prove, that the same prohibitions were esteemed no less
sacred and inviolable after it, since Noah, who together with his Sons were
innocent of this sin, and yet knew so well as they did, by the punishment of
others, how heavily displeasing it was in the Eyes of God, could not choose,
together with the tradition of the Flood it self, but deliver down the causes
of it to their Posterity, together with a caution to avoid the same iniquities,
for fear of being visited, tho not with the same (for God had made a promise
that he would not drown the World any more) yet, with some equally terrible and
dreadful judgments.

15. But yet, because nothing can be too sure, I will prove it by a double
instance, by the first of which it will appear, that the marriage of Parents
with their Children; by the second, that that of Brothers and Sisters Germans
or Uterines with one another, was after the Flood and before the delivery of
the Law, looked upon as detestable and unlawful.

16. The First is the case of Lot, who lay with his Two Daughters, from which
incestuous Coitions the two great people of Moab and Ammon were descended; but
they despaired of prevailing upon him to gratify their wicked desires, till
they had made him so much more than mellow, that it is said, he perceived not
when they lay down or when they arose, Genesis 19. 33. which is a plain argument
that a just and righteous man, which is the Character of Lot, would not, in his
right senses and while he continued to have a due exercise of his reason, have
been guilty of a Congression of that nature, and consequently that in those
times it was esteemed and looked upon by all as an abominable and accursed
thing.

17. The Second instance is that of Abraham, when being charged by Abimelech,
the King of Gerar, for having deceived him under pretense that Sarah was his
Sister, when she was in reality his Wife, says in excuse of himself, Genesis 20.
12. She is my Sister, she is the Daughter of my Father, but not the Daughter of
my Mother, and she became my Wife, by which it is plain, that in the opinion of
Abraham her being a Sister only by the Fathers side, was not an hinderance to
Marriage, and this being spoken by way of appeal, and in his own vindication to
Abimelech, who had indeed injured himself, for want of duly considering the
true meaning of Abraham's expression, it is an argument that it was the Custom
of those times, and that the same degrees of Consanguinity were allowed and
prohibited at Gerar as well as in the family of Abraham, who probably if in
these matters he had differed from his neighbors, it would have been in this
that the allowances would have been rather more narrow than more indulgent and
licentious on his side.

18. I know very well that Josephus and out of him Bishop Tailor, and out of
him his Transcriber, T. D. the Writer of a small Treatise in behalf of the
Marriage of Cousin Germans, will needs have Sarah not to have been Abraham's
Sister in that sense in which we usually take the word, but only his Niece, the
Daughter of his Brother Haran, and the same with Iscah, Genesis 11. 29. and this
he tells us, p. 84 of that little piece, will appear to any one who rightly
considers the place; but indeed, whether I have rightly considered it or no, I
am sure I have considered it as well as I can, and I can find no such thing in
it, but Sarah and Iscah are both of them mentioned in the very same verse,
which it is not likely that it would have been done without any mention of the
change of the name, as is usually done, or without so much as intimating that
she was called by both of these names, if they had been both of them one and
the same person.

Besides, if a man would be understood of his half Sister or his Sister by the
Fathers side, how could he express himself more clearly than thus. She is my
Sister, she is the Daughter of my Father, but not the Daughter of my Mother.

Again that very expression, she is the Daughter of my Father, but not the
Daughter of my Mother, cannot without granting many precarious assertions, and
such as can no way be justified, be understood of the Niece or Brothers
Daughter, so, as the sense of the place must at that rate, be this; She is the
Daughter, or Grandchild of my Father Therah, but not of my Mother, but she is
his Grandchild by some other Wife, who was the Mother of Haran; so that it is
plain to make this interpretation good, these two things must first be granted,
First, that Therah had two Wives, either together, which cannot be proved of
any but Lamech before the Flood, or successively, which cannot be proved
neither; and if it could be proved yet, Secondly, it must be granted likewise
that of these two, Abraham was the Son of the one, and Haran of the other, but
that they were not both descended of the same Mother; all which is not only a
shameless but also a very needless begging of the question.

For the reason, as I conceive, why this opinion was First started in the
World, was out of a pious design to defend Abraham from the Obloquy of an
incestuous Mixture, whereas if a man would consider things aright, the Niece or
Brothers Daughter, is rather more than less a kin than the half Sister by the
Fathers side, and that upon two several accounts, both because the Father's is
of the two, the more uncertain side, and because in the Niece or Brothers
Daughter, there is at one remove if he be Brother German, as it cannot be
proved that Haran was not, the blood of both our Parents running in her veins,
besides that to such an one we are parentum loco, which is another hindrance to
Marriage in the Mosaic as well as the Civil Law,

I conclude therefore upon an impartial survey of the whole matter, that this
conjecture, let it be supported by never so great names, is not only precarious
but improbable into the bargain. Neither do we read of any other change of Name
which Sarah ever suffered but only that of Sarai, by a very light mutation into
Sarah, which is as much as Domina, Ductrix, Princeps Faemina, to make it of the
same signification with Miriam or Maria, which was the Name of the blessed
Virgin, from Mar or Maran Dominus, whence the Maronites in the East, and that
bitter form of Excommunication called by St. Paul Anathema Maranatha have their
name likewise.

For as Isaac was A Type of Christ so what the blessed Virgin was to him, that
Sarah was to Isaac, the respective Mothers of those two blessed offsprings, the
one an Old Woman with whom it had long ceased to be after the manner of Women,
the other a spotless Virgin, that had never known man, both of them in a manner
equally miraculous as has been said else where in the case of John the Baptist
his forerunner.

The Result of all is this, it has been sufficiently proved that for Brothers
and Sisters Germans to marry, was all along accounted impious and unlawful, it
has been proved likewise, that the Marriage of the Brothers Wife in all but
the case excepted, is in the interpretation of Law the same thing, as to marry
the Sister German, lastly, by the express words of the Levitical Table of
Marriage it appears that where the Brother dying left Issue, at least Male
Issue begotten in lawful Wedlock, behind him* such Marriages were punishable
with death; which Punishment was too severe for the breach of a Law, that had
not somewhat more than a positive turpitude in it, or of such a Marriage as was
till that time without scruple allowed and practiced in the World.

It is therefore clear upon more accounts than one, that such marriages in
general were always reckoned incestuous and forbidden; Onan therefore being put
upon paying this service to the memory of his Brother, so much against his own
inclinations, as we see by the story it was, might have urged in his own
excuse, that it was an Incestuous Mixture, forbidden by the Law of Nations, and
the constant practice of those and former times, and that though there be an
entire Obedience due to the Commands of our Parents, as well as Politic
Superiors so far as those Commands are in the matter of them Lawful, yet that
in this, as in all other cases, where the Divine and Human Authority interfere
with one another, it was better to obey God than Man, which since he did not
do, but instead of that made a semblance of Obedience, though he was resolved
before hand not to do it, it is a plain indication that this case had been
excepted by the usage of those times; neither is it likely that God would have
punished this disobedience with that severity which he did, if he had refused
that service in compliance, or at least in agreement to the Laws of God, or the
Usages, though but reputedly sacred, of those times.

The same is likewise further clear from the apprehension of Judah, lest the
same untimely Fate might likewise be the portion of his youngest Son Shelah, if
Tamar thorough his neglect did not continue in her state of Widdow-hood, till
Shelah was grown up to marriageable years, v. 11. lest peradventure he dye
also, as his Brethren did, which yet would have been no fault of his, if
through the negligence of the Father a sufficient restraint had not been laid
upon his Daughter Tamar; neither could Shelah have suffered any thing by it, if
it were not that God does often punish the sins of the Fathers in the Children,
which is no more than a proper exercise of his Sovereign Power and Dominion
over men.

But Judah had been guilty of no sin, in suffering her to marry abroad, if the
reason of her marriage to Onan, First, and of her being afterward designed for
Shelah, had not depended on something else besides his own arbitrary pleasure.
Further we do not find that she was afterward actually married to Shelah, but
it is more probable from the silence of the Scripture in it, that she was not,
because by the Levitical Law, which in this instance also seems to have been
much ancienter than the time of Moses, it was not Lawful for the same Woman to
conceive by the Father and Son. And, though it be true that she did
successively enjoy both Son and Father, yet neither was this right in it self,
but only comparatively, and is somewhat excused from a sort of necessity that
seemed to attend it; She has been more righteous then I, said Judah, as much
as to say, she has done an abominable thing, but I that which was more impious
than she, by withholding my Son Shelah from her embraces, whom Custom and my
Promise, and the respect due to the memory of my deceased Son, had given her
for her Husband, and whom she had purchased by performing the condition of
Widdow-hood on her part, and by patiently expecting the time beforehand
stipulated between them. Therefore he said rightly, She has been more
righteous than I; for Er the Eldest Brother was to raise up seed to the Family,
or to propagate the name of Judah himself, he dying with Issue, it was to be
propagated by Onan and by Shelah his Proxies, which since the one did refuse,
and the other did either refuse or was prohibited to do, what remained but that
either the memory of the Eldest Brother must perish, or the Father himself
perform the Husbands part, and propagate his own memory, and that of his Eldest
Son deceased in his own person; which though in it self detestable, yet the sin
was partly his own, in putting something that looked like a kind of necessity
upon the Woman; and it being directed to an intention not only less culpable
than the action it self, but also such as was laudable and just, though unjust
to compass it by this means, it is for this reason he says, She has been more
righteous then I. Drus. in loc. Justa est quam ego; quomodo justa quae se
adulterio temeraverat? Non dicit justa simpliciter, sed justa quam ego and est
sensus magis quam ego, i. e. justior. Comparative igitur justa erat.


Lastly the same thing is evident from this, that till Judah was rightly
informed of the matter, he would have burnt his Daughter Tamar for an
Adulteress, as having after a promise not to do it, by forsaking Shelah,
adulterously betrayed the Bed of her Husband Er, by which you see likewise,
which is an other confirmation of what has been said, that Adultery long
before the delivery of the Law was punished with Death but it does not seem
that he would have punished this offense so heavily, if the Custom and Law of
that time, had not made it Adultery to marry or enjoy another so long as any of
the Brethren still remained alive, and in a Condition or likelihood of being
so, to propagate the name of their Elder Brother.

It remains then that this Custom must needs be ancienter than the time of
Judah; and since there is no instance of any such thing in all the Family of
Abraham, though you go as high as to Sem himself, till you come to the Sons of
Judah in this Chapter, since all the Sons of Noah were actually married at one
and the same time to several and distinct Wives Since Noah himself is no where
taken notice of as the beginner of any such practice, or as an example of it it
seems most reasonable to go yet further backwards and place the first
beginnings of this Ancient usage in the ante-noachioal or ante-diluvian times.

I will not desend this fact of Tamar, from all suspicion of guilt, when it may
seem to be at first sight, not only a very unlawful but a very detestable
practice and when at this distance of several Thousand Years being in a manner
perfectly unacquainted with the usages of those times, it is utterly impossible
to make such a Judgment of the case, as may be reli'd upon for truth in all its
parts.

But thus much I will say, she was not by so doing guilty of Adultery, though
whether she were of Incest or no, will require some further consideration; for
either Shelah the Third Son of Judah was alive, or he was dead; if he were
alive, it is true she was engaged to expect the years of his Maturity, that he
might perform the Husbands part, in raising up Seed to his deceased Brother,
and by not expecting that appointed time, she did in effect betray the Bed of
her first Husband Er, whose person Shelah was in this case to sustain. But if
after she had staid thus long, which was all that she was obliged to do, she
did then demand him in Marriage, according to the contract and agreement
formerly made between them; if Judah who was to receive all the benefit of this
agreement, which was the propagating of his own and his Sons name, and the
continuing the Inheritance in the line of the First born, would not stand to
the contract into which he had entered for his own advantage, by all the Law,
and all the equity in the World, the party to whom no benefit accrews is free
of any further obligation, which was exactly Thamars case, to whom it might be
indifferent, whether she continued in the same house, or married into another,
and who might perhaps fancy some other person for her Husband more than she did
Shelah, in which case it is altogether unreasonable she should be under any
restraint, when the parties on whose side all the advantage lies, will not make
good their own part of the bargain.

It is clear then she could not be guilty of Adultery upon supposition that
Shelah being alive, had himself refused, or had by some external force been
hindered from performing his part of the condition, which it was impossible for
him at that time to do, without his Fathers consent, who had, as it seems,
according to the Ancient practice of the first, mortals jus vitae and necis, an
absolute and despotical power over all his family and dependants, as appears by
the sentence passed upon Tamar without any other Process or Formality of Law,
but his own Arbitrary decree, Genesis 38. 24. bring her forth and let her be burnt.

Of which despotical power of Parents over their Children and such was Tamar in
this case, being still considered as the Wife of her first Husband Er, the Son
of Judah so long as Shelah lived, who was when he came to Age to sustain his
person, and propagate his name) we have two known instances in the Ancient
Roman story, the first is that of him of the surviving Horatii, who killed his
own Sister, for bewailing the Death of her Lover, an enemy of Rome, who being
for this fact arraigned, and about to receive sentence of Condemnation from the
Duumviri, who sat in Judgment upon him, was thus defened and interceeded for by
the miserable old man his Father, who was now in danger of losing all his
Children, though not many hours before, the happy Parent of a numerous and
hopeful Offspring, Se Filiam jure caesam judicare, ni ita esset patrio jure in
filium animadversurum fuisse. Live. lib. 1. The Second is of Sp. Cassius in the
Second Book of the same Author, who being accused of aspiring to be King, a
name so hated at that time by the Romans, among other accounts given of his
punishment, is said to have been sentenced to Death for it by his Father, and
executed at home by virtue of that Sentence. Livies words are these: Sunt qui
patrem auctorem ejus Supplicii ferant, eum, cognita domi causa, verberasse ac
necasse: peculiumque filii Cereri consecravisse; signum inde factum esse, and
inscriptum, EX CASSIA FAMILIA DATVM. And not unlike to this and the former
instance is that of L. Virginius, in the 3d. Book of the same Writer, who, as
it may seem by virtue of this paternal power, slew his own Daughter, to free
her from the Lust of Appius the Decemvir, but as for the story of Manlius, it
being rather an effect of Military Discipline than his Authority, as a Father,
it is not here to be accounted for.

Neither is it to be doubted, but the Romans were beholding for the exercise of
this Paternal Right, to some other People, both more Ancient and more Easterly
from whom they were descended, both because we have here a plain instance of
the same Authority, invested in the person of Judah, and because in the
beginning of things, when almost every distinct Family was a little Kingdom by
it self, of which the Paterfamilias was the Supreme Lord, from whose
determinations there was no manner of Appeal, it must needs be for the keeping
this Family in due Order, there must be the same distinction of punishments
according to the different natures, and differing aggravations of Offenses, as
are to be met with in greater Bodies; and in truth when matters are examined to
the bottom it will be found, that the Original of all Justice, as well as
Government, is from private Families; but enough of this.

From hence it appears that whether Shelah refused to comply himself, or
whether an outward restraint were laid upon him by his Father, the first of
which seems to have been the very truth, it is the same case, and she is either
way freed from all manner of obligation, and consequently could not be guilty
of Adultery by the enjoyment of another.

Or else Secondly if you suppose Shelah to have been dead before this happened,
then she seems still to be more excusable, in that all the Brothers being dead
one after another, there was no body now left to raise up Seed to the Eldest,
therefore he was perfectly dead to all intents and purposes, both in himself
and in his Proxies, and so there was no possibility of committing Adultery with
relation either to him or them.

It is true indeed according to the practice of after days, which seem to have
taken their Copy from these, and those that went before them, in default of a
Brother, the Widow of the deceased might challenge the next of Kin, as is
clear from the instance of Ruth, who first demanded a nearer Kinsman, and then
upon his refusal Boaz in Marriage, the latter of which challenges was accepted.

And though it seems clear in the Law of Moses, at least as to an immediate
Brother, that the Woman was bound to put in her Claim to him, yet it was still
at his liberty whether he would comply with it or no, only it seems by the
instance of the nearest of Kin in the family of Elimelech, in the story of Boaz
and Ruth, that he was to give some tolerable reason of such his refusal.

But then again there be two reasons why such challenges as these were made;
The first was this, That the Younger was considered in the Nature of a Servant
to the Elder, of which I shall speak more largely by and by, but this did not
hold in the collateral Relations, who were not under the same subjection to the
party deceased, nor to the despotical Authority of the Pater-familias who was
in the Nature of a common Sovereign to all the Sons, but had no such power over
the descending Relations in the transverse or oblique Line.

Secondly, It was done for the better preserving the Inheritance in the Line of
the Firstborn, for which reason the Firstborn of this imputative Wedlock, was
to rise up in, and inherit the name of the deceased, that is, not that he was
to be called by the same name with his imputative Father, for the Son of Ruth
by Boaz, was not called Mahlon, which was the name of her deceased Husband, but
Obed; only all the business was, he was to inherit the estate of the deceased,
which it was not in the power of his real Father to alienate from him, or
divide among the Children of another Venture, neither had he any right to such
Inheritance, but what was devolved upon him by his Elder Brother for the use of
his Eldest Son, by his said Brothers Wife, begotten by him in his Brothers
stead.

It is apparent therefore, if there were no inheritance in danger of being
alienated from the House of Judah, or of his Eldest Son, Er, that she had no
manner of reason why she should challenge the next of Kin upon the decease of
the three Brothers, and therefore clear that she did not do it, much less would
any of them be under any the least obligation to accept of any such challenge
as that was.

For that Judah and much less his Eldest Son, had yet no Inheritance of their
own, may seem probable from this, that Jacob himself was yet alive, besides
that they shortly after were to part for Egypt, bidding a long Adieu to the
Land of Canaan, and all their immovable Possessions in it. However Judah
himself being still as we see by the story in a condition capable of leaving a
Posterity descended immediately from his own Loins, it was a preposterous way
to have recourse to this artificial remedy in the transverse Line, when Nature
as yet was so vigorous and warm as to be able to propagate and continue its
self; so that it remains an undeniable truth, that whether Shelah were alive or
dead, she was free from all manner of Obligation either to him or any other of
that Family, and therefore could not by this Action be said to have committed
Adultery, which was the thing to be proved.

But now after all it is certain that Shelah was yet alive, Genesis 46. 12. The
Sons of Judah, Er, Onan, and Shelah, Pharez and Zerah: but Er and Onan dyed in
the Land of Canaan. Which is as much as to say that Shelah did not but went
along with his Father, Grandfather, and Uncles into Egypt, as it is also, Number.
26. 19, 20. The Sons of Judah after their Families were of Shelah the Family of
the Shelanites, etc. 1 Chronicles. 4. 21. 22, the Sons of Shelah the Son of Judah
were, Er, the Father of Lecah, and Laadah the Father of Mareshah, and the
Families of them that wrought fine Linen, of the House of Ashbea. And Jochim
and the men of Chozeba, and Joash, and Saraph, who had the dominion of Moab,
and Jashubi-lehem. For this reason it is that Josephus reckoning up the Sons of
Judah does not mention the two Eldest Er and Onan, because they dyed without
Issue, but only Shelah the Youngest of the Three by his Lawful Wife Shua, and
Pharez and Zerah begotten by him upon his Daughter in Law Tamar, his words are
these Antiq. l. 2. (...). and it seems from this place of Josephus very
probable, that such as dyed without Issue, their names were blotted out of the
Genealogical Tables of the Jews; which is not only reasonable in it self to
suppose, there being no use of such names in Tables of Genealogy, as do not
spread themselves farther by a Posterity of their own, but it will also if
admitted give a mavelous light to several places of Scripture, not yet
sufficiently understood, as that of Exodus 32. 32. Yet now, if thou will forgive
their Sin, and if not, blot me I pray thee out of thy Book which thou have
written. Not that Moses supposed any such thing, as that God kept a Scroul of
Parchment, or a material or literal Book, wherein he did enter down the Names
of those, on whom he was pleased to bestow any mark of his favor, but it is
manifestly a Metaphorical expression, and therefore must allude to some Custom
or Usage of those times.

Now it is certain that Tables of Genealogy were constantly kept, I will not
say from the Creation, when there were no letters, but as soon as ever letters
began, this being the Principal if not the first use of Letters in all Nations.
To what wherefore can this expression better allude than to those Tables? which
being probably written over in every Family for themselves, when the Family
increased, and consequently the Tables were to be enlarged, and oftentimes
Transcribed for the use of new descendants in every Generation, they did not
Transcribe any more than what was necessary to carry down the History of
Succession, so as if a man had Five Sons as Judah had, Two of which dyed
without Issue, and ended in themselves, they were omitted as useless out of
this Table, because the knowledge of their names was of no use to the
Herauldry, as I may call it, of those times, which could give a sufficient
account of its self without them, but could not make use of them in order to
the settling any doubt that should arise in the History of a Pedigree in after
times.

Of the same import is that of Psalm 69. 28. Let them be blotted out of the
Book of the living, and not be written with the righteous. The Book of
Genealogies is called the Book of the Living because in them their names abide
for ever, and they live in their Posterity, though in their own persons they be
dead and buried. And not written with the righteous, because fruitfulness was
always looked upon among the Jews, and that with good reason, as an argument of
Gods favor, and of something commendable in those on whom this blessing was
bestowed, and the contrary as a curse of God, for some one or more very heinous
and provoking sins, which was manifestly the case of Er, and Onan, who seem
therefore to have been left out of Josephus his account, as not worthy the
notice of after times.

So also Ps. 109. 13. Let his Posterity be cut off, and in the Generation
following let their name be blotted out, i. e. when the next Generation, shall
come again to Transcribe the Tables of Genealogy for themselves, let the names
of this man's Posterity, as dying without Issue be omitted. And this no question
is the true sense of that place, Deuteronomy. 25. 6. And it shall be that the
Firstborn which she bears shall succeed in the name of his Brother which is
dead, that his name be not put out of Israel. Put out, viz. in that manner
which I have said, and that in the Register of his Family his name may still
stand over his imputative Offspring; which it was necessary it should do,
because all the descendants from that adoptive Birth, enjoyed the Inheritance
only in right of him, who himself died without any Issue of his own Body; so
that if his name were left out of the Tables, the Estate would upon any
controversy, be adjudged to some Collateral pretender, because his imputative
descent in a right Line of adoption could not be proved; therefore it was
necessary it should be entered down thus:

Mahlon Boaz Ruth. Obed.


Or some such way as this, to show how he and his descendants came by that
Inheritance which they enjoyed, otherwise he that died unmarried or being
married had no Inheritance, nor Issue either of his own or his Proxy, his name
was omitted as useless in the Catalogues of Succession.

It is out of dispute then that Shelah was yet surviving, it is likewise
certain that he was now come to Marriageable Estate. v. 14. She saw that Shelah
was grown and she was not given him to Wife. and v. 26. She has been more
righteous than I, because that I gave her not to Shelah my Son. So that all the
remaining Question is, why he did not give her, which Question in all
likelihood must be Answered thus:

Onan had such such an aversation for the person of Tamar, or rather for the
thoughts of getting Children to propagate the name, or enjoy the inheritance,
if he had any, of another, that we see what prodigious brutality he was guilty
of, to decline this ungrateful Service, and it is not unlikely that Shelah,
when he came at Age, might as to this matter have the same sentiments with his
Brother Onan, for it is natural to every man to hate Bondage, and to loath
every thing that bespeaks him a Slave, which was the true reason of the Younger
Brothers, performing the Husbands part to continue the name and memory of the
Elder, as I shall prove more largely in its due place.

It is very likely therefore, that knowing how severely God had punished the
beastly dissimulation of his Elder Brother, that very fact it self being made
death afterward by the Law of Moses, which is a new argument of the great
Antiquity of the Mosaic dispensation, as to most of the things Prohibited or
Commanded in it; it is very likely, I say, upon this account, that having the
same aversion with his Elder Brother, he would not yet be guilty of the same
soul Hypocrisy and Dissimulation, but declined this ungrateful office more
openly than his Brother had done, to which though his Father by his Arbitrary
power might have compelled him, as he seems to have done his Son Onan, yet
fearing to drive him to the same wicked extremity which had cost the other his
life, and would in conclusion rob him of all his Children, he did so far at
last yield to the fixed and immovable aversion of his Son, as to suffer him to
Marry another, for Marry it is certain he did, as I have proved already, and
from that match the Shelanires were descended.

Besides that Tamar would have had no reason to despair, which yet it is
certain she did, v. 14. If Shelah had still continued perfectly disengaged, for
so long whatever his own inclinations were, she had a reasonable ground of
hope, that he was still by his Father Judah designed for her, in pursuance of
the agreement made between them, v. 11. The same is clear from v. 26. Because
that I gave her not to Shelah my Son, for if he had remained still unmarryed,
and had been firmly designed by Judah for her Bed, it would have been no excuse
for her, that he had not done it yet, so long as he had not violated his faith
by giving him to another.

It is certain therefore that Shelah was not only alive at this time but
actually Married, and being so he had still a further excuse why he would not
raise up Seed to his Brother.

Because besides his own aversion, which would to be sure increase, with the
love which he may well be supposed to have conceived for his other Wife, the
piques and animosities betwixt the two Women might make it a duty which he owed
to the quiet of his Family and the comfort of his Life, to continue with the
same or greater obstinacy to refuse her, than he had formerly done; nay, the
rational prospect of those differences which do naturally arise in Families
from Poligamy, where there are more Women than one pretending at the same time
to an equal or greater share in the affections of the Husband, and in the
Government of the House, together with the quarrels and little janglings of the
respective broods, which might in time grow up to a mortal enmity betwixt them
and their Families for ever; in all which differences the Mothers would be sure
to side with their respective Offsprings, and would engage all the Servants
under them to take their parts, by which means the whole Family would be
engaged in a kind of Civil War, and would be embroyled in everlasting Tumults
and Disorders; this alone might be sufficient to deter him from admitting Tamar
into the partnership of his Bed, and much more would the experience which he
might possibly have of the inconveniences that had actually happened, scare him
from admitting any rival in his love, or partner in his conjugal embraces.

Though in truth whether it were from these unfortunate janglings, or that in
those times it was not looked upon as lawful, the instances of Poligamy before
the Law, are very rarely to be met with: I do not remember to have found above
one before the Flood, and that is of Lamech who had Adah and Zillah to his
Wives at one and the same time, and but two after it, and before the delivery
of the Law, that is, of Jacob who had Rachel and Leah the Daughters of his
Uncle Laban, and of his Brother Esau, who had Three Wives, but Two were such as
it was not Lawful for any of Abraham's Posterity to marry, for which reason,
they are said to have been a grief of mind to Isaac and Rebekah Genesis 26. 35.
upon which account it is most probable that he afterward married Mahalath the
Daughter of his Uncle Ishmael, Gen.* 28. 9. only to reconcile himself to his
offended Parents.

How the first of these agreed we cannot tell, but it is probable bad enough,
from what has been said already; and whether that Homicid which was committed
by Lamech were not the effect of some Womanish quarrel, may rather be suspected
at this distance of time than proved, but something sure was the matter, which
made him so pathetically apply himself to them, as if they had been some way or
other concerned in it, Genesis 4. 23. And Lamech said unto his Wives Adah and
Zillah, hear my voice ye Wives of Lamech, hearken unto my speech, for I have
slain a Man to my wounding and a Young man to my hurt. And as for the last of
them, the contentions between Rachel and Leah are sufficiently known, to all
that are not perfectly unacquainted with the Scripture story. Wherefore Shelah
being now Married to another, he had now the inconveniences of Poligamy to
represent in his own behalf, which is in its self, and has been always
accounted a very reasonable excuse, as in the case of the nearest of Kin of the
Family of Elimelech, his excuse why he would not purchase the Field of Naomi,
nor redeem the Inheritance of Mahlon and Chilion is this, I cannot redeem it my
self, lest I mar my own Inheritance, Ruth 4. 6. But how comes that to pass?
Josephus will tell you. (...) he said he had a Wife and Children already. Which
whether it were the Answer that he gave or no, yet it would have been
ridiculous in Josephus to represent him speaking thus, if this had not been
looked upon as a reasonable excuse, among the Jews, and a proper Bar to
Marriages of this Nature.

Again it seems very probable that this was the very Answer, or substance of
the Answer which he gave, because this Answer is a very genuine interpretation
of the place in Ruth above cited. I cannot redeem it my self, lest I mar my
own Inheritance.

Now there are two ways by which the Inheritance might be marred, First if
there were a Morgage on the field of Naomi, or the Inheritance of Chilion,
which Morgage could not be wrought off without making a Versura and turning the
inconvenience upon his own Estate, which yet in the end would come all to a
case; for in the year of Jubilee this encumbrance would be taken off, and in
the mean time it would have been a very hard bargain, if the land which he had
cleared would not more than answer the inconvenience of that which he had
morgaged. Neither was it reasonable that the Eldest Son of this Vicarious Bed,
should enjoy the entire Inheritance of his reputed Father when he came at Age,
supposing the Jubilee did not happen before that time, till the debts of his
real Parent contracted by this Marriage were satisfied. But this at the long
run would be so far from an inconvenience if a man had no Wife before, that it
would rather be a very great advantage, because by this means there would be
one Child provided for, and his own Estate left entire to make provision for
the rest.

It is therefore necessary what Josephus has represented, that you suppose him
to have been Married before, and then indeed besides the inconveniences of
Polygamy, there would be this detriment accrue to his own inheritance; That the
first Child enjoying the whole fortune of the reputed Father, all the rest were
looked upon as his own Offspring, by which means it would come to pass that out
of the same fortune, and that perhaps not very plentiful neither; he would have
two Wives, and two distinct broods of Children to make provision for.

If the business of Polygamy had not been a lawful bar against Marriages of
this nature, when the party challenged was not inclinable to comply, it would
have been in a manner impossible, considering the great Antiquity of this
usage, which I have already cleared, but we must have had more instances of
Polygamy before the Law than are to be found in Scripture, whereas there are
but three in all, one of which seems to me to labor under the suspicion of a
much fowler occasion, the other has been proved to be unlawful, and the last
was a matter of necessity not choice, as proceeding from the treachery of
Laban, contrary to the true meaning and intention of Jacob.

Thus far therefore Josephus is in the right, but yet there is one thing in
which no question he is much out of the way: his words are these, in the very
same Paragraph from whence I have taken the former; (...). That is, Boaz
sending first for Ruth, and then for him who was nearest of Kin of the Family
of Abimelech, asked him this question, do thou possess or occupy the
Inheritance of Abimelech and his Sons? yes, said he, I do, as being next of
Kin. Nay, but said Boaz, we must not observe the Law by halves; Therefore
either leave the Inheritance, or take this Woman with it (to raise up the name
of the dead upon his Inheritance) at which words he immediately quitted his
pretensions both to the Woman and the Inheritance to Boaz who was himself a Kin
to the Deceased. Which is without doubt a very great error of Josephus. For
either the nearest of Kin to the House of Elimelech, or of Abimelech as he
calls him, was legally possessed of the Inheritance, or not; if he was why
could he not still enjoy it without the Woman; if he was not, unless upon this
condition, how came he to enjoy it so long without disturbance already, for an
illegal possession is in effect no possession at all, unless what we have
acquired by injustice we can maintain by force of Arms; it is impossible for
Josephus or any body for him to answer this.

But besides it is a flat contradiction to the express words of Scripture; I
cannot redeem it of my self, lest I mar my own Inheritance. But what need he
redeem it if he had it in possession already, and if he might enjoy it, as
according to Josephus he did, without redemption, I do not understand how the
acquisition of a new Estate, is any mar, prejudice, or detriment to the old. I
conclude therefore that Josephus has misinterpreted the matter, and so I pass
on to that which is yet behind, on this subject.

And I think it is very clear from what has been said, that Thamar having
patiently expected the time stipulated between Judah and her self, and having
in vain demanded Shelah for her Husband, in pursuance of that agreement and
bargain, Shelah being resolved not to comply, and Judah not to compel him to
it, it was now morally impossible that this agreement should ever have its
effect, which Moral Impossibility is a sufficient Vindication of Thamar from
the charge of Adultery. Besides that Judah having first violated his promise,
she would at the worst have been more righteous than he, as he himself
confessed.

But yet after all this though Shelah continued still averse, and Judah in the
same mind that he would put no arbitrary Violence upon his inclination, yet it
is certain he still continued to persuade him what he could to accept of Thamar
for his Wife, and that not without some though but slender hopes of prevailing
upon him by his importunity, though he could not as yet alter his inclination,
otherwise there could be no color of condemning her for an Adulteress, which
yet it is certain he did, for by Whoredom in the Text is not meant simple
Fornication a very trivial crime in those days, but Adultery, or the betraying
of a Conjugal and Lawful Bed. As is manifest from this that Judah himself was
guilty of the former, and as it proved afterward by the Story, at the same
time, and with the same Person; but it would have been a very unequal thing to
punish that fault with death in another, of which he himself was guilty. I
conclude therefore, that he still continued to importune his Son to accept of
her, and that it was upon this account, and no other he laid Adultery to her
charge, though when he more calmly considered the Circumstances on her side,
how much she had been abused by himself, and how good reason she had to despair
of ever obtaining Shelah, he then withdrew his Action, and acknowledges; She
has been more righteous than I.

Thus have I demonstrated my way by a very faint and dim light, thorough all
the dark passages of an ancient and obscure Story, which whoever shall consider
so well as I have done, must be forced to acknowledge that I have not failed in
any Circumstance of representing the very matter of fact, as it stood in those
times with relation to the parties concerned.

I could now be glad having washed off the imputation of Adultery, if I could
wipe out that of Incest too, not so much out of respect to the persons of Judah
or Thamar considered by themselves, as because our Savior's Genealogy is so
deeply concerned in it, and yet Thamar is no where mentioned that I know of
with any reprehension by any of the Writers either of the Old or New Testament,
neither is this all but there are other instances in the same Genealogy, partly
of an equally foul nature with this, and partly of a nature something
approaching to it.

Of the latter sort are the Matches of Abraham with his Half-Sister, and of
Jacob with his two Cousin Germans, both of them Sister Germans to one another,
but of these I shall give a fair account, when I come to speak of the Marriages
of Cousin Germans, which will be the subject of another Discourse.

Of the first sort is the incestuous congression of Lot with his two Daughters
from whence Moab and consequently our Savior himself by Ruth a Moabitish Woman
was descended, and the Marriage of David with Bathsheba the Wife of Vriah in
which there was an horrid combination of Adultery and Murder together, and yet
from thence Solomon who was himself no very virtuous Prince, and from him many
very wicked Kings of Judah sprung, in all whose Loins the Messiah was
contained, so that it may be applied to this sense as well as any other, in
respect of his Genealogy as well as for any other reason, what the Prophet
Isaiah has said of him Esai. 53. 12. He was numbered with Transgressors.

But after all it is certain that the very worst of these Congressions, had
something in them which was Typical of that Messiah, who was to spring from
them. I will instance first in that of Lot, with his Daughter the Mother of
Moab from whom the whole people of the Moabites borrowed their Original; and
why was he called Moab I beseech you? was it not Miab? because he was descended
of his and his Mothers common Father, the Progenitor of him according to the
Flesh, who was begotten of his Father before all worlds, begotten of him who
was the Father of the World, the Father of the Son, and though not in the same
immediate sense, the Father of the Blessed Virgin his Mother.

I will instance likewise in the incestuous Mixture of Judah with his Daughter
in Law Thamar, betwixt whom Pharez, another of our Saviors Progenitors was
begotten, and who was this Pharez, is it not from Pharats rupit? and does he
not in his very name point at the Messiah, who was in the fullness of time to be
descended from his Loins, by whom the Mosaic enclosure was to be laid open,
and the Partition Wall betwixt Jew and Gentile to be broken down?

Lastly in the Marriage of Boaz with Ruth, which though it was not an
incestuous, yet it was possibly an unlawful Marriage; First of Mahlon, then of
Boaz in his right to a strainge Woman; and yet what more plain, than that the
Marriage of Boaz a Jew, to Ruth a Moabitish Woman, was Typical of that blessed
Union betwixt Jew and Gentile, and of their being one Sheepfold under one
common Shepherd, to which the dispensation of the Messiah is so Naturally
fitted, which was the design of his coming into the World, and of his
Suffering upon the Cross, and which though not yet completed, yet the
Completion of it, is by all good Christians expected with a no less firm and
consident assurance, than that with which they embrace any other part of the
Christian Belief

He was to unite God and Man, and therefore had the Humanity twisted into one
common person with his Godhead, he was to unite men to one another, and
therefore his Human Part was in a manner equally divided betwixt Jew and
Gentile; he was by nature all things to all men, that he might gain the more.
And being so nearly allied by the bands of Nature, both to the Jewish and to
the Heathen World, it can be the less suspected that he had any design, but
what did equally concern the happiness of them both.

And now I am the less displeased with this conceit in that since I find
Grotius, a man of unquestionable judgment, as well as Learning, to concur with
me in the same opinion. His words are these upon Ruth 1. 4. Merito autem
Rahabam and Rutham in Genealogia Messiae ponit Matthaeus tanquam praeludia
vocationis gentium, quae per Messiam facienda erat.

But when all is done, it neither is nor ought to be looked upon as any such
disparagement, that in our Saviors Genealogy there are incestuous Mixtures to
be found. For as Seneca says wisely, with relation to those who vaunt
themselves too much upon the Antiquity and Splendor of that Family of which
they are descended. Omnibus nobis totidem ante nos sunt, nullius non origo
ultra memoriam jacet. Plato ait. Neminem regem non ex Servis esse oriundum;
neminem non servum ex regibus, omnia ista longa varietas miscuit, and sursum
deorsum fortuna versavit. And again, Si ad vetera revocas nemo non inde est
^nte quod nihil est. A primo mundi ortu, usque in hoc tempus, perduxit nos ex
splendidis sordidisque alternata series. Ep. 44. I say, what he says of the
Antiquity of Families, that we may say with as much appearance of reason of the
Legitimacy of them too, and perhaps it would be found at the bottom of the
greatest names, if any records took notice of such obscure matters, not only
that there was,

Aut pastor -- aut illud quod dicere nolo. But that even Bastardy and Incest
would appear, and the best of us all would be found to owe our Being to those
Crimes, which are branded with the most ignominious names, and which as we
censure the most heavily in others, so in our selves we cannot think of them
without a sense of Abhorrency and Shame; And yet for all that I hope every
gallant man is and ought to be measured by himself, a man's own Virtues or Vices
are the only things in which he is properly concerned; it is rather a
Disparagement than Commendation to a bad man, that he is descended of a
Virtuous and truly Honorable Stock, because he adds degeneracy to folly; and
it is on the contrary an additional commendation to the Virtuous Offspring of
wicked and disorderly Parents, that he will not suffer the diseases of his
Family to be hereditary, but gives a nobler example to Posterity, than he
received of them which went before him. And at the worst Incest is not an
Offense against the Primary, but only against the Secondary Laws of Nature,
that is, it is not properly a sin in a man considered by himself, which is the
case of all bodily Intemperance, and of all exorbitant Passion in the Mind, but
it is a relative or consequential offense as he is a member of a Society, and
as those Matches which are called incestuous, are prejudicial to the interest
and well being of that Society in which he has Enrolled and Listed himself, of
which I shall speak more largely in that other discourse to which this is
preparatory and introductive.

Having thus given an account of the great Antiquity of this Custom of the
Brothers Marrying the Childless Brothers Wife, and in what case it was usually
dispensed withal in the earliest times, I will now give an account of the
reasons of it likewise, which is more than any man has done before me. The
reason then is this, that the Patres familiarum or Masters of Families, in the
beginnings of things, had, as has been shown, a Despotical and Arbitrary power
over their Children and Servants, every Family being a little Monarchy by its
self, in which there lay no appeal from the Master of the house, but his will
was the last and only measure by which all things were to be administr'd and
governed; and this appears not only from what has been said already, in the
case of Judah condemning Thamar, and compelling Onan to an ungrateful Office,
but much more evidently from the story of the Battle of four Kings against
five, Genesis 14. all which Kings were little better, if indeed any thing more,
than Not much more considerable than these were the Thirty One Kings conquered
by Joshua on the West side of Jordau, whose names are set down Josh. 12.
Masters of great Families, or of a very few families joined together under one
common head, however it is certain that Abraham who was as absolute a Prince as
the best of them, and as it appears by the story much more potent, was
certainly no more than the Master of a single Family, and yet was more than an
equal match for the four Kings, and is called a Confederate of the five, v. 13.
and v. 14. is said to have armed his trained Servants born in his own house
(the Seventy render it (...)) Three Hundred and Eighteen, than which there
cannot be a plainer instance of the absoluteness of the Ancient Masters of
Families, and of their independency upon any other; he was Superior in Power,
and he is called a Confederate, which implies an equality of Dignity also, to
those that are styled Kings; and his Three Hundred and Eighteen servants born
in his house do plainly show the Antiquity of that absolute power which the
Roman Laws have given to Masters over their Servants, by which not only their
persons, but their substance was at the disposal of the Pater familias, or
Master of the House, which extended as far as to the persons of their Wives and
Children as many as were born to them before the time of their freedom.

Of the Antiquity of which power, we have Josophus will not acknowledge them to
have been bondmaids. But this is said by Josephus without any ground only for
the credit of those four Tribes, which were descended from them, whereas indeed
they were not looked upon in the esteem of Law, to be the Children of the
Servants but of their Mistrisses, whose part they did in this case sustain, his
words are these, Antiq. L. 1. (...). If Josephus had consulted the Hebrew text
and understood it, which I am very much afraid he did not, that would have told
him, after a careful survey of all those texts where those words do occur that
Shipheah and Ammah are never used but for a bond-servant, and accordingly they
are translated by the Seventy (...). If one place can be produced where these
words have not this signification, I will yield the cause. Exodus 2. 5. they
Translate Ammah by (...) which is the place Grotius instanceth in as an
instance where Ammah is taken for a free Woman, but what is (...)? Hesychius
(...), again (...), ( I had rather read it (...), Gloss. Vet. (...) ancilla.
and again Ancilla. (...), The Vulgar Latin in this very place of Exodus, misit
unam e famulabus suis, and Genesis 24. 6. (...) (Veneharotheath) (...). is no
question meant of (...), Aneillae, Vernae Famulae, And now let any man judge
whether Grotius or I have the better.
another instance in the story of Laban who giving first Leah to Jacob to Wife,
gave Zilphah along with her for an handmaid, and afterward bestowing Rachel,
gave Bilhah likewise to be in the same quality to her. Neither is there any
doubt but Hagar was for the same reason bestowed upon Sarah, upon her Marriage
with Abraham.

The Servant maid given together with her Mistress, was in the Nature of a
dowry, and was as much in the disposal of the Supreme Lord the Master of the
House, whether to give away or sell, or what he pleased, as any other dead or
immovable substance whatsoever.

Neither was this all but the Husband was an absolute Lord over his Wife, and
the Wife was in the Nature of a Servant to the Husband. This is the reason why
Sarah styles her Husband by the name of Lord. And that not out of flattery or
complaisance but privately to her self, imagining that no Body heard her, which
shows it to have been the Language of those times, Genesis 18. 12. After I am
waxed old shall I have pleasure, my Lord being old also? Which subjection of
the Wife to her Husband, as her absolute Sovereign and Lord, was as Ancient as
the fall of Adam, and was a consequent of it, being part of the curse denounced
against Eve, as a punishment for Eating the Forbidden fruit and tempting her
Husband to do the same, enforcing so pernicious an example with arguments no
less fatal to all the Posterity descended from her Loins, Gen* 3. 16. Unto the
Woman he said, I will greatly multiply thy sorrow, and thy conception. In
sorrow thou shall bring forth Children, and thy desire shall be to thy Husband,
and he shall rule over thee.

But if they had such power and Authority over their Wives, it is much more to
be supposed that they were likewise invested with the same absolute, and
uncontrollable dominion over their Children, so as to punish them, if the fact
should to them seem to require it with Death its self, as has already been made
probable, by the Ancient Roman story, which seems to have taken its Pattern from
elder times, and from the example of Thamar, who was by Judah being his Sons
Wife considered as his Daughter; all which is yet farther confirmed by the
express testimony of the Law its self, by which a rebellious and disobedient
Son, was upon the complaint of the Parents, if there remained no hopes of
amendment, without farther process to be stoned to Death, Deuteronomy. 21. 18, 19, 20,
21. which was no doubt a remainder of that absolute right and power, which
Parents had over their Children before the Law, and which was so far from being
perfectly taken away by it, that they seem rather to have been under an
obligation to accuse them, in cases of obstinate and refractory disobedience,
as the City or Congregation among whom the fact was committed, were under
another to Stone them till they died, v. 20, 21. They shall say unto the Elders
of his City, this our Son is stubborn and rebellious, he will not obey our
voice, he is a Glutton and a Drunkard, and all the men of his City shall stone
him with Stones, that he die, so shall thou put away evil from amongst you, and
all Israel shall hear, and fear.

Much more then, might they disinherit them, and give the Birthright from the
Eldest to another, and so downwards as low as they pleased, either for a small
crime or for none at all, if it should so seem good, which it is certain they
actually did: for to Jacob were born by his Wife Leah four Sons one after
another, without any other between them, Reuben, Simeon, Levi, Judah, Genesis 29.
32, 33, 34, 35. Reuben was the Firstborn, to whom the natural right of
Inheritance belonged, but he for committing Incest with his Fathers Concubine
Bilhah, Genesis 35. 22. was disinherited, and for that fact instead of a blessing
received a curse from his Father, Genesis 49. 4. Unstable as Water thou shall not
excel, because thou wentest up to thy Fathers Bed, then defiledst thou it. He
went up to my Couch. Simeon and Levi were likewise Disinherited for their
Treacherous dealing with the Sechemites, Genesis 34. which how heavily it was
resented by Jacob, is plain from v. 30. of that Chapter. And Jacob said to
Simeon and Levi, ye have troubled me to make me stink among the Canaanites and
the Perizzites. And I being few in number, they shall gather themselves
together against me and slay me, and I shall be destroyed, I and my house;
which was the reason of that dreadful Curse, he denounces afterward against
them, Genesis 49. 5, 6, 7. Simeon and Levi are Brethren, instruments of cruelty
are in their Habitations, O my Soul come not thou into their secret; unto their
assembly mine honor be not thou united, for in their anger they slew a Man,
and in their self-will they dug down a Wall; cursed be their anger, for it
was fierce, and their wrath, for it was cruel. I will divide them in Jacob and
scatter them in Israel. Neither were these three only passed by, but Judah
also, against whom no exception appears, 1. Chron. 5. 1, 2. Now the Sons of
Reuben the Firstborn of Israel (for he was the Firstborn, but for as much as
he defiled his Fathers Bed, his Birthright was given to the Sons of Joseph the
Son of Israel, and the Genealogy is not to be reckoned after the Birthright.
For Judah prevailed above his Brethren, and of him came the chief rulers, but
the Birthright was Joseph's.) v. 3. the Sons I say, etc. Now this if it were an
Arbitrary thing, as there is no reason assigned of Judahs being passed by, then
it appears plainly that the bare will of the Father, with whom there was no
dispute, and from whom there lay no appeal, was sufficient to justify the
disinherison of the Eldest Son, for that Judah was, after Reuben, Simeon and
Levi, were discarded, and it is by virtue of this paternal right that David
placed Solomon in the Throne, notwithstanding Adonijah was elder than he.

But it is most likely that Jacob had conceived some displeasure against Judah
also, as being concerned in the common hatred of all the Brothers to their
Brother Joseph, Genesis 37. 4, 5. and was the adviser of his selling into Egypt,
v. 27. which being a temperament both of mercy and cruelty together, for the
others would have dispatched him outright. It was from hence perhaps, that the
Jews have concluded that Jacob did not dispossess him of his whole Birthright,
but gave only to Joseph a double portion of the Inheritance, leaving all other
things in their natural and usual state, for to the Elder Brother the Masters
tell us there belonged three things. First he was the King of the Family to
reign in his Fathers stead after his decease. Secondly he was the Priest of it,
and Thirdly he was to enjoy a double share of the Inheritance, which double
share they affirm to have been given to Joseph, and that his Birthright which
is said to have been given him consisted only in that.

And truly to give them their due, something of this Nature is very reasonable
to believe, for its manifest not only from the place of the Chronicles above
cited that Judah prevailed over his Brethren, but he did this as the Rightful
Heir, by virtue of his Fathers blessing, Genesis 49. 8, 9, 10. Judah thou art he
whom thy Brethren shall praise; thy Hand shall be in the Neck of thine Enemies,
thy Fathers Children shall bow down before thee. Judah is a Lions Whelp, from
the prey, my Son, thou art gone up: he stooped down, he couched as a Lion, and
as an Old Lion, who shall rouse him up? The Scepter shall not depart from
Judah, nor a Lawgiver from between his Feet, until Shiloh come, and unto him
shall the gathering of the People be.

It is clear therefore that the Kingdom or Sovereignty over his Brethren, was
bestowed upon Judah, and as for the Priesthood, it was after appropriated upon
another occasion to the Sons of Levi, not by the designment of Jacob, but of
God himself. It is likely therefore that as Judah tempered mercy with his
hatred, and was in the midst of his Envy an Instrument of saving his Brother
Joseph's Life, so Jacob mixed the Kindness of a Father with the Severity of a
Judge, and depriving him only of a part of what belonged to him as his
Birthright, as a punishment for his offense, left him the rest entire, as
being due to him as the Eldest, and as the reward of his mercy.

But yet after all this, he passed by not only Dan and Naphtali, the Sons of
Rachel by her Handmaid Bilhah, as also Gad and Asher the Sons of Leah, by her
handmaid Zilphah but likewise Issachar and Zebulon the Sons of Leah her self,
all of them Elder than Joseph, and all dispossessed of the Birthright without
any reason at all but only the Arbitrary power with which their Father was
invested, unless it were perhaps upon some Prophetic reasons, which neither
are or can be at this time known to us, as it was in the case of Ephraim and
Manasseh, Genesis 48. 17, 18, 19. And when Joseph saw his Father lay his right
hand upon the head of Ephraim, it displeased him: and he held up his Fathers
hand to remove it from Ephraims head unto Manassehs head. And Joseph said to
his Father, not so my Father, for this is the Firstborn, put thy right hand
upon his head. And his Father refused and said I know it my Son; he also shall
become a people, and he also shall be great: but truly his Younger Brother
shall be greater than he and his Seed shall become a multitude of Nations.

But if no violence were done to the natural succession, then the Elder Brother
did in right of Primogeniture succeed; he Grot. ad Genesis 4. 7. primogeniti per
Patris aut mortem aut absentiam, paternam quandam aut horitatem in fratres
habebant.
was in his Fathers life time looked upon as Heir apparent to the domestic
Crown, and in his Fathers absence he was the Supreme Lord, and his Brethren
were as much his Servants as he was his Fathers; and how great Homage and
obeisance the Younger Brothers of those times were used to pay the Elder, will
appear from the 33d of Genesis where Jacob meeting his Brother Esau, and being
fearful he would now take that opportunity to revenge himself for the wrong he
had received, pays him all the Submission and Duty which belonged to the Elder
Brother, as well in his own person, as in those of his Wives, Children and
Servants, from verse the 12 to the 16 in these words, they are so remarkable, I
will Transcribe them all. And Jacob lift up his Eyes and looked and behold Esau
came, and with him four hundred men; and he divided the Children unto Leah and
unto Rachel and unto the two handmaids, and he put the handmaids and their
Children foremost, and Leah and her Children after, and Rachel and Joseph
hindmost, and he passed over before them and he bowed himself to the ground
seven times, till he came near unto his Brother. And Esau ran to meet him and
they wept, and he lift up his Eyes and saw the Women and the Children, and
said, who are these with thee? And he said the Children which God has
graciously given thy servant. Then the handmaids came near, they and their
Children, and they bowed themselves, and Leah also with her Children came near
and bowed themselves, and after came Joseph near and Rachel, and they bowed
themselves. And he said what meanest thou by all this drove which I met, and he
said these are to find grace in the sight of my Lord, and Esau said, I have
enough my Brother, keep that thou have unto thy self, And Jacob said, nay, I
pray thee, if I have found grace in thy fight, then receive my Present at my
Hand, for therefore have I seen thy face, as though I had seen the face of God,
and thou wast pleased with me; take I pray thee my blessing that is brought to
thee, because God has dealt graciously with me, and because I have enough, and
he urged him and he took it. And he said let us take our journey and let us go
and I will go before thee, and he said unto him my Lord knows that the
Children are tender, and the Flocks and Herds with young are with me, and if
men should out-drive them one day, all the Flock will die, let my Lord I pray
thee pass over before his Servant, and I will lead on softly according as the
Cattle which goes before me, and the Children be able to endure, until I come
unto my Lord in Seir. And Esau said, let me now leave with thee some of the
Folk that are with me, and he said what needs it? let me find grace in the
sight of my Lord.

But if thus much submission were paid on account of Primogeniture to a Fellow-
Twin, born but just immediately before him, an Inhabitant of the same Womb at
the same time with himself, then it is still the stronger evidence of that vast
respect which was used, by the Custom of those days, to be paid to the same
Primogeniture in others, whose birth was at a greater distance from the Younger
Brothers, because in them the reason of this preferment of the Firstborn
before the Younger Children, was much more strong than it can be in Twins, who
are born in a manner together. Which reason is assigned by Jacob speaking of
his Eldest Son Reuben. Genesis 49. 3. Reuben thou art my Firstborn and the Deuteronomy.
21. 15, 16, 17. If a man have two Wives, one beloved and another hated -- and
if the firstborn Son be hers that was hated -- he may not make the Son of the
beloved firstborn -- but he shall acknowledge the Son of the hated for the
firstborn -- for he is the beginning of Strength, the Right of the firstborn
is his.
beginning of my Strength, the excellency of Dignity, and the excellency of
Power; he was therefore the excellency of Dignity, and the excellency of Power,
that is, he was to have excercised a Sovereign Rule and Dominion over his
younger Brethren (had he not forfeited this Right of his by uncovering the
Nakedness of his Father, in the enjoyment of his Concubine Bilhah) because he
was the beginning of his Strength, the Son of his Youth, the first, and the
most lively representation of his Father to the World. This Dominion of the
Elder over the Younger, is as ancient as the two first Brethren that ever came
into the World, and was expressly warranted by God himself. Genesis 4. 7. Unto thee
shall be his desire, and thou shall rule over him.


Now one great instance of that Subjection and Duty, which was paid by the
Younger to the Elder in those times was this, that in case the latter died
without Issue, his Widow might challenge the former, as her own and late
Husband's Servant, to perform the part and office of an Husband in his stead.
And that it was indeed nothing else but an acknowledgment of Servitude and
Subjection, will appear not only from the reluctance of Onan, of which I have
already spoken, but from the Stories of Sarah, Leah, and Rachel, all of them
Instances of the same nature, who finding themselves barren, appointed their
respective Handmaids Hagar, Zilpah, and Bilhah, to conceive by their Husbands
in their stead, all which Children so begotten, were accounted in the esteem of
those times Legitimate, and looked upon as inheriting not in right of the
Handmaids, who were their real and proper, but of their Mistresses the adoptive
and reputed Mothers, whose Children in the interpretation of Law they were
accounted. Genesis 16. 2. Behold now, the Lord has restrained me from bearing: I
pray thee go in unto my Maid, it may be that I may obtain Children by her, Genesis
30. 3. Behold my Maid Bilhah, go in unto her, and she shall bear upon my knees,
that I may have children by her.

Nay, so great a propriety did they conceive themselves to have in the Children
of their Handmaids, that if they had been never so truly and properly their own
they could not express a greater joy and satisfaction at it, and it was they,
not their real Mothers, who gave them their names. Genesis 30. 6. Rachel said, God
has judged me, and has heard also my Voice, and has given me a Son,
therefore called she his name Dan. So also v. 8. Rachel said with great
wrestlings have I wrestled with my Sister, and I have prevailed: and she called
his name Naphtali. Though both of these were truly and properly not hers, but
the Children of her Handmaid Bilhah.

Neither was Leah less fond of her Adoptive Children by her Handmaid Zilpah v.
11. And Leah said a Troop comes (70 (...), in a fortunate time) and she called
his name Gad. v. 13. And Leah said, happy am I, for the Daughters will call me
blessed, and she called his name Asher.

This is the meaning of that expression; She shall bear upon my Knees, Genesis 30.
13. with allusion to, as I conceive, and in imitation of the Stools mentioned
in Exodus 1, 16. When you do the office of a Midwife to the Hebrew Women, and
see them upon the Stools, if it be a Son, then you shall kill him: but if it be
a Daughter then she shall live. In the Hebrew it is hal haabuaim (70. (...))
the sense is the same in both, but not so accurate in the version of the
Seventy, for (...), is about to bring forth, but they could not yet make a
judgment, whether it was a Boy or Girl, nor consequently whether they should
kill the Infant or save it alive in pursuance of the instructions given them by
the Egyptian King. It would therefore be better to keep exactly to the Sense,
(...). And it shall be when they have brought forth. But though this be right
as to the sense, yet it is not Verbum verbo; which, though a fault in some
translations, is a Virtue in this. For Haabnaim is certainly a Noun, the He
emphaticum in the beginning and the Jod Mem which are the formative Letters of
the Plural Number, or by adding a Kametz to them, if the present punctation be
true, of the Dual, are plain demonstrations of this, that it is a Noun and
cannot possibly be a Verb. It must therefore of necessity be that when it is
said, when the women shall be upon the haabnaim, that by that word, some
Instrument or Utensil, made use of in the Midwifery of those times must be
understood, and indeed it is not likely to have been any thing else but a Stool
of parturition, where the Woman in Labor was placed by the Midwife, which
answers most naturally to the signification of the Preposition hal (upon) which
is added to a word of the Dual Number, to show that it was a folding Stool,
such as are usually in the Isles of Churches, both for the more easy setting,
and for the more easy placing and removing. But we might judge with more
certainty of the goodness of this punctation if the Hexapla or Octapla of
Origin, which are unhappily lost, could be retreived. The Seventy by
translating it by (...). are thus far useful to us that they have pointed out
the Etymology of that Word, which is not from Eben, Lapis, but from Banah
aedificavit, with the addition of an Aleph, as in Aben for Ben. In Aben Ezra,
Aben Melech, Aben Tibbon; and from thence also though that be not so commonly
known, the Two Famous Arabian Physicians and Philosophers, Averroes and
Avicenna have their names.

The same word occurs likewise Jer. 18. 3. and with the same Praeposition, hal
haabnaim. But there the Seventy have rendered it (...), from Eben Lapis, though
in truth Eben it self is from Banah too, because of the use of such Materials
in buildding. And so is Boun, intellexit, because of the progression of all
Human Sciences, from one Proposition to another, in the nature of a Foundation,
with sundry Superstructures upon it, and so Abnaim in the place of Exodus, is
from Ben, Filius, or which is all one, from Banah aedificavit, because
Generation or Posterity is a kind of Super-structure upon former Ages, and
because of the use of the word Banah in matters of this kind. As Genesis 16. 2.
That I may obtain Children by her. In the Hebrew it is, Oolai Ibaneh Mimennah.
Perhaps I shall be built up by her. And so also Genesis 30. 3. and Ruth the 4th.
11th. which is to this day a part of the Jewish Litany in all their Marriages.
The Lord make the Woman that is come into thy house, like Rachel and like Leah,
which two did build the House of Israel.

Where you see likewise that there is no mention made at all of the two
Handmaids Bilhah and Zilpah. Notwithstanding they were the natural and proper
mothers, of Dan, Naphtali, Gad and Asher, but the whole business of building up
the House of Israel is ascribed perfectly to Rachel and Leah, the reason is
because the others did but supply their places and conceive in their stead, and
because in such cases they were used to bring forth upon the Knees of their
Mistresses, which did in this case supply the Office of those Maieutical Stools
mentioned Exodus 1. 16, so as the real Mother sitting upon the Lap of the
Adoptive, they were like two Persons united into one, and whatsoever the one
did or suffered at that time, became by this means to be ascribed to the other.

Now nothing is more certain than that the reason of this last Custom was
founded in the servitude and entire subjection of the Handmaid to her Mistress.
And it is already proved that the respect or relation which a younger Brother
by the custom and usage of those times bore to the Elder was the same, it is
clear therefore the actions being in both Instances of the same Nature, and the
Persons of the same quality, that what was done on both sides, was for the same
reason, which was the thing to be proved.

Having thus discovered the Antiquity of this usage, and the reason of it, and
given an Instance of a Case in which it seems always to have been dispensed
with. I will now take Mr. Seldom and the Rabbis whom he follows, to task, not
so much out of a vainglorious humor, to triumph over the mistakes or
misapprehensions of so Learned and so deservedly Famous a Person, as out of
love to Truth, which we should all prefer above the greatest names, and indeed
let a man's Wit, or Judgment, or Industry, be what it will, if he be but guilty
of that one mistake of giving himself up to the Conduct of the Rabbis, that it
self will involve him in a Thousand more, for when all is done, when all their
Advocates have said their best for them, they are but good Guessers no more
than we, when they appear at the greatest advantage; but for the most part they
do but father their own mistakes and blunders upon Antiquity, and discover
almost an equal degree of Impudence and Ignorance together.

The first mistake which I shall take notice of in this affair is this: It is
said Deuteronomy. 25. 6. And it shall be that the firstborn which she bears, shall
succeed in the name of his Brother which is dead, that his name be not put out
of Israel. Where Mr. Seldom moved only by the Authority of the Rabbis will
needs have it, that by the firstborn, not he that is first begotten and
brought forth in this Leviratical Wedlock, but the Levir himself, or the next
Brother to the deceased is to be understood, and that by those words, which she
bears, not the Wife but the Mother of the deceased is meant, which is so
wretched a Violence done to the most natural and easy sense of the words,
which is this, that the firstborn in this Vicarious Wedlock shall succeed in
the name, that is, the Inheritance of the deceased, that I wonder very much how
he could ever persuade himself to think this Opinion had so much as a bare
possibility of truth, unless he thought the true and proper construction of the
Sentence as it lies now in the Bible, was of less Authority than this distorted
exposition of the Rabbis.

Besides, the second Brother, though he be the Eldest Survivor upon the death
of the first, yet he can never be the Firstborn, it will be ever true, whether
his Elder Brother be alive or dead, that there was one born before him, and it
will not only be improper, but always false to call him the Firstborn, unless
it be in an Elliptical way, meaning the Firstborn of those that are alive; but
what an obscure unintelligible way of expression is this? Or how would it be
possible for men to understand one another, if they should always talk at this
rate? If this way of interpretation be once admitted, the Jesuits may go to
School to the Rabbis to learn how to aequivocate, and may defend the Doctrine
of mental Reservation, as being the very Style and Language of the Scriptures.

Again, And it shall be the Firstborn which she bears. How can that be
understood of the Mother of the deceased, of whom there is no mention before?
Or is not this to make a Relative without an Antecedent, which if it be once
admitted, it will introduce an Universal Confusion into all manner of Speech,
so that no man will be able to understand another. (...). Here if the Question
be asked, (...), etc. the answer will be (...). And if so, then it is manifest
that (...) must be understood of the Son of the Levir, not of himself, and by
consequence the (...) must be explained of the Wife of the deceased. And with
the 70 O^kelos agrees; and erit primogenitus quem genuerit, which words cannot
possibly be understood of the Husband himself, but of his Eldest Son.

This is the first mistake. The second is this:

He plainly favors that conceit of Josephus and some later Jews, who interpret
that place. And it shall be that the Firstborn which she bears, shall
succeed in the name of the Brother which is dead, that his name be not put out
of Israel. As if the adoptive Child, were to be of the same name with his
Imputative, that is to say the deceased Brother of his real Father. So as if
his name were Jose, the Child's must also be Jose, and if John the Child's was
to have been called John. But what if it proved a Girl? What then? Must it
still be Jose or John? What can be more ridiculous than this? Besides, why
should the Adoptive Offspring bear the same name, when yet it was scarce ever
known that the Real one ever did? Examine the whole Bible and you will scarce
find one Instance where Father and Son were of the same name; And if his name
must perish out of Israel without a Son to inherit it, then for ought I can
perceive it would at this rate be more eligible to have an Adoptive than a Real
Son, because the one by Custom did continue their names to Posterity which the
other did not. The Adoptive Son was intended to supply the place and to be in
stead of a real one, and since the real one did very rarely, if ever go by the
same name with his Father, what can be more unreasonable than to believe the
adoptive should be obliged to do it. Neither is this only contrary to reason
but to experience too, for the eldest Son of Ruth by Boaz in the stead of
Mahlon, was not called Mahlon but Obed, as has been observed already.

But here it is pretended that the Marriage of Boaz and Ruth, is a perfectly
different thing, from that of the Brother to the Brother's Wife, and depends
upon another Constitution of the Mosaic Law, of the truth of which Mr. Seldom
was so thoroughly De success. in bon. defunct. c. 15.
persuaded, that he has employed an whole Chapter in defense of it; with what
success we are now going to see.

The Law upon which the Marriage of Boaz and Ruth depended is affirmed to be
Levit. 25. 25, etc. in these words. If thy Brother be waxen poor, and has sold
away some of his possession, and if any of his Kin come to redeem it, then
shall he redeem that which his Brother sold, and if the man have none to redeem
it, then let him count the years of the sale thereof, and restore the overplus
unto the man unto whom he sold it; that he may return unto his possession, but
if he be not able to restore it to him, then shall that which he sold remain in
the hand of him that bought it, until the year of Jubilee: And in the Jubilee
it shall go out, and he shall return unto his possession. This was the Law of
Redemptions among the Jews, in case of a Morgage upon their own, their Brethren
or their Kinsman's Land; and the reason why this is applied to the Case of Ruth
and Boaz, is because of the frequent occurring of the word redeeming in that
Story. v. 4. of that Chapter. If thou will redeem it, redeem it; but if thou will not redeem it, then tell me, that I may know: For there is none to redeem
it besides thee, and I am after thee. And he said I will redeem it.

Having thus recited the words as they lie in the place of Leviticus above
cited, which words are pretended to be the only ground of the Marriage betwixt
Ruth and Boaz. I will now impartially state the case, and show plainly how far
this Law was concerned in this Marriage and how far it was not.

Ruth 1. v. 1, 2. we have these words; Now it came to pass in the days when the
Judges ruled, that there was a famine in the Land, and a certain man of
Bethlehem Judah, went to sojourn in the Country of Moab, he and his Wife and
his two Sons, and the name of the Man was Elimelech, and the name of his Wife
Naomi, and the name of the two Sons Mahlon and Chilion, Ephrathites of
Bethlehem Judah: And they came into the Country of Moab and continued there.

An expensive continuance it was to be sure, when they were forced to live
wholly upon the Personal Estate, what Money they had or could get together,
while the real one lay wast and would not yield any thing at all. Besides that,
there being so heavy a Famine in the Land of Canaan it is not to be supposed,
but that the same causes which had wrought this scarcity in Judaea did more or
less prevail in Moab also, as being a bordering Country, as when the Seven
years Famine was in Egypt, it raged no less in the neighboring Countries at
the same time; Provisions must therefore be very dear, and they as being
Strangers, were probably more hardly used than the Natives, and besides were
continually subject to the Violence and Injustice of a Nation who had
sufficient reason to be no friends to the Jews.

How long this famine lasted we cannot tell, but the Egyptian famine is an
example that such Judgments in those Countries, were sometimes of a very long
continuance, and if you suppose it to have fallen upon the year before the
Sabbatical as it might well enough do, when the whole Land of Israel was at
rest from all manner of Husbandry and Tillage, it must be of three years
continuance at least, that is to say, that year on which it began, the
Sabbatical year wherein the Land rested from Tillage, and the year following
till the time of Harvest, for it is impossible both to sow and reap-together.

Well, in process of time Elimelech he dies, and at his death divides his
estate into three parts, one part of it he gives to Naomi, not wholly, for that
it does not seem to have been in his power to do, by the Law of Inheritances,
Numb. 27. but only till the year of Jubilee, or perhaps by way of Jointure
during her life; the rest he divided, after what manner is not said, neither
can we tell which was the eldest (for one is named first, Ruth 1. 5. the other,
Ruth 4th, and the 9th.) between Mahlon and Chilion, his two sons, who, the
famine being not yet ended, the better to secure what they had, or perhaps to
acquire more for their support married each of them to a Moabitish Woman, Ruth
1. 4. but did not cohabit long with them, before they dyed also as their Father
Elimelech had done before them. By which means it came to pass, that the whole
estate, which seems to have been passed over and consigned to Naomi, in case
the two Brothers dyed without Issue, was now actually in her possession, and
this is the meaning of that appeal of Boaz to the Elders. Ruth 4. 9. And Boaz
said unto the Elders and to all the People, ye are Witnesses this day, that I
have bought all that was Elimelech's, i. e. Naomi's proper share, and all that
was Chilion's and Mahlon' s of the hand of Naomi. From whence it will be easy
to discern how far the Law in Leviticus concerning the redemption of the poor
Brother's Inheritance was concerned. Elimelech's estate upon the decease of
himself and his two Sons was now wholly in the Possession of Naomi, either till
the year of Jubilee, or for the term of her natural life, for the reasons
already mentioned; this the next of Kin, to whom the Inheritance after the
expiration of this term would of it self devolve, might redeem at his pleasure
to reunite it to the Inheritance of his Family, and that either by allowing so
much as a valuable consideration for the Interest of her life in it, or by
setting an equal value upon her Right in the time to come from the date of the
purchase to the year of Jubilee, be it more or less, according to the manner
prescribed in that Chapter of Leviticus; if he would not redeem it then the
next of Kin might do the same, yet so as he was only to enjoy it till the said
year of Jubilee, and then it must of course fall to the share of the first
refuser, as being nearest of Kin, according to the Mosaic Platform of
Successions.

This was Boaz his case, who could not redeem the Inheritance of Elimelech,
till he that was nearest of Kin had first refused, Ruth. 3. 12, 13. Now it is
true that I am thy near Kinsman, howbeit there is a Kinsman nearer than I,
tarry this night and it shall be in the Morning, that if he will perform unto
thee the part of a Kinsman, well, let him do the Kinsmans part, but if he will
not do the part of a Kinsman to thee, then I will do the part of a Kinsman to
thee, as the Lord lives. Again Chap. 4. v. 3, 4. And he said unto the Kinsman
Naomi that is come again out of the Country of Moab, sells a parcel of Land,
which was our Brother Elimelech's, and I thought to advertise thee, saying, buy
it before the Inhabitants, and before the Elders of my People, if thou will
redeem it, redeem it, but if thou will not redeem it, then tell me that I may
know: For there is none to redeem it besides thee (that is, you are by Law to
have the first refusal) and I am after thee, as much as to say, and the next
refusal is mine.

But now whereas I said that the Estate of Elimelech was bequeathed to Naomi
till the year of Jubilee, or during her Life, the latter of these seems to me
the more probable of the two, in that it is but reasonable, the Widow should be
always considered out of the fortune of the deceased, for the term of her own
Natural and proper Life, which in many cases would in all rational probability
extend farther than the next year of Jubilee, and was to be sure the most
certain way to make a provision for her, neither could this be looked upon as
any Alienation, when the Estate after her decease was to return into its proper
channel; besides, that Naomi for ought we know might be an Heiress, which was
the case of the Daughters of Zelophehad, Numb. 27. and 36. and of the Daughters
of Sheshan 1 Chronicles. 2. 34. of Eleazar, 1 Chronicles. 23. 22. and as I shall make it
very probable in its due place, of Achsah the Daughter of Caleb, Josh. 15. 16,
17. and Jud. 1. 13, 14, 15. in which case it would be very unreasonable they
should be left destitute themselves, who had brought an accession of power and
riches unto that part of their family unto which they were matched.

Who they were that in cases of this nature had a right of redemption, we find
particularly set down in the Chapter of Leviticus so often mentioned, in the
case of the poor Brother who had sold himself to the stranger, for, I suppose,
the redemption of Inheritances is but one part of that Law in which the
redemption of persons is included, and that the right of redeeming, is in both
cases invested in the same persons; the words of the Law are these, Levit. 2.
47, 48, 49. If a sojourner or stranger wax rich by thee, and thy Brother that
dwells by him wax poor, and sell himself unto the stranger or sojourner by
thee, or to the stock of the strangers family: After that he is sold, he may be
redeemed again; one of his Brethren may redeem him: Either his Uncle or his
Uncles Son may redeem him, or any that is nigh of Kin unto him of his family,
may redeem him; or if he be able, he may redeem himself: It is certain that the
Jewish commentators are of Opinion, that the same persons had a right of
redemption, in the case of Inheritances as well as this, in that some of them,
not by any tradition, but by the authority of this text, have determined Boaz
to be Uncle to Mahlon the deceased Husband of Ruth, and others would have him
be his Cousin German.

But I am rather for the latter of these, because for the Uncle to Marry the
Niece which is the same thing with the Nephews Wife, is forbidden by parity of
reason at least, Levit. 18. 14. Neither is there any one instance to be found,
after the delivery of the Law where it was ever dispensed with, but now there
are instances in the Daughters of Zelophehad and of Eleazar, wherein the
Marriage of Cousin Germans, (and a Cousin Germans Wife is the same thing) has
been dispensed with; it is therefore much safer to conclude on that side, which
has precedents to favor it, than on that which has none; besides that the
nearness of Kin being in a manner the same, between two Cousin Germans, and an
Uncle Marrying with his Niece yet there is an equality in the former, which is
one predisposition to Marriage, which in the other there is not, but instead of
that he is to his Neice, as has been said Parentis loco; which bar to
Matrimony has always been so sacred not only in the Mosaic but also the Roman
Law, that it has never been broken down without the disgrace and infamy of
those that gave the first example of so fowl a crime.

But that which will put the matter out of all controversy it this, that the
reason of dispensations in Marriages of this nature, being founded in that
Servitude or Subjection, which the Younger ows to the Elder, it is manifest
that a Cousin German, that is, the Son of a Younger Brother, might properly
enough marry the relict of him who was the Son of the Elder; he does in this
perform a service to his Uncle, the Father of the deceased who was by
interpretation of Law, a kind of Father to him, as well as the other, but the
Uncle himself being to the Niece in the stead of a Parent, it being impossible
that Superiority and Subjection can consist together in the same person, with
respect to the same, and so the reason of the dispensation ceasing, the
dispensation its self must of Necessity cease together with it. But yet after
all I will not be too positive in this case, which seems to be something
extraordinary, if the Uncle would decedere de suo jure, if he would submit
himself to his deceased Nephew, whose person he did in this case sustain, and
equal himself in a manner to his Niece, to whom he is by Law and by Nature in
the stead of a Parent, volenti non fit injuria. Therefore I leave this business
as I found it, without determining any thing either way.

But either way it is a very great mistake of Mr. Seldom and those of the
Jewish Writers whom he follows, to think that this match was not made in
pursuance of that Law of Deuteronomy. 25. by which the Brother, was to raise up Seed
to the deceased Brother, and to propagate his name and memory in his stead.

The business in short is thus, Naomi had passed over her Title to the
Inheritance of Elimelech to her Daughter-in-Law Ruth, upon condition that he of
the Kindred, who would accept of her Daughter for his Wife, should have the
Inheritance together with her; upon this Ruth challenges Boaz for her Husband,
which challenge he did not refuse, but only said there was one nearer of Kin
than he, being as I conceive his Elder Brother, who was in this case always to
have the first refusal, and she must first apply her self unto him, it being
not in his power to accept of what she proposed, till the other had refused to
do it; it is therefore agreed that in the presence of the Elders and the
People, she shall make her application to him: Naomi, says Boaz, in behalf of
Ruth, sells a parcel of Land which was our Brother Elimelech's, you are the
first person who by our Law have a right of redeeming it, say therefore whether
you will redeem it or no: I will said he, but did not think at the same time
that he was to purchase a Wife into the bargain, wherefore being better
informed of the true state of things, he relinquishes his right to Boaz, who
immediately takes Ruth to Wife in the presence of the whole Assembly to raise
up the name of the dead upon his Inheritance.

Now if he had a right of redeeming the Inheritance and yet not take the Woman
for his Wife, then the former impediment would still remain, there being no
reason why he should relinquish his right, either to Boaz or any other
pretender; but if he had not, then it is manifest that the connection of these
two, the Land and the Woman together, so as he must of necessity take both or
neither, could not depend upon any other Law, than that of the Brother's
raising up Seed to the Brother.

For it is another very gross Error of these Writers, when they distinguish
with so much nicety as they do, betwixt what they call the Jibboum and the
Geulah, That is, the performing the Husbands part and the redemption of the
Inheritance; for though they be two pretty names, and it may perhaps be a
thousand pitties that they do not signify two pretty things, yet the mischief
of it is they are both of them the same, or if there be any difference it is
only that the one is more comprehensive than the other, so as in every Jibboum
there is a Geulah, though in every Geulah, there be not a Jibboum, by the same
rule in Logic, that every Pippin is an Apple, though every Apple be not a
Pippin. For the design expressed in the Law why the Brother was to Marry the
Brothers Wife, was to raise up the name of the dead upon his Inheritance,
therefore where there was no Inheritance, neither was there any Jibboum, and
where there was an Inheritance there must be a Geulah. These things are so very
plain, that they need no confirmation, they carry their own evidence in
themselves.

But they tell us none had right to Marry the Widow of an Husband deceased
without Issue, but the next Brother to the same Husband, and upon his refusal
the next to him, and so on; but this is only said, not proved. It is true
indeed that what the Rabbis call Jibboum or Leviratus, if you argue too nicely
from the signification of a word which is of their own making, belonged only in
propriety of speech to the Brother of the deceased; but as for all that is
meant by it, and all that was the design of this Law, which was the performing
of the Husbands part to the Widow of the deceased, this may be, and was
Actually by the practice of the Jewish Nation, extended farther.

For look you, the words of the Law are these, her Husbands Brother shall go in
unto her. This the Rabbis, to appeal to themselves, apply to the Eldest of the
surviving Brethren if there were more of them, and it was very true that he was
first to be applied to, but then if he refused, application was to be made to
the second and third, and so on. And that this was the order in which they were
taken is evident from the story of Er, Onan and Shelah already so much insisted
upon, and from the History of the seven Brethren all of them successively
Married to the same Woman, in the Gospel; but what if all the immediate
Brethren refused, as they might do if they pleased? shall the man's name perish
for want of an adoptive Heir rather than the next of Kin shall be addressed to,
to perform the Husbands part?

The 70 Interpreters who understood these matters better than either Mr. Seldom
or any of those Authors, whom he is pleased to follow in this matter, were not
of his mind; their words are these: (...), v. 4. It is manifest therefore, it
was enough if he were (...), nigh of Kin, which the Cousin German must not be
denied to be, and therefore their Translating the word Jabem (...), which might
have been Translated more compendiously by (...), is sufficient to prove that
by that word (...) they did not intend to confine themselves to the strict
signification of Jabem, but to expound it by the practice of the Jewish Church,
which extended to all that were near of Kin to the deceased, who in the Hebrew
Idiom are frequently called Achim i. e. (...), Brethren. The same is likewise
proved from their general way of rendering the verb Jibbem, without restraining
it in their version to the Brother of the deceased, Genesis 38. 8. Bo el esheth
achika vejabbem Otha 70. (...). That is, duc eam uxorem, the vulgar Latin, and
Sociare illi, and our Translation. Go in unto thy Brothers Wife and Marry her.
Again Deuteronomy. 25. 5. Lechachah lo leishah vejibmah, 70. (...), he shall take her
for his Wife and shall cohabit with her, whereas if they would have rendered it
by a word, restraining it wholly to the Brother of the deceased, they must
instead of (...), and (...), which they use else where, have used some such
words as these, (...), (...) or such like. Again, Ruth 4. 5. Then said Boaz,
what day thou buyest the Field of the hand of Naomi, thou must buy it also of
Ruth the Moabitess, the Wife of the dead, to raise up the name of the dead upon
his Inheritance. And v. 10. Moreover Ruth the Moabitess, the Wife of Mahlon,
have I purchased to be my Wife, to raise up the name of the dead upon his
Inheritance, that the name of the dead be not cut off from among his Brethren,
and from the gate of his place. Which answers exactly to that of Deuteronomy. 25. 6.
And it shall be that the Firstborn, which she bears, shall succeed in the
name of his Brother which is dead, that his name be not put out of Israel, it
is therefore unquestionable that the Marriage of Ruth and Boaz, being between
so near Kins-folk, for the same reason, which is assigned of the Brothers
Marrying the Brothers Wife Deuteronomy. 25. 5. did depend likewise upon the same Law,
and to say otherwise, is to say any thing without regard either to truth or
probability.

Solomon Jarchi thinks to compound the business thus, as he is cited by Seldom
de successionibus p. 106. Chiatta legaol Nachalath Ishi: He makes Ruth speak to
Boaz in this manner, you are to redeem the Inheritance of my Husband, etc. And
then, I and my Mother in Law are compelled to sell our Inheritance; it is
therefore incumbent upon you to buy it, as being next of Kin, and with the
Inheritance you must take me too, that so the name of the deceased may be
remembered because of his Inheritance, so that when ever I come upon the Lands
which he possessed, men may say this was the Wife of Mahlon. And so they might
whether she had Married any Body or no, after the decease of her Husband, so
that it is manifest this is but a mere shift, and cannot be the meaning of
raising up the name of the dead upon his Inheritance; but it is still for all
this of the same meaning with that of Deuteronomy. that his name be not put out of
Israel, and with a like expression of the Daughters of Zelophehad Number. 27. v.
3, 4. Our Father dyed in the Wilderness, and he was not in the company of them
that gathered themselves together against the Lord, etc. why should the name of
our Father be done away from among his family, because he has no Son; give
unto us therefore a possession among the Brethren of our Father.

Where it is plain that a name's being done way from a Family, and a man's not
leaving a possession to some Body to inherit in his right, so as it was
necessary the memory of his name should be continued for the asserting of the
Title, are exactly the same thing. For Women could not continue the memory of
their Parents; in all the old Testament you scarce ever find them inserted in
the Genealogies, they have their name from oblivion, as men have theirs from
remembrance, because they carry on and continue the Pedigree of their
Forefathers, but the Women are reckoned only as a part of their Husbands, and
their Children as the Posterity not of theirs, but of their Husbands Fathers,
and are distinguished from the Posterity of their own; to which we have a
manifest allusion Psalm 45. 16. Instead of thy Fathers thou shall have
Children, whom thou may make Princes in all Lands. It was necessary therefore
that to propagate the memory of the Father by the Daughters when he had no Male
Issue, they should be considered as Heiresses, and the estate descending from
them to their Posterity in right of their Father; his name and memory was by
this means continued, which otherwise would have perished as effectually as if
he had had no Children at all. From all which it is plain, that for a man's name
not to be put out of Israel, not to be done away from among his Family, and to
rise up upon his Inheritance are all of them the same thing.

Lastly, To put the matter yet farther out of question, Ruth 3. 13. the
redemption of the Inheritance, and the Marriage of the Woman to whom in right
of her Husband it belonged, as being intimately connected with one another, are
both of them expressed by the same word of redeeming, if he will redeem thee,
let him redeem thee; both in the original Hebrew and in the Greek, we render
it, if he will perform unto thee the part of a Kinsman, well, let him do the
Kinsmans part, and the Vulgar Latin singularly well, si te voluerit
propinquitatis jure retinere, been res acta est, si autem ille noluerit, ego te
absque ulla dubitatione suscipiam. Where it is certain that the Verb Gaal in
this place, is exactly the same with Jibbem in Deuteronomy, though the first be
of a more extensive signification than the latter, as likewise what our
Interpreters do here call performing the Kinsmans part, is there by them Styled
performing the Husbands part.

All which is mightily corroborated by the Testimony of Josephus, Antiq. L. 5.
XI. who telling this very story, mentions together with it the loosing of the
shoe and spitting in the face of the refuser in pursuance of the Law made in
that behalf, Deuteronomy. 25. 9. (...), says he, (...) Mr. Seldom reads rightly after
Drusius (...)) (...), that is, Boaz appealing to the Assembly of the Elders,
bad them take notice of the refusal of the nearest Kinsman, and then instructed
Ruth in pursuance of the Law of Moses, to take off his Shoe and spit in his
Face; which done he immediately Married her in the presence of them all.

But Mr. Seldom will not allow this to be any thing better than a mistake of
Josephus, Confusio, says he, planissime binarum legum, quarum altera de
haereditate alienata, seu emptores invitante redimenda, altera de fratria
ducenda est. But I think I have made it pretty plain already that it is Mr.
Seldom himself is in the mistake, not Josephus, and I cannot but observe that
it is that Learned Gentleman's misfortune to side with Josephus only in his
Errors, as when he tells us the adoptive Child was to be of the same name with
his imputative Father, but when he speaks reason, as he does certainly in this
case, to oppose him.

For Josephus does not deliver this out of any Authentic record, as is
apparent by this, that we have already found him in several mistakes, but it is
only his own opinion, or perhaps the sense of the Learned men of his time, that
this place was to be referred to the Law of the Leviratus, and so he added the
description of this Ceremony de suo, as being a part of that Law, and which he
thought was never omitted, in case the person to whom the challenge was made,
refused to accept it, only this indeed is much to be wondered at, as a very
great inconsistency in Josephus, that he should acknowledge the Marriage of
Boaz and Ruth, to have been made in consequence and pursuance of that Law of
Moses, by which the Brother was to propagate the name and memory of the
Brother, and yet understand that expression, that his name be not put out of
Israel, as if the Child was to be of the same name, with his adoptive Father,
when as it is clear that the Son of Ruth by Boaz was not called Mahlon but
Obed, which name is from habad, servivit, and was given him, as I conceive, for
this reason, to denote that he was a Servant to Mahlon, to continue his name
upon his Inheritance, and propagate his memory by a new succession of
descendants from his Loins, to after ages, which is still a further
confirmation of what I have endeavored to prove.

But it may be still objected, that Ruth being a stranger, a Moabitish Woman,
neither Boaz nor any other Jew could Marry her, it being so far from being
agreeable to any Law, that it was expressly contrary to the Law of Moses Deuteronomy.
7. 3. neither shall thou make Marriages with them: thy Daughter thou shall not
give unto his Son, nor his Daughter shall thou take unto thy Son. But this, if
it had been a good objection, might have been urged by him that was nearer of
Kin to the Family of Elimelech than Boaz was, and since it was not, we have
more reason to conclude, that she was then proselyted and naturalized and
become as one of the Jews themselves, which it is certain she did passionately
desire, Ruth. 1. 16. And Ruth said, entreat me not to leave thee, or to return
from following thee: for whither thou go I will go, and where thou lodgest I
will lodge, thy people shall be my people, and thy God shall be my God.

And in this case there was no reason why he might not take her to his Wife,
especially if you consider that such Marriages were allowed, after some
Ceremonies there mentioned, in the case of a Captive, of whom yet it was not
required that she should be so much as a Proselyte to the Religion of the Jews,
Deuteronomy. 21. v. 10, 11, 12, 13, 14. the same was the case of Jarha the Egyptian
Servant, 1 Chronicles. 2. 34, 35. who yet not withstanding was Married to an
Heiress, although it be the express Law of God by Moses, that the Inheritance
should be so far from going into the hand of a forreigner, that it was not to
remove so much as from Tribe to Tribe, nor if it could be avoided, out of one
Family of the same Tribe into another, and though it were equally forbidden to
Marry a Servant as a Stranger, so that here was a double incapacity, and yet
this was it seems no hindrance to the Marriage; neither is the thing mentioned
as irregular, or taken notice of with the least degree of reprehension: We may
therefore very probably conclude, that he was first manumitted or set free,
then adopted, not by Sheshan the Father of the Damsel, for this could not be,
for no man can adopt a Nephew or Niece, but only a Son or Daughter, and this
would be for Sister and Brother to match together, but he was adopted by the
Brother or Uncle of Sheshan, and so Married to his Daughter in the Nature of
one that was nearest of Kin to her, as in the Instance of the Daughters of
Zelophehad and Eleazar.

Further, That it was Josephus his deliberate opinion, that the Marriage
between Boaz and Ruth was in pursuance of the Leviratical or rather the
anchisteutical sanction in Deuteronomy, and that they were not words spoken
aliud agendo and by chance, when he tells us of Ruths taking off her Kinsmans
Shoe, and Spitting in his Face, will appear plainly from other words in the
same paragraph, importing and inculcating the same thing, (...).

But what are these Laws which he speaks of so often: are they not the Laws of
the Leviratus or the (...)? search all the Law of Moses from one end to the
other, and you will find no other Law to which this can refer. It is manifest
therefore that Josephus has not only plainly, but with some seeming solicitude
delivered his opinion, that the Marriage of Ruth and Boaz was in pursuance of
that Law, and I think it is equally clear from all that has been said, that he
does not confound two Laws together as Mr. Seldom has represented him to have
done.

Before I leave this, I will observe that Josephus though he have made some
unwarrantable additions of his own, of which I have carefully taken notice, yet
that he took his relation out of that very Book of Ruth which is now received
among us, and out of those very Greek Interpreters which are now in use, which
I will show plainly from two things. First he tells you, though falsely, that he
who was nearer of Kin than Boaz to Elimelech, was in actual possession of the
Inheritance (...); and then it follows, (...), etc. now this (...) was the Law
of redemption, or that Law which permitted the next of Kin to Marry the Wife of
the deceased and possess himself of the Inheritance into the bargain; for which
reason Boaz, who is by the Hebrew called Goel, or the redeemer, is all along by
the Greek Interpreters called (...) or the near Kinsman, and their translation
of c. 4. v. 6. is very remarkable; the words of the Hebrew are these, Vajomer
Hagoel Lo oucal Ligeol li, phen Ashchith eth Nachalathi, Geal atta eth
Geulathi, chi lo oucal legeol.

In the Greek these.

(...). The Second thing by which this appears is this, that he who is in the
Hebrew rightly called Elimelech, is by Josephus all along called Abimelech, and
this he had also out of the Greek Translation, though not out of that reading
of it which the Vatican preferrs; but the Alexandrine Ms. will both show you
that it is a corruption and by what degrees it proceeded to be what it is, for
Chapter 2. v. 4. that copy reads it, (...), and 4. v. 4. (...).

All this may be yet farther strengthened from the Law mentioned in the Book of
Numbers c. 35. concerning Chance-Medly or Unwilling Slaughter, in which case if
a man could first fly to One of the Six Cities of Refuge, and when his cause
came to an hearing it appeared that there was no evil intention nor any malice
forethought in him that had committed the fact, he was safe so long as he
continued within the Pomoeria of the said City, during the life of that High
Priest in whose Pontificate the thing was done, and after that he might repair
to his own home, and enjoy all the freedom of an innocent and guiltless Person,
but in case the Revenger of Blood should overtake him before he could get to
one of these Cities, or if after he had made his escape thither he should
afterward at any time within the time prefixed, be found any where without the
Bounds or Pomoeria of the said City, then it was lawful for the Revenger of
Blood to exact one life for another, and avenge the Death of the Deceased
Party, with that of him who did though never so unwillingly slay him. Now who was
this Revenger of Blood? Josephus tells you it was any of the Kindred. l. 4. c.
8. his words are these. (...). That is, Moses built Ten Cities, being parcel of
the Forty eight assigned to the Levites, of which Three were Sanctuarys, for
such as unwillingly had slain a Man. The time of their consinement to any of
the said places was during the life of that High Priest, in whose time such an
accident fell out. But after his decease, he was at liberty to return home, or
go whither he pleased in safety. But in the mean time, if he were taken without
the bounds of the said Sanctuary to which he was consigned, it was lawful for
any of the Kindred, and none else, to kill him.

Now if you ask what Authority Josephus has for this, the Answer will be that
he took this as he does every thing else from the Seventy Interpreters. For
that which we call in our Translation the Revenger of Blood, is in the Hebrew
Goel Hadam. And in the Seventy all along in Numbers, Deuteronomie, and Joshua,
it is (...), and (...). As out of them the Vulgar Latin renders it, propinquus,
cognatus, and proximus occifi, and with them Onkelos in his paraphrase upon the
Book of Numbers and Deuteronomie does exactly concur; the Hebrew Word, to
render it exactly, is as much as the Redeemer of Blood, and so it is taken by
Jonathan in his Targum upon Joshua, it is the same word used in the case of
Ruth and Boaz, and in the case of redeeming the Inheritance or the Person of
the poor Brother who had sold himself.

Since therefore the word in the Hebrew is the same, since the rendition of the
other Interpreters does all along restrain it to one of the Kindred of the
deceased Party, since the (...) and the (...) in the Seventy are the same, what
can be more manifest than that, as well in the Opinion of the Seventy
Interpreters, as of others, whose Authority because not so ancient, and because
derived only from them is of less Credit, the (...) or the degrees of Proximity
in respect of blood in all three cases, that is to say, in the redemption of
the Person of a Brother who had sold himself, or of the Inheritance of the same
Person, who being reduced to extreme Poverty was obliged to sell it, and in the
avenging the blood of him who was unwillingly slain, were all of them the same,
being either the Brother, or the Uncle, or the Uncle's Son, or any that was
nigh of Kin to the Family of the Person concerned. Levit. 25. 48, 49. Neither
does it appear only from the Identity or Sameness of the word in the Hebrew in
all these cases, and from the agreement of the Seventy in their Version in
every one of the cases now insisted upon, that the word Goel which we render
the Revenger, is to be understood in this last instance as well as in the
other, of somebody that was nigh of Kin, but it is no less evident from the
express words of the Original Text it self. Deuteronomy. 19. 5, 6. He shall fly unto
One of those Cities and live, lest the Avenger of Blood pursue the Slayer,
while his heart is hot, and overtake him, because the way is long, and slay
him, whereas he was not worthy of death, insomuch as he hated him not in time
past. Now in the first place it is a very wild piece of extravagance to
suppose, that a man having killed another by a perfect chance, should for this
reason lie exposed to the fury of every man who had the power or opportunity to
revenge it, without any process or formality of Law, that it might be seen
first whether he deserved such punishment or no. In the second place there was
no reason why every man's heart should be hot, or swelled with a tumultuous
appetite of revenge, as fast as any other, whom perhaps they never knew or
heard of before, should come to an untimely death, it seems therefore most
reasonable to confine it only to the relations or friends of the party
deceased, who may well enough be supposed, especially those that are so very
near, to have had the greatest friendship for him, and the deepest share in
that loss which is sustained by his death. Thirdly, We must not Imagine that
the Law did countenance revenges of this Nature, but it did only pardon the
infirmity of men, whose heart was hot, i. e. overpowered with an excess of
grief and a masterless desire of revenge, which passionate concern may well
enough be supposed to enter into the breast of a Brother, Uncle, or Uncles Son,
or any that is near of Kin, especially if to the nearness of Consanguinity, a
strict friendship and a necessary dependence be joined, but cannot reasonably
be pretended by any in his excuse, whose circumstances of Birth and Fortune are
at a farther distance from the person slain.

The use which I make of these things is this, that all these three instances
do mutually confirm and strengthen one another; the right of redeeming the
person of the poor Brother, has been shown to belong only to the near Kinsman
by the express words of the Law its self, that is to say, to the Brother, or
Uncle, or Uncles Son, or any that is near of Kin, that is, at the least a
degree farther than this; the same is likewise agreed by all the Jewish
Interpreters, of the redemption of Inheritances, and is in it self very
reasonable to believe, it being mentioned in the very same Chapter with the
other, without any particular mention, who are the persons in whom the Right of
Redemption is legally invested, unless the persons who are specified in this
latter case, be understood (...) to belong to them both, besides that the case
of Ruth and Boaz, in which the redemption of Inheritances was no question
concerned, shows it without all controversy to be extended farther than to the
immediate Brother, though not further than to such as were near of Kin.

Lastly, The revenging the Death of him that was slain by chance, has been
shown to belong likewise to the very same persons, and that not only from the
sameness of the word (...) three cases, and from the (...) the Ancient
Interpreters, (...) ^xpress words of the Law and from the reason of the thing
it self.

If then whoever redeemed the person of a Brother that had sold himself, might
also avenge his blood, in case he were slain by chance, and might redeem his
Inheritance when through poverty or want it was encumbred or alienated from
him; and if the reason of that Vicarious Wedlock which is usually, but falsely
confined to the Brother of the deceased, was for the redemption of the
Inheritance, and to hinder it from going to any other Tribe, or as nigh as
might be into another House, then it follows plainly, that whoever might redeem
the Inheritance might Lawfully Marry the Wife of the deceased, which had no
other end but this; which was the thing to be proved.

And now if it be asked why in the Law of Deuteronomy, the Jabem or deceased
Husbands Brother is only mentioned, notwithstanding so many of the Kindred
might Marry to the Widow, I answer it was for these three reasons, First,
Because the first refusal of the Widow and of the Inheritance was his.
Secondly, Because he was under the strictest obligation to propagate the name
and memory of his deceased Brother in the nature of his Servant, whereas though
the other relations might if they pleased, do it upon the refusal of the
Brethren, yet not standing in the same relation of servants to the deceased,
they were not as I conceive under the same obligation. Lastly, Denominatio
sumitur a part potiori, because it did actually so come to pass for the most
part, that one of the surviving Brethren did accept of the Challenge made by
the Woman in behalf of her deceased Husband, and there was good reason why he
should, if he were not Married before, because by this means there was, as I
have said, one Child provided for, and that very plentifully, for there was a
double portion in the case, which belonged of right to the Elder Brother, Deuteronomy.
21. 17. and it is not improbable that he received likewise into the bargain
this farther advantage, that during his own life he had the entire management
and disposal of this estate, for the support of himself, and for the benefit of
all his Family, though at his death he must leave it as he found it, and could
not cut off the Entail from the Eldest Son of this imputative or adoptive Bed.

This might, for ought we know, be the reason why the Marriage of the Brother
to the Brothers Wife, was so severely forbidden by several Imperial Laws, both
in the Corpus Juris Civilis of Justinian and in the Theodosian Code, which
practice might perhaps creep, though not for the same reason of raising up the
name of the dead upon his Inheritance, out of Judea into the Empire, but if any
man had rather think that this was an effect only of that Libertinisme, and
Licentiousness, to which men are but too subject of themselves, I am so far
from contending, that perhaps I shall be more inclinable to be of his opinion;
but it is certain that this practice, so far as it was used among the
Egyptians, was borrowed from the Jews, or perhaps from those Elder times from
whom the Jews themselves received it, which may be plainly proved from the
words of that Imperial Rescript by which it was at length forbidden by the
Emperor Zeno; they are these:

IMP. ZENO. A. EPINICO. P. P. Licet quidam Aegyptiorum idcirco mortuorum
fratrum sibi conjuges matrimonio copulaverint, quod post illorum mortem
mansisse Virgins dicebantur, arbitrati scil. (quod certis legum conditoribus
placuit) cum corpore non convenerint, nuptias non videri re esse contractas;
and hujusmodi connubia tunc temporis celebrata, firmata sunt, tamen praesenti
lege sancimus, siquae hujusmodi nuptiae contractae fuerint, eas earumque
contractores, and ex his progenitos antiquarum legum tenori subjacere, nec ad
exemplum Aegyptiorum (de quibus supra dictum est) eas videri fuisse firmas, vel
esse firmandas.

Now that this custom among the Egyptians, was received from the Jewish, I
argue from these words, quod certis legum conditoribus placuit, which legum
conditores are Moses and those other Lawgivers of Earlier times, from whom he
himself received it; and though it be true that the Jews Married the Wife of
their deceased Brother, whether she were a Virgin or no, in case she had no
Male Issue, yet it is every whit as true, that there were those that would not
allow this Law to take place, but only in such, as had never been touched by
the deceased Husband; of which number there is no meaner a man than R. Shammai
himself, the head of one of the two famous Pharisaick Schools, as R. Hillel was
of the other, and the Samaritanes ad unum omnes; but I take this only upon the
Authority of Grotius, who upon Deuteronomy. 25. 5. has these words, Vxor defuncti,)
male Sammai and Samaritani hoc de desponsata tantum interpretantur, obstant tum
alia, tum Genesis 38. 6. and if this was the Opinion of the Samaritanes, who yet
certainly received their knowledge of this Law from the Jews, why might it not
be of the Egyptians too?

Again, if these matches were made by others up and down the Roman Empire, as
the same Edict does more than seem to insinuate, ad exemplum Aegyptiorum, then
it is true what I have already hinted, though I would not be very confident of
it, that the Romans themselves received it from the Jews Originally, for causa
causoe est causa causati.

Having thus proved that by the Firstborn, is meant not the Levir himself but
the Eldest Son of the Leviratical Bed, and that by raising up the name of the
dead, by hindering his name from being blotted out of Israel, is not meant that
the adoptive birth was to be of the same name with the deceased Father, having
shown that the Marriage of Ruth and Boaz was in consequence and pursuance of
that Law in Deuteronomy, whereby the Brother was authorized and obliged to
raise up Seed to his deceased Brother: Lastly, Having demonstrated that by the
Name, the Inheritance is meant, and given the reason why it is so, because it
was necessary the name of the dead should be continued for the asserting of the
Title; by the light of what has been said we may now discover two other Errors
of Mr. Seldom and his Rabbis; his words are these, p. 99, 100. Consensu
Magistrorum, posteri a fratre fratriam ducente suscepti omnes, pro vario jure
in aliis speciebus successionis, defuncti fratris haereditatem capiebant. In
which words there are no less than two very gross mistakes. The First is this,
that this opinion supposes all the Children begotten by the Levir or near
Kinsman upon his Brothers Wife were accounted and looked upon as the Children
of the party deceased; and the Second which is expressly asserted, that they
had all of them a share in the Inheritance, both of which must needs be false,
if by succeeding in the name of the dead, Deuteronomy. 25. 6. nothing else can be
meant, as I have proved, that nothing else is or can be, but only that, he was
to Inherit the Estate and Patrimony of the deceased, for this belonged only to
the Firstborn by the express words of that place, and it shall be that the
Firstborn which she Bears shall succeed in the name of his Brother which is
dead, that his name be not put out of Israel, now to attribute that in common
to all which the Scripture so plainly appropriates to one, what is it but to
prefer the Authority of a Rabbin before that of Moses the Lawgiver himself?
Only thus much I believe to have been very true, that in case the Firstborn
died, then the next Brother was to Inherit in the nature of an adoptive Son, as
the Eldest had done before him, and so on, if there was more Brothers, and the
Second died likewise as the First had done; because without this there would
not have been a sufficient provision made for that which was the declared end
and design of the Law, that his name be not put out of Israel, and because it
is certain if the Elder Brother, I speak now of the Imputative Father, died
without Issue, then the next was to succeed in his Bed and in his Inheritance,
as a kind of an adoptive Husband, or an Husband in his Brothers stead, as is
evident from the story of Er, Onan, and Shelah, and from the story or
supposition of the Seven Brethren in the Gospel.

Now if Brethren were used to succeed one another in their course, upon the
decease of the Eldest, the Second and so on, in the quality of adoptive and
vicarious Husbands, it seems to me to depend upon the same reason and right,
that the Children begotten in such a Leviratical or Anchisteutical Bed, should
also succeed one another upon the decease of the Elder in quality of adoptive
Sons, or Heirs to the First Husband deceased.

But then if there were no Sons, then the Daughter First Begotten was to
Inherit, for it is still a great mistake in Mr. Seldom and his Rabbis, when
they Interpret those words, If Brethren dwell together and one of them die, ou
ben even Lo, and has no Son, so laxly as if it were indifferent either to a Son
or Daughter, neither is it any argument for him in this case, that the 70 and
the Vulgar Latin, have rendered it in such general words, by (...) and by
liberi or that St. Matthew and St. Mark speaking of this very thing, use the
word (...) instead of (...). For general Words as they are in themselves
extended to a greater latitude of signification, so they may be restrained when
the nature of the Subject treated of does require it, as if a man who had no
Daughter, should use the word Liberi, or (...) speaking of his own Children, it
is manifest that in this case these words, however extensive their full
signification be, must be restrained to signify only the Male Issue, because
we suppose him to have no other. So (...) signifies properly only Sons or Male
Children; and yet when Josephus makes the nearest of Kin of the Family of
Elimelech say, (...), nothing hinders but that by (...) in this place either
Boys or Girls in common, or perhaps only Girls, if the man had none but such,
notwithstanding in propriety of speech it be restrained only to the Male Issue,
might be understood. From both which instances it is plain, that words may be
and are frequently extended beyond, or restrained within a much narrower
compass, nay, sometimes taken quite contrary to their natural signification, in
compliance with the Nature of the Subject about which the discourse is made;
and I appeal to any man, upon supposition that the (...), he that was nearest
of Kin to the Family of Elimelech, had only Girls for his Children, whether it
would not have been better Greek to say (...) than any thing else that could
have been said, for (...) in this sense is not Greek, and (...), or (...) or
(...), expresses the Sex, but does not so plainly represent the relation, as
his Children.

But at the worst it is but the Opinion of the Seventy and those that follow
them, that the word Ben in this place was indifferent to a Son or a Daughter,
but I will now show if that were their Opinion, that they are by no means
infallible, though their Authority as Interpreters be for the general the most
Sacred, and the least subject to exception of any.

For, First, I affirm that when it is said; Deuteronomy. 25. 6. And it shall be that
the Firstborn which she bears, etc. that this by the propriety of the Sacred
Language is to be understood only of the Male issue. As it is Exodus 11. 5. And
all the Firstborn in the Land of Egypt shall die, from the Firstborn of
Pharaoh that sits upon his Throne, even unto the Firstborn of the
Maidservant, that is behind the Mill, and all the Firstborn of Beasts: Chapter 12.
29. And it came to pass that at Midnight the Lord smote all the Firstborn in
the Land of Egypt, from the Firstborn of Pharaoh that sat on the Throne, unto
the Firstborn of the Captive that was in the Dungeon, and all the Firstborn of
the Cattle.

Now that by the Firstborn who were Smitten by the destroying Angel only the
Males are to be understood, I argue from the Separation of the Firstborn among
the Children of Israel in memory of this delivery. Exodus 13. 2. Sanctify unto
me all the Firstborn, whatsoever opens the Womb among the Children of Israel.
Now if it be proved that only the Males were sanctified, then it is clear that
none but the Males were destroyed, and that by the Firstborn none but the
Males are to be understood.

I confess the Phrase of Opening the Womb is a little general and does extend
to Females as well as Males. But it is to be considered that it depends upon
what went before. Bibnei Jisrael, which I take here in the most strict and
proper sense, whatsoever or whosoever of the Sons or Males of Israel first
opens the Womb, that is, is Firstborn. And so Exodus 21. 29. The Firstborn of
thy Sons shall thou give unto me. But because it may be pretended that by Sons,
and by the Sons or Children of Israel, both Males and Females are to be
understood, as it is certain it is so in many other places, and the contrary
cannot be proved, without some other argument than a bare supposition to
support it; I shall now desire you to consider, that as the Firstborn of all
the Children of Israel, were First Sanctified and set apart, in gratitude for
that deliverance which they had when the Firstborn of Egypt were destroyed; so
afterward the Levites were singled out from the rest of the Tribes, and set
apart instead of the Firstborn of the Children of Israel Numb. 3. 12, 13.
Behold I have taken the Levites from among the Children of Israel, instead of
all the Firstborn that opens the Matrix among the Children of Israel.
Therefore the Levites shall be mine, because all the Firstborn are mine, for
on the day that I smote all the Firstborn in the Land of Egypt, I hallowed
unto me all the Firstborn in Israel both Man and Beast: mine they shall be, I
am the Lord.

Now in what sense it was that the Levites were set apart, and what they were
obliged to do by such their separation is expressed v. 5, 6, 7, 8. of the same
chapter, in these words: And the Lord spoke unto Moses, saying, bring the Tribe
of Levi near, and present them before Aaron the Priest, that they may Minister
unto him, and they shall keep his charge, and the charge of the whole
Congregation before the Tabernacle of the Congregation, and the charge of the
Children of Israel to do the Service of the Tabernacle. The same you have
likewise repeated again, c. 8. of the same Book. It is clear then if Ministering
to the Sanctuary and doing the Service of the Tabernacle, be all that is meant
by the Levites being set apart, and all that they were obliged to do by virtue
of such their separation, that the separation of the Firstborn of all the
Children of Israel whose persons the Levites did in this case represent, was of
the same Nature, that is, they were consecrated to a sort of Priesthood, and
their business was to be conversant about the Holy things.

Now Women were never admitted into the Priesthood, or set apart to the
Ministry of the Altar, either before the Law or under it, any more than they
are now under the Gospel, therefore it is plain that by the Separation or
Sanctification of the Firstborn, only that of the Males is to be understood.

Again, Women were at liberty to Marry out of one Tribe into another, so as a
Woman descended of the Tribe of Levi might Marry if she so pleased into that of
Benjamin or Judah, but by so doing the band of Matrimony unites her much more
strongly to her Husband and his Tribe, than to that Tribe of which she was
descended, so that this, if they had been separated would have been a kind of
alienation from the service of God, for that they did so Marry is evident from
the case of the Daughters of Zelophehad, who were hindered from Marrying into
another Tribe, not because it was in its self unlawful or not usually
practiced, but to preserve the Inheritance from being alienated for ever from
that Tribe to which it formerly belonged, and the Daughters of the other Tribes
were with difficulty and by such another wile, as that by which the Romans took
them Wives of the Sabines, granted to the Benjamites after the great slaughter,
not because it was unlawful simply considered, and in its self, but because the
Children of Israel had sworn, saying, cursed be he that gives a Wife to
Benjamin, Jud. 21. 18. In other cases it was rather a Duty than a thing
unlawful for the Tribes to intermarry with one another, because such
Intermarriages are naturally productive of a strict friendship and unity
between them, which was the reason why such Marriages were by the Law forbidden
with Idolatrous and Heathen People, for fear that friendship and good
understanding, which this would produce, might be a means to tempt the
Israelites from their Duty, to make them Eat of their Sacrifices, and defile
themselves with all their abominations.

Neither was there any Law as I conceive, of more use to the Aggrandizing of
the Roman State, by abating somewhat of those perpetual heats betwixt the Lords
and Commons, of which it was composed, than that which was at length passed by
the Wisdom and activity of one of their Tribunes, de maritandis ordinibus,
whereby the Patricii and Plebeians, were allowed to Intermarry with one another
betwixt whom before that time there was kept so sacred and so unviolable a
distance. Lastly, of the Intermarriages of those of the Tribe of Levi into
other Tribes, we have an instance in the Grot. ad Matthew 1. 16. Quod aiunt
tribules tribulibus nubere debuisse, neque perpetuum est, neque si sit, ^o
usque valere potest, ut etiam ex Davidis famil^^ Mariam fu^sse natam inde
appareat. lb. paulo post. -- Id ipsum evincit historia qu^ est Judi^. 2. 18.
ubi tribus caeterae, quo min^s fili^s suas nuptum ^arent Benjamitis, oftendunt
se non lege Divina sed jurisjurandi religione prohiberi Et David Juda prosatus
ex Benjaminis progeny Micholem ducit uxorem. Et de Hillele Pharisaeo scriptum
reperimus apud Hebraeos patrem ei fuisse ex tribu Benjamin, matrem ex tribu
Juda See the same Learned Annotator upon Luc. 1. 5. where he gives some other
examples, and does also sufficiently confute that conceit of P^ilo judius, as
if the High Priest could not Marry out of the family of Aaron. Such another
mistake is that of Epiphanius, who will have no Tribes to Intermarry with one
another but those of judah and Levi. His words are these. Haeres, 78. (...). --
Which is so far from truth that P^ilo himself confesses that the Priests
themselves all but the High Priest might Marry any of the Jewish Nation who
they pleased. (...), says he, (...). -- And Josephus requires no more contr.
^pp^on. L. ^. (...).
Blessed Virgin her self, who being of the Tribe of Levi was espoused to Joseph
of the Tribe of Judah

But this is not all, the institution of the Passover, is a sufficient
demonstration that by the destruction of the Firstborn that of the Maleswas
only meant, for the Passover which was afterward a commemoration of this
deliverance, and was in its first institution used by way of atonement, to
procure it, by Sprinkling the Blood upon the Posts of the Houses, by which the
destroying Angel was to pass, was to be a Male of the First Year, a Male as
being an atonement for a Male and of the First Year to be an atonement for the
Firstborn. To which purpose it is likewise said, Exodus 13. 12. Thou shall set
apart unto the Lord, all that opens the Matrix and every Firstling that
comes of a Beast, which thou have, the Male shall be the Lords. And again, v.
14. 15. And it shall be when thy Son asks thee in time to come, saying, what
is this? that thou shall say unto him, by strength of hand the Lord brought us
out of Egypt, from the House of Bondage. And it came to pass when Pharaoh
would hardly let us go, that the Lord slew all the Firstborn in the Land of
Egypt, both the Firstborn of Men and the Firstborn of Beast, therefore I
sacrifice to the Lord all that opens the Matrix, being Males, but all the
Firstborn of my Children I redeem. For this reason the remainder of the
Meat Offering was to be eaten by the Males only of the Children of Aaron,
because the Females, as I have said, were not set apart to the Ministry of the
Altar, Levit. 6. 18. All the Males among the Children of Aaron shall eat of it,
it shall be a statute for ever in your Generations, concerning the Offerings of
the Lord made by Fire, every one that touches them shall be Holy, i. e. not
only purified with all the Mosaic ways of lustration, but actually set apart
to be employed about the Holy things, which were hallowed unto the Lord, which
it seems by this place, the Females were not, though of the House of Aaron. So
also it is expressly said about the trespass Offerings, Levit. 7. 6. Every Male
among the Priests shall eat thereof, it shall be eaten in the Holy place, it is
most Holy. And as the Females were always excluded from the number of those
that were separated in stead of the Firstborn, so the Males even from a Month
old and upwards were all taken into the Muster, Number. 3. 28. speaking of the
Males of the Family of Kohath, and the same is to be understood of other
Families. In the number of all the Males, from a Month old and upwards were
Eight Thousand Six Hundred keeping the charge of the Sanctuary. So then it is
clear that none but the Males came into the Account, and none but they had the
charge of the Sanctuary committed unto them. And to fill up the demonstration,
and make it to all intents and purposes complete and perfect, in the 46. verse
of the same chapter, we find the Number of the Firstborn in the other Tribes,
who were to be represented by the Levites, did exceed the Number of the Levites
themselves, by Two hundred seventy three persons, for whom therefore there was
an other way of Redemption found, than that of their separation to the Ministry
of the Tabernacle, either by themselves or by their Proxies the Levites, which
was, that they were to pay Five Shekels apiece, after the Shekel of the
Sanctuary, each Shekel consisting of 20 Gerahs, for the use of Aaron and his
Sons, v. 47, 48. which was accordingly done and distributed after the manner
aforesaid, as the Lord had commanded Moses, v. 49, 50, 51.

From whence it is very plain, not only that none of the Levites were reckoned,
but the Males, but that they represented none but such, in the other Tribes:
For if you consider, that the Tribe of Levi was one of the Thirteen, all the
Males of the Tribe of Levi, will be in a manner of an equal number with the
Firstborn being Males of the other Tribes, for the excess of Two hundred
seventy three, is only accidental in its self one way or other, and is not much
either way in so large an account as this.

But you will say it is an equal chance, take one with another, whether a Male
or Female be Born first in any house or Family, and therefore if only the
Firstborn were represented by the Males of the Levites, and the Females were
not taken into the account nor had any to represent them, then the number of
the Levites would be in a manner double to the number of the Firstborn in the
other Tribes: But to this I Answer; that in such cases the Female indeed was
omitted out of the account, but the next Male to her was taken in as the
Firstborn, and so the Account will be adjusted again. If you ask me how I
prove this, have a little patience and I will tell you.

You must know therefore that the Firstborn of all Beasts as well clean as
unclean, were to be set apart, as well as the Firstborn of Men, the clean for
Sacrifice and the unclean to be redeemed with Money. Now it is expressly
asserted in the Law it self, as has been already shown, that none but Males
were either to be Sacrificed or Redeemed; what therefore if the Firstborn of
any Beast, whether clean or unclean, shall prove a Female, shall not the next
Male be esteemed as the Firstborn in this case? And is not this much more
reasonable to suppose than that God should lose his Sacrifice, or the Priests
their portion? Nay, is it not expressly asserted that it was to be so? Numb. 3.
40. The Lord said unto Moses, Number all the Firstborn of the Males of the
Children of Israel; now he might be the Firstborn of the Males, the Firstborn
in suo genere, who was not so absolute, or the Firstborn of all the Children:
It is clear therefore, that in case a Daughter were really the Eldest, yet she
was not included in the notion of the Firstborn, which belonged only to the
First of the Males, i. e. to her next Brother or to the Eldest Son that should
be born after her; now the same was the case both of Cattle and Men, and for
the same reason, so that these things do mutually strengthen and confirm one
another, v. 41. of the same Chapter. And thou shall take the Levites, for me (I
am the Lord) instead of all the Firstborn among the Children of Israel, and
the Cattle of the Levites instead of all the Cattle of the Children of Israel.
All which will be yet further evident from Deuteronomy. 21. v. 15, 16, 17. If a Man
have two Wives, one beloved and another hated, and they have born him Children,
both the beloved and the hated, then it shall be when he makes his Sons to
Inherit that which he has, that he may not make the Son of the beloved
Firstborn before the Son of the hated, which is indeed the Firstborn, but he
shall acknowledge the Son of the hated for the Firstborn, by giving him a
double portion of all that he has, for he is the beginning of his strength,
the right of the Firstborn is his. From which place I argue thus: Whoever had
the right of the Firstborn and was to receive a double portion of all, that
the Father possessed, he or she was in the Interpretation of the Law, and
consequently in the Language of Moses, and in all those Laws where mention is
made of the Firstborn, the Firstborn; but this was not the Firstborn Child,
but the Eldest Son: Therefore in case a Daughter were born before him, it is
necessary according to the true intention of the Law, and the practice of those
times, that she should be omitted out of the account; for a Female, in case
there were any Male surviving at the death of the Parent, was so far from
having a double portion which was the right of the Firstborn that she was not
to Inherit at all, Numb. 27. 8. If a man die and have no Son, then shall he
cause his Inheritance to pass unto his Daughter. But in no other case unless
you suppose this Law to be in vain: It is manifest therefore all along, that by
the Firstborn the Eldest Son is meant, again, for he is the beginning of his
strength, which is the very expression of Jacob concerning his Eldest Son
Reuben, Genesis 49. And the meaning of it is this, that the Eldest Son was in the
nature of all primitiae or first Fruits, dedicated unto the Lord, only with
this difference, that all other first Fruits were dedicated in the nature of
Sacrifices, but he in the quality of a Priest. Now as I have said, it is plain
that Women were never admitted into the Priesthood, either before the Law or
under it, and before it as has been said, the Eldest Brother was both the King
and the Priest of the Family, for these two characters were of Ancient time
commonly united in the same person, as Melchisedeck was King of Salem, and
Priest of the most High God; As is evident from the Accounts of Numa and Tullus
Hostilius in the Roman story, and from this, that after the expulsion of their
Kings they had their Reges Sacrificuli, whose business it was to execute those
parts of the Priestly Office which belonged formerly to the Kings of Rome. And
as has been a thousand times observed out of that known Verse,

Rex Anius, Rex idem hominum Phaebique sacerdos. Upon which place of Virgil,
Servius has these words, Majorum enim haec erat consuetudo, ut Rex esset etiam
Sacerdos and Pontifex, unde hodie quoque Imperatores Pontifices dicimus. And
upon the very next Verse to it,

Vittis and sacra redimitus tempora lauro, says thus, Vittae Sacerdotis sunt,
laurus etiam Imperatoris victoris.

For which reason it is that when Jacob calls Reuhen the beginning of his
strength, he adds to it, after an exegetical, or explanative manner, the
excellency of Dignity and the excellency of Power; in the former of which
expressions the Priesthood, and in the latter the King-ship of the Family,
though Reuben had forfeited them both for a reason already mentioned seems to
have been contained. And that this separating of the Firstborn, was in the
nature of First Fruits in Ancient times as well as it was afterward for
another reason likewise, will appear from Exodus 22. 29. where the separating
the Firstborn and of the (...) or First Fruits are evidently compared
together. Thou shall not delay to offer the first of thy ripe Fruits and of thy
Liquors; the Firstborn of thy Sons shall thou give unto me. If then the
beginning of the Fathers strength, and the Firstborn, were all one, and if the
beginning or Primitiae of the Fathers strength, neither was nor could be a
Daughter, but must always be a Son, then it is manifest that the same thing
must be understood likewise of the Firstborn, which was the thing in question.

There are two things, I foresee, may be objected against what has been said;
the first is this; Suppose a man had but one Child, and that a Daughter*
whether this were to be taken into the list of the Firstborn, to which I answer
in the negative, that she was not, and I give this reason; Either he had an
Inheritance to bestow, or he had not; if the latter, then it is manifest the
Woman was not considered, as of that Family of which she was descended, but was
to pass into another by Marriage, or dye useless and unregarded in a single
life, from whence it came to pass that Women as I have observed already, had
their names from oblivion and were called Nashim, as on the contrary the men
are Zecarim from remembrance because they carry on and continue the memory of
their Forefathers in their Inheritance and in their persons.

But then upon Supposition that there was an Inheritance left behind to be
enjoyed by some body after his decease, yet it would not have fallen to his
Daughter, at that time when the Levites were set apart instead of the
Firstborn, but to the next of Kin, the Daughters of Zelophehad, being the
first instance of Women's inheriting in the sacred story, and it appears that at
that time it was a new thing and never heard of before, therefore they apply
themselves to Moses for a remedy of this grievance to the Female Sex, and
complain of it as a very unreasonable thing, Number. 27. v. 2, 3, 4. And they (the
Daughters of Zelophehad) stood before Moses and before Eleazar the Priest, and
before the Princes of all the Congregation, by the door of the Tabernacle of
the Congregation, saying, our Father died in the Wilderness, and he was not in
the company of them that gathered themselves together against the Lord in the
company of Korah, but died in his own sin, and had no Sons, why should the name
of our Father be done away from his Family because he has no Son? Give unto us
therefore a possession among the Brethren of our Father. Which petition of
theirs, however reasonable it might appear in its self, yet Moses could not
grant it, till he had first brought their cause before the Lord, v. 5. from
whom he received this answer, v. 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11. in which the Mosaic
platform of Successions to the Inheritance or goods of the deceased is
contained: And the Lord spoke unto Moses, saying, the Daughters of Zelophehad
speak right: Thou shall surely give them a possession of an Inheritance among
their Fathers Brethren, thou shall cause the Inheritance of their Father to
pass unto them, and thou shall speak unto the Children of Israel, saying, if a
man die and have no Son, then he shall cause his Inheritance to pass unto his
Daughter, and if he have no Daughter, then he shall give his Inheritance unto
his Brethren, and if he have no Brethren, then he shall give his Inheritance
unto his Fathers Brethren, and if his Father have no Brethren, then he shall
give his Inheritance to his Kinsman, that is next to him of his Family, and he
shall possess it, and it shall be unto the Children of Israel a statute of
Judgment, as the Lord commanded Moses.

By which words it is manifest, as well from the expostulation of the Daughters
of Zelophehad, as from the answer of God to the remonstrance of Moses made in
their behalf, that Daughters before that time were in no case to Inherit the
Land of their deceased Fathers, for it would have been a very Idle question,
why should the name of our Father be done away from his Family because he has
no Son? and as needless a demand, give unto us therefore a possession among the
Brethren of our Father, if the Daughters by the custom and usage of these
times, had had in default of Male Issue, a true and proper right of Inheritance
to the estate of the deceased: Which is yet farther plain from this, that Moses
durst not of himself adventure to assign them a possession among the Brethren
of their Father, till he had first consulted God what was to be done, in a case
in which he had no Law; nor any example but what would be to the prejudice of
the Petitioners to govern himself by; and by the answer of God to Moses it
appears plainly, that the Inheritance of Sons was then sufficiently provided
for, v. 8. If a man die and have no Son; in which words the Inheritance of the
Son is supposed, in case the deceasing party left any, but for that of the
Daughter and of the collateral relations, it was not yet settled, as is plain
from that express provision which is here made in that behalf, and from those
words at the close of this provision, v. 11. And it shall be unto the Children
of Israel a statute of Judgment: Which words might well enough have been
spared, as well as the scruple, the consultation, the answer and all that went
before, if these things had been unto the Children of Israel a statute of
Judgment before that time.

Now if you examine at what time this Law was made, the Chapter wherein it is
contained will tell you, that it was after forty years sojourning in the
Wilderness, when all that Generation which came out of Egypt, Caleb, and
Joshua, and Moses himself only excepted, were actually dead and gone, and when
Moses himself was about to follow the rest, and to resign up his Government,
together with his life, into the hands of Joshua the Son of Nun. Which being
long after the Levites were set apart to the Ministry of the Sanctuary instead
of the Firstborn, it is plain that in those lists of the Firstborn which were
then taken, there was no mention made of any Daughter though the only Child,
she being neither the beginning of her Fathers strength, in that sense in which
those words are to be understood, as has been shown, neither did the double
portion, which was the right of the Firstborn (or indeed, as it must be in the
case of an only Child, all the estate) belong to her. And though it be true
that the Firstborn themselves had at that time, being in the Wilderness, no
Inheritance there being as yet no partition made of the Land of promise, yet
they were notwithstanding heritable persons in the esteem of Law, and they were
going to the actual possession of such Inheritances, which none of the
Daughters of that time were.

But it is enough to say without all this elaborate canvaseing the business,
that the reason of the separation of the Levites instead of the Firstborn,
being to be the Priests and Clergy of the Jewish Nation, in their stead, and it
being manifest by the excess of Two hundred and threescore and thirteen, for
whom a price of redemption was paid, that every man had his particular
representative assigned him at that time, and it being ridiculous for a Levite
to represent that person in the service of the Tabernacle, which its self was
excluded from all manner of intermedling in such affairs, which I have shown
Women always to have been, it is demonstration that not being represented by
the Levites, they were not reckoned in the number of the Firstborn. Thus far
therefore it is undenyably certain, that by the Firstborn the Male, and the
Male only is to be understood.

This is the First Objection; the Second is this: There were Firstborn among
the Levites themselves too, how therefore shall we do in this case? were they
set apart for their own sakes and for the sake of others whom they represented
also? This seems to be not only needless, but in a manner impossible, for when
you have done all, they can be but set apart to such a service, and that they
are as effectually one way as the other. And which soever of these you consider
First, the real or the vicarious person, seems for that reason to exclude the
other.

But to this I answer, that whatsoever the Levites were with respect of their
office, was perfectly by way of representation, they were nothing in
themselves, they had no inheritance, neither were they considered as a part of
the children of Israel, Numb. 1. 48, 49. The Lord had spoken unto Moses saying,
thou shall not remember the Tribe of Levi, neither take the sum of them among
the Children of Israel. Numb. 18. 20. The Lord spoke unto Aaron, thou shall
have no inheritance in their Land, neither shall thou have any part among them
I am thy part and thine inheritance among the Children of Israel. And ver. 24.
The tithes of the Children of Israel which they offer as an heave offering unto
the Lord, I have given the Levites to inherit. Therefore I have said unto them,
among the Children of Israel they shall have no inheritance. Lastly, c. 26. 62.
And those that were numbered of them (of the Levites) were 23000, all Males
from a month old and upward, for they were not numbered among the Children of
Israel, because there was no inheritance given them among the Children of
Israel.

I shall conclude this discourse of the signification of the word Firstborn,
and of its being always restrained and confined to the Male issue, with that
place of Zech. 12. 10. They shall mourn for him as one that mourns for his
only Son, and shall be in bitterness for him as one that is in bitterness for
his Firstborn, where it is evident that the Firstborn in the latter clause
being only exegetical of the only son in the former, and it being a proverbial
speech expressive of the extremity of grief and sorrow, which in all reason
will and ought to be greater for the loss of a Male that might have continued
the name and memory of the deceasing Parent, than of a Female from whom this
advantage cannot be obtained, it is in both of these respects clear, that the
word there is restrained to the Male Issue; and look whatever is the sense of a
word in a proverbial way of speech as this is, that is the general acceptance
of that word in all examples of the same Language. And indeed I think I may
after all this safely challenge any man to show me one instance, where the word
Bacor, I do not speak because it is of the masculine gender, for
notwithstanding that, its signification might be Epicaene in many cases, I say,
I may, and do challenge any man to show me one instance where it is not
restrained to denote only the Male kind.

How unreasonable then must it needs appear, to Interpret it in this place of
Deuteronomy. contrary to the whole Current of its acceptance in all the Bible
besides. Especially if you consider that it has been immediately joined with it
in the former verse, ov ben even Lo. And he have no Son, which word as I
conceive, in the singular number is never so comprehensive as to denote both
sexes, though in the plurative sometimes it may, as when they say bnei Adam, or
bnei Israel the Sons of Men, or of Israel, it is in these instances
comprehensive of both sexes, but in the Singular number I believe you will very
rarely meet with it so, though two instances indeed I do now remember, as I am
writing, but then the word is in construction with a case, it is not put alone
as it is here. God is not a Man that he should lie, nor the Son of man that he
should repent. And again, what is Man that thou art mindful of him, or the Son
of Man that thou so regardest him? But this being not the case here, and it
being so nearly placed to another word, which is never used but of the Male
Sex, which two words do plainly refer to one another. Habecor, v. 6. being as
much as Ben habecor, because the reason of the Woman's Marriage to the Brother
of the deceased was chi ben even Lo, because her former Husband had no Son. I
think all this more than one demonstration that the Male is only to be
understood in this place.

Thus have I done with my first argument taken from the signification of the
word Firstborn in the Language of the Scripture, to prove that Mr. Seldom and
those Hebrew Gentlemen, whom he is pleased to follow, are mistaken when they
interpret those words, ov ben even Lo (and he have no Son) indifferently to
either Sex. I will now confirm what I have said by a second consideration which
cannot be resisted, and which I have already mentioned in my discourse upon the
former medium, and that is, that this Law was made in the Wilderness long
before the delivery of that Law, Number. 27. of which I have already spoken, by
which Women were first made capable of Inheriting; if then Women could not
Inherit when this Law was made, if the design of the Law was, to raise up the
name of the dead upon his Inheritance: And if by that nothing else be meant but
that the vicarious Offspring should Inherit in his Right and Title, then it is
manifest that he who died leaving no Male Issue, though he had Female, had not
yet made sufficient provision for the raising up his name upon his Inheritance,
or which is all one, for hindering his name from being blotted out of Israel, or
being done away from his Family or from the gate of his place, therefore the
reason of this Law still remaining, (notwithstanding the Female Issue) the
relict of the deceased might still demand his Brother or near Kinsman in
Marriage for the aforesaid end. And if the true and real Daughter of the
deceased was not to Inherit, much less was the First Child of the Leviratical
or Vicarious Bed, if it proved a Daughter likewise, because it could have no
right but what it received from the adoptive Father, and he that gave no right
of Inheritance to his real, must much less be supposed to have done it to his
imputative Offspring. It is true indeed that by the Law of Number. 27. a Daughter
was afterward made capable of Inheriting, but in regard there were great
inconveniences attending inherisons of this nature, the Estate by this means
going out of the direct line into a collateral House of the same Family or
Tribe, all which was directly contrary to one of the main designs running
through the whole tenor of the Jewish Laws, which had so particular respect in
many cases, to the preserving the Inheritance in the same House and Line, that
I conceive the Daughter did never legally Inherit, but in one of the following
cases.

First, If the Wife deceased before her Husband, who left only Female Issue
behind him. Secondly, If at her Husbands decease she were past the years of
Childbearing. Thirdly, If Marrying again in pursuance of the Leviratical
Sanction she had no Issue, or none but Female, or if upon the refusal of the
Kindred she Married into another House: In all these cases or the like, if any
more can be thought of, the Female was to Inherit, and in none else as I
conceive, because the Law in Numbers was not certainly intended to invalidate
or weaken those other Laws, by which the continuance of the Inheritance in the
same house, was so carefuly provided for.

Wherefore if they* refused to Marry into their own Family or Tribe, they were
in such case to leave the Inheritance behind them, and suffer it to go to the
next of Kin, to whom upon their death without Issue it would have descended,
Joseph. L. 4 Antiq. c. 7. (...).

For indeed all those Laws of settlement mentioned Number. 27. seem to me to be
only an addition or an explanatory Act added to that of Deuteronomy. by which, as in
the first place, there is no manner of care taken for the Inheritance of
Daughters, so only the Husbands Brother, properly so called, is expressly there
warranted to Marry his deceased Brothers Wife, whereas in the Law of Number. it is
provided if a man had no Brethren, that the Inheritance should go to his
Fathers Brethren, and for want of such to the next of Kin of the same Family;
and the reason of the Brothers Marrying the Brothers Wife, in an imputative and
adoptive way, being only for the preservation of the Inheritance in the same
House or Line, it seems reasonable to believe, that all who had a legal right
to the Inheritance had also the same right to Marry the Widow of the deceased,
for though none were so much obliged to perform this part as the Brother
himself, yet the Marriage of the Brothers Wife being death in other cases by
the same Law, it is clear, it is a less dispen, sation, or a less violence done
to the ordinary course of things, to suffer a Kinsman farther off, than an
immediate Brother to Marry the relict of the deceased, notwithstanding he being
most obliged, the first challenge was to be made to him, and there being
somewhat of a privilege in it, by Inheriting the double portion, he as the
very next of Kin had the first right of refusal. From all which I conclude,
that this was the true reason why the 70 make use of the word (...) in the
place of Deuteronomy. it self, to show that this right was afterward extended
farther, than the words as they are set down in Deuteronomy may at first view
seem to allow, and that it was in pursuance of this Law in Deuter: as it is
explained and enlarged by that of Numbers, that the march between Ruth and Boaz
was afterward made.

But that I may not seem to oppose Mr. Seldom and his Rabbis in every thing
they say, as it were out of a Spirit of contradiction, which no man is more
naturally averse from than my self, being always a favourer of that side where
I see the greatest appearance of truth. I will now acknowledge that in one
thing they determine with great probability of reason, and that is, when they
tell us that the Law of the Leviratus was to be understood only of the Brothers
Germans or of the Kindred of the Fathers side, but that the Maternal
Consanguinity was not at all concerned in it; the words of Mr. Seldom are
these, p. 100. De fratribus autem uterinis Lex haec non intelligenda est, sed
tantum de Germanis, nam ut ad invicem minime succedunt uterini, ita nec hac
lege tenentur. And of Maimonides, cited in the same place by Mr. Seldom, Achin
Min Haeem eenan chashoubin Achin, etc. that is, Brothers by the Mothers side
are not in the Interpretation of Law looked upon as Brothers, either with
relation to the Inheritance, or to the Marriage of the deceased Brothers Wife,
but they are as to both these matters, as if they were not Brothers at all,
neither is there any Brotherhood but what is from the same Father. Which things
are all clear and certain beyond all colorable ground of contradiction, for if
the Inheritance descend legally from Father to Son, or Daughter, or in defect
of such pass on to the collateral Relations obliquely ascending or descending
on the Fathers side, then it is clear that they whose blood does not center in
the same Paternal Consanguinity cannot have a Title to the same Inheritance;
and the intention of Marryings of this nature, being to raise up the name of
the dead upon his Inheritance, there is no reason why the Widow might not be at
liberty to Marry whom she pleased to this end, if she might Marry him who had
no relation to the Inheritance its self, which was the case of a Brother by the
Mothers side. Again, upon supposition that the Brother of the deceased by the
Mothers side did Marry this Widow, either this Marriage did bar the paternal
Kindred from a legal Title or Claim to the Inheritance, or it did not; if it
did not, then the design of this Marriage was in vain, for he would not raise
up the Name of the dead upon that Inheritance which was not in his possession,
and with which he had nothing to do; if he did, then the Maternal Kindred had a
better Claim to the Paternal Inheritance, than those who were descended of, or
were by Consanguinity related to the same Father, upon whose Title all other
claims must depend, which is absurd, it being as much as to say, they had, and
they had not a right at the same time; but then, if he could not bring the
Inheritance along with him, it was unlawful for the Widow to Marry him at all,
as appears by undeniable consequences from Levit. 18. 9. the deceased Husbands
Brother Uterine, being considered as her own half Brother, which is the same
thing as for a Brother to Marry his half Sister, which was forbidden by the Law.

Again, if none could Marry the Widow, for the purpose aforesaid, of hindering
the name of the deceased from being blotted out, and of raising up the name of
the dead upon his Inheritance, but he that had a right of redeeming the said
Inheritance, and if none had a right of redeeming the inheritance but the
Kindred descending from, or centring in the same paternal Consanguinity, then
it is manifest that this Law could not be extended to the half Brother of the
deceased by the Mothers side. But the connection of these two is acknowledged by
Mr. Seldom himself when he gives this as a reason why the Brother of the
deceased by the Mothers side could not Marry his Widow. Nam ut ad invicem
minime succedunt uterini, ita nec hac lege tenentur. And Maimonides also
acknowledges the same, by putting them both together, Fratres uterini, says
he, non censentur pro fratribus, Lehinjan jeroushah, ou Lehinjan jibboum
vechalitsa, vel in causa haereditatis, vel in leviratu. And though Mr. Seldom
and Maimonides, and a thousand more should not have granted this, yet the
Scripture it self would sufficiently have proved it, for I have shown Levit.
25. 48. 49. to belong as well to the redemption of Inheritances as persons, and
in that place, we have these words: After he is sold he may be redeemed again:
one of his Brethren may redeem him. Either his Uncle or his Uncles Son may
redeem him, or if he be able he may redeem himself; where that only Paternal
Kindred is to be meant, may be proved by undeniable arguments.

As for the signification of Echad Meachau v. 48. unus ex fratribus ejus,
though nothing can certainly be inferred from it, if nothing else were to be
considered, yet when in the next verse we are told that either Dodo or ben Dodo
his Uncle or his Uncles Son may do the same, there are these two things to be
observed; First, That Dod does properly signify the Uncle by the Fathers side,
not Avunculus but Patruus, and so the vulgar Latin renders it, the 70, (...),
and ben Dodo (...). And so also Jerem. 32. 7, 8, 9. neither do they render it
in any place whatsoever of any but the Kindred of the Fathers side. Now if the
Uncle and the Uncles Son must both of them be understood of the Fathers side,
then it is but reasonable to conclude that the Brother also in the former
verse, must be understood the same way. Secondly, or any that is nigh of Kin to
him of his Family may redeem him. Here there are two things to be observed.
First any that is nigh of Kin to him, Hebrew Misheer Besaro, 70 (...), any of
his near Flesh, or any of his own Flesh, now the (...), a man's own Flesh, is
not that of his Mother, but his Father with whom his Mother by Marriage is made
one, and his Family is looked upon as hers, and if after his decease she shall
marry another, then that Child which she shall conceive and bear by the second
Husband is not (...) to the Son or Daughter of the First, no more than her
second Husband is, to whom she is now united, having forsaken her former
Family, and is become one Flesh with him. Secondly, he was not only to be near
of Kin, i. e. of the same Flesh, as both the Original and the 70 more exactly
speak, but it is added likewise, any that is nigh unto him of his Family may
redeem him. Now a man is of his Fathers Family, not his Mothers, who quits her
own Family and her Fathers house by Marriage. It is plain therefore that none
had a right of redemption, nor consequently of Marriage with the deceased, but
only the Kindred of the deceased by the Fathers side. But this is not all,
there was another reason as I have often said, of performing the Husbands part
to the Widow of the deceased, besides the redemption of the Inheritance, and
that was the servitude or subjection under which the Younger was in ancient
time to the Elder; but this subjection began first in the same common Father,
who had a despotical power over all his Sons, and under him the Eldest had a
dominion over the rest, as representing the person and Inheriting the fortune
of his Father, but now he that is born of a distinct Father, though of the same
Mother, it is manifest he belongs to another House, and is to be looked upon as
a subject of a different Kingdom; so that it cannot be in either respect,
either with relation to the Inheritance of the deceased, or in regard of that
Duty and Subjection which the Younger ows to the Elder, that the half Brother
by the Mothers side should raise up Seed to the deceased Brother; (...).

But notwithstanding the plain evidence and downright conclusiveness of what
has been said, the speech of Naomi to her two Daughters in the story of Ruth
seems at least to be a supposition of the legality of a contrary practice. c.
1. v 12, 13. Turn again, my Daughters, go your way for I am too old to have a
Husband, If I should say, I have hope, if I should have a Husband also to night
and should also bear Sons, would you tarry for them till they were grown? would
ye stay for them from having Husbands? nay, my Daughters, for it grieveth me
much for your sakes, that the hand of the Lord is gone out against me. This
difficulty has very much baffled the endeavors of Learned Men. Mr. Seldom upon
this occasion has these words, Ruth 1. 11. Vbi Naomi ad nurus suas, Orpha and
Ruth, viduas, nec prole beatas; An adhuo, inquit, intra me, in utero meo sunt
filii, qui fiant mariti vestri? perinde ac si non solum ad fratrem uterinum sed
etiam ad eum qui mortis fraternae tempore, nondum in lucem fuerat editus (quod
itidem uno ore negant Magistri) jus hoc spectasset, atqui non ex hujusce juris
obtentu, sed ex ingenti erga Nurus amore a Naomi hoc dictum volunt, ao si
tantum innuisset, tanto erga eas se amore flagrare, ut, si fieri posset,
futuris, siqui sibi essent, filiis, eas in uxores traderet.

Mr. Seldom in the same place takes notice of another opinion of Solomon
Jarchi, but he seems to favor this more, as indeed it deserves, ( Jarchi's
opinion being founded upon a supposition that Ruth was not yet naturalized
which I have already And she is by Eusebius expressly called a proselite, Hist.
Eccles. L. 1. c. 7. where speaking of the burning the records or Tables of
Genealogy by Herod, he says, (...).
disproved) and he backs his own sentiments with the Authority of Abenezra, and
might have done with that of Joannes Drusius too, Quest. Hebra. L. 3. Quest. 16.

But neither is this so right as it should be, it not being likely that her
love to her two Daughters in law should make her so far forget the Custom and
Usage of her Country. Therefore let us try some other way, and see if that will
succeed any better. Are there any more Sons in my Womb that they should be your
Husbands? I am too old to have a Husband, if I should say I have hope, if I
should have an Husband also to Night, and should also bear Sons, would you
tarry for them till they were grown? Would you stay for them from having
Husbands? Nay my Daughters: For it grieveth me for your sakes that the hand of
the Lord is gone out against me; all which questions are nothing else but an
enumeration of so many impossibilities, to make them despair the more, and to
make them return back from whence they came. As when God asks Abraham whether
he could count the Stars, or the Sands of the Seashore? It was not upon
supposition that this was a possible thing, but to let him know that his seed
should be as numberless as they, or when it is said, Can the Blackmore change
his Skin, or the Leopard his spots? It is not that these things can be done,
but to show how hard and in a manner impossible it is for habitual wickedness
to be reclaimed. And, Where wast thou when I laid the foundations of the Earth?
i. e. thou wast not at all. so here, Are there more Sons in my Womb? is as much
as positively to affirm there are not. Again, that they may be your Husbands,
is as much as to say, and if there were, yet you could not marry them. But then
again, I am too old to have an Husband: If I should marry it would be to no
purpose for I should have no Children; again: If I should have an Husband also
to Night, and should also bear Sons; nay, and put case it were lawful for you
to Marry them, which yet it would not be, Would you tarry for them till they
were grown? Would ye stay for them from having Husbands? As much as to say, you
would not, or it would be in vain if you should: For you your selves would be
past Childbearing by that time; and therefore she adds presently: nay, my
Daughters, and then concludes, the hand of the Lord is gone out against me, as
much as to say, it is impossible, talk no more, but leave me and go home again.

Against all that has been said, I know but two things remaining that deserve
an answer, the First concerns the main question, whether the marriage of Boaz
and Ruth were celebrated in consequence of that Law in Deuteronomy, by which
the Brother was to raise up seed to his deceased Brother, and the Second that
which has been the particular subject of this last debate, whether in this Law
the Paternal Consanguinity were only to be considered.

Against the First of these Mr. Seldom Argues thus, c. 15. de successionibus,
Nec sane exutus hic (Ruth 4. 7.) Calceus ritus est, qui ad fratris nuptias
attinere potest, nam is, ubi ad eas spectabat, renuntiationis duntaxat signum
erat quod scimus ex Deuter. 25. 9. atqui hic nihil aliud innuit praeter
solennem quae inoleverat traditionis seu acquirendi dominii formulam -- neque
nuptiarum renuntiatio sed contra ipsae nuptiae fiunt. The meaning of which, as
plain as I can represent it, is this, Deuteronomy. 25. v. 7, 8, 9, 10. we have these
words: And if the man like not to take his Brothers Wife, then let his Brothers
Wife go up to the Gate, unto the Elders, and say, My Husbands Brother refuses
to raise up unto his Brother a name in Israel, he will not perform the duty of
my Husbands Brother; then the Elders of his City shall call him, and speak unto
him, and if he stand to it and say, I like not to take her, then shall his
Brothers Wife come unto him in the presence of the Elders, and loose his shoe
from off his foot and spit in his face, and shall answer and say, so shall it
be done unto the man, that will not build up his Brothers house, and his name
shall be called in Israel the House of him that has his shoe loosed. Again
Ruth 4. 7, 8, 9, 10, 11. it is said. Now this was the manner in former time in
Israel, concerning redeeming, and concerning changing, for to confirm all
things: a man plucked off his shoe, and gave it to his neighbor: and this was
a testimony in Israel, therefore the Kinsman said unto Boaz, buy it for thee:
so he drew off his shoe. And Boaz said unto the Elders and to all the People,
ye are witnesses this Day, that I have bought all that was Elimelechs and all
that was Chilions and Mahlons of the hand of Naomi, moreover Ruth the
Moabitess, the Wife of Mahlon, have I purchased to be my Wife, to raise up the
name of the dead upon his Inheritance, that the name of the dead be not cut off
from among his Brethren, and from the gate of his place: ye are witnesses this
Day, and all the People that were in the gate, and the Elders said, we are
witnesses.

From these two places compared together Mr. Seldom Argues thus: The pulling
off the Shoe in the last cited place of Ruth, cannot belong to the Law of
Deuteronomy, by which the Brother was obliged to raise up Seed to the Brother,
because in Deuteronomy that ceremony signified as much, as the Woman's
renouncing and disclaimeing her pretensions to the Brother of her deceased
Husband, but in Ruth it is nothing else but a solemn right of taking
possession, or of acquiring a right or dominion in any thing or person, and
that this was the usual Formula traditionis seu acquirendi dominii, he appeals
to the Ancient Medrash upon Ruth, that is, he appeals to a Rablin, or which is
all one to a man that understands nothing of the Jewish Antiquities, For by Mr.
Seldens favor, there is no manner of repugnancy or disagreement between these
two places, that of Deuteronomy, I mean, and that of Ruth, only they are two
partial or imperfect relations of the whole Ceremony or Formality of this
affair. From the place of Deuteronomy we learn what the Woman was to do, in
case the man refused to accept her challenge, she was to pull off his shoe and
spit in his face; the latter of these in token of contempt, and as a mark of
disgrace, the first for a reason which I shall presently explain; and on the
other side, from the place of Ruth we are instructed, what the man was to do in
case he did accept the claim and challenge of the Woman, V. Drus. in Loc.
he was to pull off his own shoe in the Face of the Congregation, and was with
this Ceremony to redeem the Inheritance of his deceased Kinsman or Brother, and
was to take her to his Wife, in the presence of them all.

Now we must know, that this pulling off the shoe in those Eastern Countries
and early ages of the World, was an external Act or expression of divine
Worship and Honor. So the Angel says to Moses, Exodus 3. 5. Draw not nigh
hither, put off thy shoes from off thy Feet, for the place whereon thou
stand is Holy ground. And so also, Josh. 5. 15. The Captain of the Lords
Host said unto Joshua, loose thy shoe from off thy Foot, for the place whereon
thou stand is Holy: This is the reason why the Turks at this day go barefoot
into their Moschs, and that it was the custom and practice of the Jews at all
their Feasts, we have the Testimony of Juvenal for it.

-- Deinde adamas notissimus and Berenices
In Digito factus pretiosior, hunc dedit olim,
Barbarus incestae dedit hunc Agrippa sorori,
Observant ubi festa mero pede sabbata Reges.
And the Jews being commanded to Eat the Passover with their shoes on, for
expedition sake, that they might be in a readiness to march, and in remembrance
of that hasty departure of their Forefathers out of Egypt, is a plain
demonstration that they were used to sit down at all their other Feasts
barefoot or with their shoes off, otherwise that which was the common practice
in all cases need not have been commanded in a particular instance. Wherefore
the plain reason why the Woman in Deuteronomy pulled off the shoe of the
refuser, whom she had challenged, but in vain, to continue the name and memory
of her deceased Husband upon his Inheritance, was, that by this Symbol she did
appeal to God, and did call him to witness, that she had done, what as the
servant or subject of her late Husband, whose Family she was bound to propagate
to the utmost of her power, she was obliged to do; and she was supposed also by
spitting in his Face at the same time, to imprecate those curses upon the
refuser, which were the reward of disobedience to the Law of God, and were but
due to him, if he had no tolerable excuse to plead for himself, who was so
unkind to the memory of his deceased Brother: As on the other side when the man
in Ruth pulls off his own Shoe himself, and delivers it to his Neighbor, that
is, in this case to Ruth her self, this was an appeal to God or a public
owning in the presence of God and the World, that he did accept the challenge
of the Woman, and did at that time solemnly engage before the whole assembly,
to redeem the Inheritance, from passing ^^to another Tribe or Family, or which
is all one, to take the Woman to be his Wife, to raise up the name and memory
of his deceased Brother upon his Inheritance, and therefore it is said v. 7. A
man plucked off his Shoe and gave it his Neighbor, and this was a Testimony in
Israel. And v. 9. Boaz said unto the Elders and to all the People, ye are
Witnesses this Day. Which he repeats Again, v. 10. Ye are Witnesses this Day.
And then, v. 11. All the People that were in the Gate, and the Elders, said, we
are Witnesses.

I do not deny what Mr. Seldom says, that this delivering of the shoe from one
to another, was traditionis seu acquirendi Dominii Formula, the manner of
Livery and seisin in those times; but I do not grant thus much because his
Medrash-monger tells us so, but because it is manifest from the plain words of
Scripture Ruth. 4. 7. Now this was the manner in former time in Israel,
concerning redeeming and concerning changing, for to confirm all things: A man
plucked off his shoe and gave it to his Neighbor, and this was a testimony in
Israel: but yet I say, that the true reason of this Ceremony, was to imply an
appeal to God, to whom this right was used to be applied as an act of Divine
Worship, and therefore the inspired Writer tells us, it was to confirm all
things, and it was a testimony in Israel, an Oath being the greatest assurance
and the most sacred way of plighting our Troth and Faith to one another that
any man can give.

Neither do I so wholly confine my self to this signification of pulling off
the shoe, as to affirm it had no other; which I am so far from, that I
conceive, Shoes being never used among the Jews, nor any of those Eastern
People, when they were within doors, but only when they walked abroad; for this
reason the pulling off the Shoe and giving it to another, was a Symbolical
representation of the passing of the inheritance from one to another, as in
this case when Boaz redeemed the inheritance of Elimelech at the hand of Naomi.
And for this reason in all such sales and passings away of Lands, from one to
another, the inheritance in the Hebrew Idiom was said to rise from the one to
the other, as Genesis 23. 17, 18. The field of Ephron, which was in Machpelah,
which was before Mamre, the field and the cave which was therein, and all the
trees that were in the Field, that were in all the borders round about, were
made sure unto Abraham for a possession. And v. 20. the Field and the cave that
is therein, were made sure unto Abraham, etc. In the Hebrew it is in both
places, vaja-kom, it arose to Abraham for a possession, and in the 70. v. 17.
(...), it stood up, and v. 20. (...). it was appropriated, which arising or
standing up, or removal of the Possession from one Master to another, I
conceive to have been Symbolically denoted, by this transferring or delivering
of a Shoe, from one to another, and that not only, because the writer of the
Book of Ruth tells us it was the manner in former time in Israel, which custom
might well enough be derived down as far as from Abraham, but because the
bargain there made, is done with the same public solemnity in the presence of
all the People the Sons of Heth, as here before all the Elders and Inhabitants
of the City, v. 3. Abraham stood up from before his dead, and spoke unto the
Sons of Heth, saying, etc. And v. 5. And the Children of Heth answered Abraham
saying unto him, Hear us my Lord, etc. and v. 7, 8. And Abraham stood up and
bowed himself to the People of the Land, even to the Children of Heth, and he
communed with them, saying, if it be your mind, that I should bury my dead out
of my sight, hear me and entreat for me to Ephron the Son of Zohar. And v. 10
Ephron the Hittite answered Abraham, in the audience of the Children of Heth,
even of all that went in at the Gate of his City, saying, etc. And v. 16*
Abraham weighed to Ephron the Silver which he had named in the audience of the
Sons of Heth, before all that went in at the Gate of his City.

The reason why the Ancients were used to worship God with their Shoes off, was
the same upon which all the Washings and Lustrations either of the Levitical or
Heathen Worship depended, namely that it was the most cleanly and decent way of
approaching the divine presence, the intention of Shoes or Sandals being
nothing else, especially in those Warm and Easterly Climats, but only to defend
those that wore them from the soil and dust of the way, when they walked
abroad, or from the offensive sharpness of any stones or pebbles, or other
inequalities that might annoy or hurt them in their passage, and therefore
where the use of them, was not upon one of these two Accounts of absolute
necessity, it was both more natural and more cleanly to go without them, and
was as well as many other ceremonies then made use of in religious Worship, a
Symbolical representation of that inward purity and innocence of mind, with
which all men ought to approach the presence of God, and therefore it was said
down, as I remember, by Proclus, as a general rule in divine Worship, (...).
Worship and do Sacrifice with your Shoes off. And upon this Account it was,
that the Jews, as I have said, in all their Feasts were used to celebrate them
with their Shoes off, and the same may be said without question even of their
common Meals which were all of them in the nature of a Feast upon a Sacrifice,
as appears by this, that they were obliged during all the time of their
sojourning in the Wilderness, to bring all the Animals of what sort soever,
which were Killed for the common use of their Tables and daily repast, to be
Killed at the door of the Tabernacle, that the blood might be poured out in
behalf of the owners by way of expiation, and if afterward by reason of the
too great distance of the Jews from the Tabernacle or Temple, after they came
to be settled in the Land of Canaan, they were not any longer obliged to this
Service because indeed it was impossible to be performed, yet notwithstanding
God did not by this depart from his right in the blood of all those Animals
that were slain for daily and common use, and therefore the blood was always
prohibited to be eaten or drunk, because it was of an expiatory nature, it was
the life of the Creature, and therefore belonged to God, as being given upon
the Altar for an atonement for the Souls of men.

Neither was it only among the Jews that all their Common Meals did likewise
partake of the nature of a Sacrifice, from whence they have a saying col
shulchan chezeh hamibeach, every Table is as it were an Altar, upon which the
owners part of the Peace Offering is eaten, but the same notion v. B^char.
Hierozoic. ubi de agno pascali, and Cudworth in opusculo de caena sacramentali.
and custom is to be found in antiquity among the Greeks and Romans also,
whence (...), to eat of that of which no part had been Offered up in Sacrifice,
was to a proverb accounted a mark of the highest impiety and profaneness. This
was the ground of that prohibition of the Counsel of Jerusalem, by which the
Idolothyta were forbidden, it being then the common custom not only in the
(...) or Heathen Temples themselves, but also at home in their private Families
and Houses, not to eat any thing, a part of which had not before hand been
offered up in Sacrifice at the Idol Temple, which seems to be very plain as to
the commonness of this practice, if not as to the universality of it, from 1
Cor. c. 10. v. 27, 28. If any of them that believe not, bid you to a Feast, and
you be disposed to go, whatsoever is set before you eat, asking no question for
conscience sake, but if any man say unto you, this is offered up in Sacrifice
unto Idols, eat not for his sake that showed it, and for conscience sake. Nay,
so prevailing was this practice among the Gentiles, and so necessary a part of
Religion was it accounted, that the Butchers and Victuallers of those times, do
not seem usually to have exposed any Flesh to sale, of which some part had not
before hand been sacrificed, to consecrate and sanctify the rest, for what
else can be the meaning of that other expression of St. Paul in the same
Chapter, speaking all the while expressly of the Idolothyta, or things offered
up in sacrifice to Idols, whatsoever is sold in the shambles that eat, asking
no question for conscience sake. And how long this practice continued in the
World, we may learn, from the Capitulars of Charlemaigne and Lewis, where there
is an express decree or Law against it. L. 5. Number. 68. de his qui convivio solo
gentilium and escis immolatitiis usi sunt, and then follows the Capitular it
self, the beginning of which Lindenbr^g c^d. LL. Antiq. p. 938.
is in these words. Qui convivio solo gentilium and escis immolatitiis usi
sunt, possunt jejuniis and crebris manuum impositionibus purgari: ut deinceps
ab Idolothytis abstinentes, sacramentorum Christi possint esse Participes, etc.
And several other instances there are to be met with in the same Capitulars of
Pagan superstition remaining in those times, of which I may speak more in
another place.

But this is enough to show, that as well common Meals, as other more solemn
and sacred entertainments, were accounted both among the Jews and Heathens to
be so many several Feasts upon a sacrifice, and it having been proved already,
that no Feast among the Jews, the Passover only excepted, could be eaten with
the Shoes on, and that no Act of divine Worship among them, could be performed
but with the Feet uncovered, it would follow plainly that in all their common
Meals they were used to pull off their Shoes, though no particular Authority
could be produced, where this was expressly asserted, but our Savior's last
supper with his Disciples, which I have demonstrated elsewhere, not to have
been the legal Passover, but the day before it, is a demonstration what the
custom was at all the Jewish Meals; our Savior's washing the Feet of the
Disciples, as they sat at Supper, being a certain and undoubted argument that
they sat barefooted at that time, and this supper, though celebrated upon a
solemn occasion, being a complication of the Jewish and the Christian Passover
together, yet not being kept upon the solemn or stated time, it is demonstrable
that there was no Pascal Lamb at that time Eaten, and it is said expressly that
they did not stand but sit at Supper, which not being observed with the usual
rites, it is probable, that otherwise than in its tendency and design, and
bateing that the blessed sacrement was given at the end of it, as the
Mnemoneutical Passover was used to be by the Jews, it had nothing extraordinary
in it, nor any thing which was not common to all other Meals among the Jews, so
that if the Feet of the company were bare at this, it is the more likely that
they were so at all other times wherever they sat down to Table.

And indeed if we examine, the manner and ceremony of our Savior's last
supper, and compare it with the Roman Antiquities in like cases, we shall find,
as to many particulars a perfect agreement between them; for first as to the
place, it was (...) a large upper Room spread with carpets, as the Roman
Fashion was, and that the upper Rooms in their Houses, were anciently the only
places of entertainment and repast, appears by the very word caenaculum, which
from this custom came to sig-Nifie the upper Room or Garret of an House, and
the true reason why they did eat their Meals in that part of the House, was the
same as I believe, for which the Apostles and the primitive Christians were
used to meet in the (...) or upper part of the House, because every Table, as I
have said, was an Altar, and every Meal a Sacrifice, and the upper Chamber, as
being farthest from noise, and the nighest unto Heaven, the supposed peculiar
residence of that Numen who is indeed omnipresent and whose divine substance is
actually coextended to all the possibilities of extension or place, (for the
First of which reasons he is called by the Hebrew Masters shamajim and for the
Second Makom,) I say, the upper Chamber was for this reason accounted more
sacred than the rest, and set apart for all religious Offices, as the Chapel
or Oratory of every particular House.

Secondly, that the manner of the Disciples sitting at Table was after the
Roman mode of the Triclinium appears by John's leaning on the bosom or breast
of Jesus, as they sat at supper. Joh. 13. 23. 25.

Lastly, as for what has been said of the Disciples sitting barefoot at
supper, this was also without question the fashion of the Romans, for so
Plutarch observes of Cato, (...), He was used often times after dinner to go
abroad without his upper Garment and Shoes, which is as much as to say, that he
went abroad as he rose from Table or from Dinner, where he sat according to the
fashion of those times with his Coat off, as well as his Shoes, but there is a
passage of Martial, L. 12. Epigr: still more remarkable to this purpose, where
Cotta a fellow that was used to sponge about for a supper, wherever he could
hear of any Belly-timber to be had, and having lost his Shoes twice by pulling
them off before he sat down, as the custom was, at last out of a principle of
Frugality, that he might lose no more, he used to go thither barefoot, as well
as sit down so at Table, excalceatus ire caepit ad caenam. Neither was it
accounted absurd at all, or unseemly in those times, to go barefoot even
publicly Paedag. L^ 2. c. 11.
and in the streets themselves. For Clemens Alexandrinus lays it down as a rule
to be observed at all times, (...), it is always fittest for a man to go
barefoot, unless it be for Soldiers in their march or being engaged in
military expeditions. And Suetonius observes of Nero, that in the progress
which he made into Achaia, he never appeared in public, but his feet were
always bare, in imitation of that frugality and simplicity of the first mortals
which Nero as bad a man as he was, did at that time in his Garb and Habit very
much affect, who were used so to do the same; the words c. 15. Nerone.
of Suetonius are these, Circa cultum habitumque adeo pudendus, ut comam semper
in gradus formatam, peregrinatione Achaica etiam pone verticem summiserit: ac
plerumque synthesinum indutus ligato circum collum sudario prodierit in
publicum, sine cinctu, and discalceatus, and the same may be seen in all the
statutes of the Roman Emperors and others, when they are not represented in a
military posture, who, if my memory do not very much deceive me, in most, if
not all the cuts that ever I have seen, are ever represented with their Legs
and Feet bare, but whatever they did without doors this is certain that when
they came home or went any where else, to any House or apartment of another,
they were used to leave their Shoes or Sandals below stairs or without the Room
into which they then entered, as the Turks and other Eastern Nations do at this
day, which being bound over their Feet by a thong of Leather, or other band or
string, it was the business of their attendants, that waited upon them whither
they went, to untie them when they came in, which explains that saying of John
the Baptist, which is not yet perhaps sufficiently understood, Mark 1. 7. there
comes one mightier than I after me, the latchet of whose Shoes, I am not
worthy to stoop down and unloose. (...). or as it is Matthew. 3. 11. (...), whose
Shoes I am not worthy to bear, because when the way was clean and smooth, the
servant was used to carry his Masters Shoes or Cloggs behind him.

From what has been said there, are several things very fit to be observed,
and first I desire that this agreement betwixt the Jews and Romans, as to the
ceremony and formality of their Feasts, and indeed of all their Meals, may not
be passed over without all manner of regard, because in some short notes, which
I intend to add at the end of this discourse, I shall give some other instances
of a manifest agreement, and such as cannot seem to have come by chance betwixt
the two Nations, and because in that other dissertation which I have promised
concerning the Lawfulness or rather Unlawfulness of the Marriage of Cousin
Germans, I shall give almost innumerable instances of this agreement, and the
use I intend to make of it is this:

If it can be proved that the Romans, both by their Language and their customs,
are manifestly no other than a colony from the East, if their first Lawgivers
were either Jews or at least Assyrians, in that Latitude of the word in which
Mr. Seldom takes it in the Prolegomena to the best Book that ever he writ, if
their Priests De Diis Syris.
and their Sacrifices both name and thing were most of them, as I shall prove
they were, pure Hebrew; if after this it can be proved that the matrimonial
prohibitions among the ancient Jews and Romans, in all other instances were
exactly the same, and if it can likewise be proved, as it shall beyond all
possibility or color of contradiction, that the Marriage of Cousin Germans,
was absolutely forbidden by the ancient Laws and usages of Rome, then certainly
all this if it will not serve to demonstrate, that the same prohibition
obtained among the Jews, yet it will add an invincible force and strength to
all those arguments, which are a great many, by which the Unlawfulness of such
Marriages shall be proved either out of the Law it self, or out of such other
Antiquity, as I shall undeniably demonstrate, to be transcribed from it, and
then I hope it will be 32 H. 8. c. 38.
granted that the Act of Parliament it self, which does expressly proceed upon
the Levitical measures, and does as plainly pronounce all those degrees to be
Unlawful, which are included within the Mosaical prohibitions, does by so doing
condemn the Marriage of Cousin Germans as incestuous and Unlawful, which
besides the Natural and formal Unlawfulness of such Marriages in themselves,,
which shall be abundantly manifested and made out, is all the satisfaction as
to this point, which the Lawyers themselves can desire.

The Second thing to be observed, or rather again to be reflected upon and
applied to the matter in question, from what has been discoursed above, is
that the pulling off the Shoe or the standing or sitting barefoot in the
Eastern Countries, was, as it is still, a posture of adoration or a posture
used in divine Worship; and I appeal to any man, let him be who he will that
will but lay aside prejudice, and give an equal Judgment between Mr. Seldom and
me, whether this notion does not perfectly reconcile and explain the pretended
disagreement betwixt the two writers of Deuteronomy and Ruth, and remove all
further occasion or pretense of scruple, whether the Marriage of Boaz to Ruth,
were in consequence and pursuance of that Law of Moses by which the Brother was
obliged to raise up Seed to the Brother.

Thirdly and Lastly, it is again to be taken notice, that neither of those two
places are a perfect and complete account of the whole ceremony or formality of
this matter, but that the defects of the one are to be supplied out of the
other, and if it be true what the Writer of the Book of Ruth does expressly
affirm, that this was the manner in former time in Israel, concerning redeeming
and concerning changing, for to confirm all things, a man plucked off his Shoe,
and gave it to his neighbor, and this was a testimony in Israel; then if the
Marriage of the Brother to the Brothers Wife, were for the redemption of the
Inheritance, as it is certain it was, Hebr. Temourah; 70.(...).
if this were as real a changing, that is, as real a bargain or contract as any
other; if it were done as publicly and solemnly in the face of the whole
Congregation, as in this contract betwixt Ruth and Boaz, which it is certain it
was from Deuteronomy. 25. v. 8, 9, then it is plain that it required also the usual
way of confirmation, which this Author tells us to have been the practice of
former times for a testimony in Israel, which is an undeniable and unanswerable
demonstration of the agreement of this place of Ruth, with that of Deuteronomy
in the Law of Moses.

Again when the same Writer tells us that this was the practice in former time
in Israel, this is a plain intimation that at that time when this Book was
written it was disused, and that this Book was at least written some time
before the Captivity of Babylon, appears from the untainted Hebraism of its
style, which after that, began to degenerate into Chalday, as appears by the
Books of Daniel and Esther which were written in that period, and also from
those of Ezrah and Nehemiah immediately after it.

It is certain that at this day the Jews do not put in practice that their
ancient custom of the Brothers raising up Seed to the deceased Brother, nay,
they expressly forbid it under pain of Excommunication, as P. Fagius tells us
upon Deuteronomy. 25. 9. Anathemate quoque hodi^ illorum Rabbini caverunt ne quis
ducat uxorem defuncti fratris sui, imo ipsa pecuniam dare cogitur fratri
defuncti mariti ut eam liberam dimittat, and Mr. Seldom tells us out of R. Leo
Mutinensis. Judaeis recentioribus mos c. 14. De successionibus ad Fin. cap.
inolevit, ut, cum filiam quis sposponderit viro, cui plures fratres, ab ipsis
cunctis plerumque exigatur obligatio, se juri huic, si sponsus, uxore
superstite, obierit, solenni more renuntiaturos, (id quod ex lege sacra fas
est) ne scilicet libera secundo nubendi facultas fratriae deesset and interdum
maritus moribundus divortii libello Matrimonium solvit, ne frater inhians
fratriae doti, ex hoc jure familiae damno siet. And the same Fagius tells us in
his Notes upon the 6th verse v. etiam Bux torf. synag. Judaic. c. 30.
of the same Chapter of Deuteronomy, that this usage has ceased among the Jews
ever since the Babylonish Captivity, Erant says he, distinctae possessiones
ante Babylonicam Captivitatem; quae sic discretae per hanc legem servabantur,
post Babylonicam Captivitatem haec lex abolita fuit. Causa enim illius, nempe
possessionum distinctio, non superfuit. And I allow his reason to v. plura. ^c.
be excellently good, but yet by his favor and with the good leave of the
Rabbis whom he follows, I affirm that this Law was antiquated and out of date,
long before this time. The general reason of my Judgment in this particular I
have given already, because that Book which appears to have been written before
that Captivity, though we know not how long, speaks of some part at least of
the Ceremony belonging to this Law or custom of the Jews, as already antiquated
and out of use. This was the manner in former time, says he, in Israel; which
is as much as to say, that then when this Book was written that custom had
expired.

But if you will needs have a particular time assigned, when this practice
began to be disused, tho I am not obliged to give any more than a general proof
that it was de facto so, that this usage did really expire some time before the
Captivity, yet that I may not seem to balk any difficulty, and that I may the
more effectually demonstrate the Ignorance of the Rabbis, and their adherents,
which it is my design to expose, that no man may be deceived hereafter with
hard names and Hebrew Roots, and that no man's pride, or vanity, or laborious
folly may hereafter be miscalled by the deservedly venerable and sacred name of
Learning, I will therefore instance in a particular time when I believe this
custom to have ceased, and when I have given the reasons of my opinion, I will
then submit it to the public Judgment whether the Rabbis or I be in the right.

The time which I shall pitch upon, shall be that of the division of Israel and
Judah into two Kingdoms by the policy and seditious practices of Jeroboam, at
which time it is expressly said that he expelled all the Levites out of his
dominions, in which there being forty Levitical Number. 35.
Citys, four in each Tribe, these two things do naturally and unavoidably
follow.

First, That the Levites being driven out of all their Cities, belonging to the
Ten Tribes, over which Jereboam ruled, it was impossible that the Levitical
Cities which remained in the other Tribes of Benjamin and Judah, together with
the half Tribe of Manasseh, which is to be taken into this account, should hold
them all, together with their Wives, Children, Servants, Goods and Cattle,
wherefore it was necessary they should be allowed to shift for themselves, and
to settle up and down in common with the other Jews, living by their Labor,
and enjoying Land of Inheritance, if by their industry they could get it, as
well as others.

And as their slocking in such numbers into the Territory of the King of Judah,
must needs make the alteration I have mentioned in those places whether they
repaired, so if you consider the Cities which they left, together with the
Suburbs or Pomaeria belonging to them, these Cities being all of them filled
upon the banishment of the old Proprietors, by new Inhabitants, this makes a
new and a very great alteration in the old partition or distribution of Lands
which was settled by Moses and Joshua at the first arrival of their Fathers out
of Egypt.

But you will say perhaps, that these Cities were bestowed upon Jeroboam's new
Priests, whom he set up in their stead, of the meanest of the people; to which
it may be answered,

First, That this being only said not proved a bare denial is a sufficient
answer to a bare affirmation.

2. Since Jeroboam established not only a new Priesthood but a new Worship
too, erecting his Golden Calves in Dan and Bethel, it is more likely that his
new Priests and his new Altars went together, and that Dan and Bethel were the
only places, where this Lay Priesthood, and Mongrel Clergy resided.

Thirdly, The reason why this new establishment was made being expressly
assigned, 1 Kings 12. 27. If this people go up to do Sacrifice in the House of
the Lord at Jerusalem, then shall the heart of this people turn again unto
their Lord, even unto Rehoboam King of Judah. And then it follows, v. 28, 29.
Whereupon the King took counsel and made two Calves of Gold, and said unto
them, it is too much for you to go up to Jerusalem: Behold thy Gods, O Israel,
which brought thee up out of the Land of Egypt, and he set the one in Bethel
and the other in Dan.

Now the motive which induced him to make this alteration, being so expressly
set down viz. lest the heart of this people turn again unto their Lord; and it
being certain, which was the fundamental Maxim upon which Jeroboam proceeded,
that an union in the manners and customs of any nation with another, does also
produce an union of heart and mind into the bargain; and it being equally
certain by experience that this is much more true in all kind of religious
observances and rites, than in any other, that an uniformity in divine Worship,
does naturally produce a strange and admirable sympathy of will and affection
in men to one another; and the contrary to this, a diversity in the outward
modes and formalities of Divine Service, if obstinately adhered to and
affectedly embraced and hugged by the several parties, produces as strange and
unaccountable an enmity betwixt them; it was for the interest of Jeroboam,
whose design was to make the hatred of the two people of Israel and Judah, as
mortal and inveterate as he could; it was but a consequence of that fundamental
reason upon which he proceeded, to alter the old establishment of the Mosaic
or Levitical Kingdom, as I may so call it, as much as ever he either could or
durst, that so the greatness of their disagreement as to the customs or
constitutions of this divided people, might produce the greater hatred and
aversion in them both for one another; which was the very thing he intended,
and which it was so highly and so manifestly his interest to promote by all the
contrivances and all the stratagems that either wit or malice could devise.

Fourthly, It would be much more for the advantage of such an usurper to divide
those Cities among the common people, as a common prey, to unite them to one
another, and to himself, and against his Enemies, by a common band of mutual
and reciprocal interest among them all, which is found by experience to be the
strongest and the most lasting engagement of affection, than by setting up a
new order of men that had no legal right to what they enjoyed, and separating
them after the Levitical manner from the rest of the People, to raise the
hatred and envy of the commonalty against them both, the King and his new
Priests together.

And as it has been the practice of this and other ages, as well as of that of
Jeroboam, to lay the foundation of civil alterations in some either real or
pretended scruples of Religion, so when those scruples had taken their effect,
and had subverted the goodly frame of Government and the peaceable dependence
of the several parts of a wise and beautiful establishment upon each other,
then to secure themselves in that Dominion which they had Usurped, it was the
policy of the leading Rebels to throw the Kings and Churches Lands, as a spoil
among the people, the better to engage them in interest to stand by their new
Masters, to which no principle of Duty could oblige them.

But Fifthly, If he would not suffer the people to scramble for the spoil, yet
still there was a better way than to give it to the Priests, and that was to
turn all these Levitical Cities, into so many Garrison Towns, or Nurseries for
Soldiers, and military men to keep his Subjects in awe and serve him in his
foreign Wars, and it is the more likely that he took this or some such course;
because no Usurpation can be long maintained without a standing Army, whereas a
rightful Authority is a thing to which all men have a reverence, because it is
a part of that regular and wholesome justice by which every man is secure in
the enjoyment of his own, it is a thing against which no man can have a just
pretense, and which none but necessitous or desperate persons, whose ruin is
usually owing to their vices, can have any real interest to oppose.

Or Sixthly, If he did not take any of these courses, yet he might have farmed
out these Levitical Cities and their dependancies at an easy and under rate,
by which he would have been sure to oblige many thousands of his subjects, and
would have filled his Coffers into the bargain, which would upon both accounts
have been a very great and considerable accession of strength and power to
himself. They might have held their Lands by Knights Service, as has been the
practice formerly in England, and as the Timariots in Turkey do at this time.

Seventhly, In the 2 Chronicles. 13. 9. Abijah the King of Judah, son to Rehoboam,
in whose time the division of the two Kingdoms happened, thus expostulates with
Jeroboam the King of Israel, by whose faithless and rebellious practices that
division was occasioned. Have ye not cast out the Priests of the Lord the Sons
of Aaron, and the Levites, and have made you Priests after the manner of the
nations of other Lands? In which words it is plain not only that the Priests of
the Lord the Sons of Aaron were cast out, but that they are perfectly opposed
to the Priests of Jeroboam, not only as a new Priesthood, but as a Priesthood
after another manner; and what manner was that? why, it was the manner of the
nations of other Lands, which could not be after the Levitical platform,
because the Levites were set apart from the rest of the Tribes, and the
Firstborn of the Children of Israel, whose persons they did by this their
separation sustain, were consecrated and set apart from the rest of their
Families, for a particular reason in which the Jews themselves, and no other
nation under Heaven but themselves, were concerned.

But in the Eighth place, Abijah goes on, and does not only tell us in the
words already produced, that the Priesthood of Jeroboam was after a distinct
manner from that of the Levites, but in the very next words he immediately
acquaints us what that manner was, so that, says he, Whosoever comes to
consecrate himself with a Young Bullock and seven Rams, the same may be a
Priest of them that are no Gods. It seems therefore that it was at every man's
pleasure to be a Priest or no Priest, as he pleased himself, a lively picture
of our late confusions, when the Sons of Aaron and the Levites were discarded,
and instead of them Cobblers and Weavers consecrated themselves to the Office of
the Priesthood, and it was a sufficient call to the Ministry, for a Mechanic
to be lazy or not to thrive upon his Handicraft Trade.

The consequence of which is, that there being no regular Priesthood, but every
man being a Priest or no Priest, as he pleased himself, there could be no
regular maintenance neither. And indeed what can be more unreasonable than to
suppose, that there being such a maintenance, settled for the Priesthood in
general, without regard to the persons either as to their quality or number, as
fast as any man grew lazy, or discontented, or infirm and unfit for business,
or opinionative of himself, and his qualifications for the Priesthood, he
should be admitted not only into the number of the Priests, but at his own
pleasure invest himself in a right of feeding upon the sacrifices and enjoying
all the benefits and emoluments of the Priestly-Office; how must the Clergy
needs swarm at this rate with a pack of lewd, scandalous, and lazy fellows, or
who that had not a prospect of very fair advantages, would be at any pains or
trouble to get his living, when such encouragements were proposed to Idleness
and Sloth? Or what maintenance indeed would be sufficient, for such an
incredible swarm of sluggards and slow Bellies, the Pest and public Nuisance of
that miserable state, that is So unhappy as to give them entertainment? so that
this it self would have altered the Levitical constitution, without any more
ado, because though the Ecclesiastical Revenues and Demesnes had been
converted by Jeroboam to the use of his new Priests, yet they would not have
sufficed; so that all things lying in this confusion, and the regular
constitution of the Priesthood being destroyed, which is the only peaceable
expedient in all nations to keep the people in Obedience, it was necessary, as
has been said, that the Kingdom of Israel should be governed by a standing
Army, this being the only way left, when the several parts of the Government
are not so regularly built, as to be able to support themselves, to preserve
the public peace: And it appears plainly, that this was the very case, by the
several changes that were made in the Kingdom of Israel, which did not continue
long in the Family of Jeroboam, but suffered many alterations and removeals out
of one Family into another, which is the usual inconvenience of such a standing
force, as may be seen sufficiently in the History of the late times; when the
Army without any other warranty than that of the Sword, murdered Kings,
dissolved Parliaments, set up and deposed Protectours, as they called them, at
their pleasure. And besides the late revolutions in the Muscovian Empire, and
some few instances in the Turkish story, though a people that take a pride in
being Slaves, and seem to be born for nothing so much as to obey, the Roman
History, whether you consider the horrid Butcheries of Marius and Sulla, or
after them of, Coesar and Pompey, before the Empire began, or in the Monarchy
it self, the story of Otho, Galba, Vitellius and Vespasian, all of them
Emperors, and the three first sacrifices to their own ambition and to the power
of their Enemies, within little more than the compass of one single year. Or if
you look still lower into the Reigns and Deaths of those Emperors that
succeeded the first Twelve, you shall find almost all of them the creatures of
military Tumult and Sedition, made what they were by the sole Power and
Authority of the Sword, and clothed with the Robes of Majesty and all the
habiliments of Imperial greatness, only to adorn the tragical Scene of blood
that was to follow, and to make them the more pompous and magnificentsacrifice
to the lust and ambition of those that set them up.

Which things, by the way, if the difsenters from our Church would seriously
consider, if they would reflect how impossible it is, but a toleration of every
man's fancy and opinion in Religious Worship, and of his outward practice and
behavior in consequence of that inward fancy and preconceived opinion, must of
necessity produce a Babel of disagreeing Sects and Parties which can no
otherwise be kept in awe, but by a standing Army. If they would remember the
perpetual taxations and arbitrary pressures to which this way of Government did
so long expose either themselves or their Fathers; if they would think a little
with themselves to what uncertainty and hazard, the estates, the persons and
the lives of men are exposed by such a military constitution, where Power, and
not Justice, gives sentence at the Bar, and executes that arbitrary sentence at
the Scaffold; if they would recollect a little with themselves, that Bloody,
rapacious, and arbitrary story of the late Wicked and Rebellious times, which
they will not endure to hear from others; if they could Sum up, what scarce
any numbers are capable of reaching, the infinite blessings of security and
peace, the infinite mischiefs, cruelties, and devastations of War; If they
would revolve over again within themselves the fatal and frequent revolutions
of the late giddy and slippery usurpation, which not being supported, as it
could not be, by a stable principle of Duty, and Religion, was tossed to and
fro, and staggered like a drunken man with every new Wind of Ambition,
Enthusiasm, or design, of private revenge or popular discontent; if they would
but suffer themselves to discern, what is very clear from the nature of the
thing, which is the measure upon which wise men proceed, and from the
experience of former times, which the proverb tells us is the Mistress of
Fools, that such an unbounded liberty, as a public toleration of all parties
and opinions amounts to, cannot otherwise be hindered from having all the ill
effects of a perpetual confusion without a standing force, to curb the
insolence of the contending parties, and hinder them from preying upon one
another? If the same experience of our late troubles be sufficient to instruct
us that even this expedient will not do, but that the plague of division and
sectarian animosity will creep out of the City into the Camp, and will rage
there so much the more strongly as a malignant Fever does in a robust and
firm, than in a less masculine or vigorous constitution? If they could but
persuade themselves to believe, so easy a proposition as this, that one good
King, is better than Ten thousand cruel, avaritious and mercenary Tyrants; that
it is better to have liberty and peace for nothing than to pay Sixty or an
Hundred Thousand Pounds a Month for being slaves and vassals to the meanest of
the people, the very offscowring and refuse of mankind. Certainly who ever will
give himself the leisure to consider of these things, or will but have the
patience to hear them, when they are told him by another, must unavoidably
conclude, that one of these four things are true; either peace and happiness,
are things perfectly unlawful in themselves, and mankind is under a perfect
obligation to be at perpetual strife and variance with each other, which is not
only a very strange Doctrine, but I am confident in the midst of all that
infinite variety of opinions and factions, with which the last Age was
infested, a very new one too; or else in the second place he must be forced to
say, that the terms of Unity that are established by Law, are in themselves
unlawful to be submitted to: Or else thirdly that the use of the only lawful
and absolutely necessary means in order to a Lawful end, are in themselves
Unlawful; or else lastly, he will find himself obliged to submit to the present
establishment of the Church of England, which by the acknowledgment of most of
the dissenters themselves, enjoyes nothing at all but what would in it self be
Lawful if it were not imposed: And if the imposition makes it Unlawful, it is
only for this reason because peace and happiness are so too, for so long as men
are so subject as they are to fall out, about very small matters; so long as
there are and will always be, so many whose consciences are tender to a
disease, and so many that have no sense of tenderness or of consciance at all;
so long as it is natural for the pretenses of the one to become the scruples
and grievances of the other, which they always will, wherever liberty and
toleration is permitted; it will be impossible to keep the world, in any
condition that has the face of quietness or peace, without a public rule of
discipline and obedience which shall be the square and measure of every man's
external behavior in Religious matters.

But this is only by the by, for I do not design in this place to enter the
lists with any of our dissenting Brethren, to whom ere it be long, I shall give
another opportunity, if they shall think it for the credit of their party or
themselves to embrace it, to stand up in defense of a no less foolish than
wicked separation; And so I return to the story of Jeroboam, which gave the
occasion to this short excursion, and I affirm that it would have been morally
impossible so many revolutions, and changes should have happened, as there did,
in the Israelitish Kingdom, in so short a time, which was transferred so
frequently from one person and family to another, but by the means of a
standing Army, which though for the time it be the natural instrument of a
great and uncontrouleable power, yet without a miracle of prudence in those
that are to govern, and of submission and good temper in those that are to
obey, it cannot be the expedient of a safe and a lasting sovereignty over men.

It is true indeed that God told Jeroboam by the mouth of Ahijah the Prophet. 1
KIngs 14. v. 7, 8, 9, 10, 11. For as much as I exalted thee from among the
people, and made thee Prince over my people Israel, And rent the Kingdom away
from the House of David, and gave it thee, and yet thou have not been as my
servant David, who kept my commandments, and who followed me with all his
heart, to do that only which was right in mine eyes, but have done evil above
all that were before thee, for thou have gone and made thee other Gods, and
molten Images to provoke me to anger, and have cast me behind thy back:
Therefore, behold, I will bring evil upon the house of Jeroboam, and will cut
off from Jeroboam him that pisseth against the Wall, and him that is shut up
and left in Israel, and will take away the Remnant of the House of Jeroboam, as
a man takes away dung, till it be all gone; him that dies of Jeroboam in the
City shall the Dogs eat, and him that dies in the Field shall the Fowls of the
air eat, for the Lord has spoken it.

From which place though I do not deny but it is very clear, that the
destruction of Jeroboam and his House was the effect of a supernatural
Judgment, yet for all that it does not follow, and it appears 1 Kings 15. 29.
de facto that it was so, but that this Judgment might be brought about, by
natural and human means, and it being so necessary, as it has been shown it
was, to Jeroboams circumstances, that he should govern by an Army, it is most
likely that the ruin of his Family was effected, by the ambition or discontent
of some who had considerable interest and power in the Soldiery, a sort of
military and therefore dangerous propularity, which is always justly suspected
and formidable to Princes. Neither can any good reason be given, why the Kings
of Judah, notwithstanding most of them were as wicked and as Idolatrous as
those of Israel, continued all the while, till the time of the Captivity, in
the line of David, while so many changes and revolutions happened in the
Kingdom of Israel, but that in the first, the Government was more civil or
rather Ecclesiastical, whose parts were all regularly knit and fastened to each
other, but in the latter more turbulent, and military than the former, it being
but natural for disobliged, or necessitous or designing men with Swords in
their hands, and a band of resolute Partisans at their heels, to carve out
their own satisfaction, whenever they thirst after greatness or revenge, and to
endeavor the advancement of themselves, though by all the foul Acts and
mischevious effects of Treason and Rebellion.

The first change or alteration that was made in the Kingdom of Israel, was in
the time of Nadab the immediate Son of Jeroboam himself, 1 Kings 15. 27. Baasha
the Son of Ahijah, of the House of Issachar, conspired against him (Nadab) and
Baasha smote him at Gibbethon, which belongs to the Philistines, for Nadab
and all Israel laid siege to Gibbethon. In which words as it is expressly
declared that Baasha the Son of Issachar conspired against him* so nothing can
be more plain, than that this was done by a motus castrensis, it was a
conspiracy formed in the Leaguer, by the power and interest of Baasha in the
Army, as they lay entrenched before the walls of Gibbethon.

The next Revolution that fell out after this, was in the time of Elah, the
immediate Son and successor of Baasha, by the Treason of Zimri, 1 Kings 16. 9,
10. His Servant Zimri, Captain of half his Chariots, conspired against him, as
he was in Tirzah, drinking himself drunk in the House of Arza, Steward of his
House in Tirzah, and Zimri went in and smote him, and killed him, in the Twenty
and Seventh year of Asa King of Judah, and Reigned in his stead. Where, this
Treason being effected by so great a commander, the Captain of half his
Chariots, being done so publicly, as he was sitting in the midst of his
Friends, and in the sight of his very Guards themselves, who it is very likely
were of the confederacy with Zimri against their Master, and Zimri being able
not only to perpetrate so black a Treason, but also to place himself upon the
Throne of Israel in the room of him, whom he had with so much baseness and
perfidiousness removed from it; all these things do sufficiently show, that it
was not the wicked rashness of one single man, but it was a formed Confederacy
in that part of the Army, that was at that time in and about Tirzah, being
appointed, as it seems to me, for the guard of the Kings person, while the rest
of the people were still encamped against Gibbethon (a siege more tedious than
that of Troy or Veii) which belonged to the Philistines.

And they not siding with Zimri in his wickedness, but on the contrary, being
desperately incensed against him, and resolved to revenge his perfidiousness to
the utmost, they immediately quitted the Blockade of Gibbethon, and came and
sat down before Tirzah, where Zimri and his party had ensconced and fortified
themselves, which siege was pushed on with so much application and vigor, that
they soon made themselves Masters of the place, for Zimri enjoyed his ill
gotten dominion, no longer then Seven Days, 1 Kings 16. 15. and then saw
himself reduced to that extremity, that there being no middle way, but either
he must dispatch himself, or fall into the hands of an enraged Rabble, whose
insolence and inhuman barbarity is usually so great, that death is a kindness
in comparison of those indignities, which the living suffer when fallen into
such cruel and unmerciful hands, he did as became a man that had been worthy to
Reign, had he not waded to the Throne through the Blood of him that sat upon
it, he chose to die rather by the* same hand that had destroyed his Master,
than suffer himself to be made a public spectacle of infamy and disgrace, an
hissing and a laughing stock to Boys and Beggars. And therefore as the Roman
Senators and other aged Persons when the Gauls came in, and the Young men that
were fit for service, were all of them retired into the Capitol, sat every man
ready to receive the satal stroke, in his best attire, and in the Robes or
Habiliments of those honors and offices which he had born in the City, that so
they might perish like themselves, and as became those that had lived like men,
and understood how to die like such; so here Zimri when he saw the City was
taken, and that there was no hope left, that he might perish like a King, he
went into the Palace of the Kings House and burnt the Kings House over him with
fire, and died. After the same manner that Sardanapalus did, who though his
life have nothing in it, but what was soft and effeminate beyond expression,
yet being driven to that hard dilemma either to die like a man or undergo the
unsupportable reproaches and indignities of a brutish and inveterat Rabble,
the beasts of the people, as the Psalmist calls them, he made a wise choice of
that extreme, which was more suitable to the greatness of his Birth and
Fortune, and expired in the midst of his Palace and his Concubines, with all
his luxury and all his vices flaming about his ears, so that though it cannot
be denied that he lived like a fool, as every man does who gives himself up to
that excess of delicacy and effeminate pleasure, yet we may say of his death,
as David said of Abners, Died Sardanapalus, as a fool dies? or was it not
rather true, that a Prince and a great man was fallen that day in Assyria? Or
was not this better than to be carried about like Bajazet, by the Tartarian
inhumanity of Tamberlain in a Cage, or like one of the Pseudo Philippi in Henry
the Sevenths time to be made a drudg or Scullion in a Kitchen, or had not
Bajazet himself done more like an Emperor and a Gallant, Sultan had he tried
which was hardest, his unfortunate head, or the servile grate of that inhumane
Cage much sooner than he did.

I cannot stand now to enter into a nice disquisition of this case of Zimri,
and to determine how far, or in what circumstances it may be Lawful or
excuseable for a man to take his leave of a troublesome and uneasy world,
before the course of nature be expired, by committing v. I. Lips. manuduc. ad
Philos. Stoic. L. 3. dissert. 22. 23. and Grot. de jur. B. and P. L. 2. S. 19.
5. 5.
some Act of violence upon himself, a case that has been often disputed pro
and con by the greatest wits of antiquity, and by the learned men of later
times, only thus much, I hope, I may presume to say, that if in any case it be
a Lawful or excusable practice, it is in this of Zimri, to avoid the
insupportable indignities of an incensed crowd, who will not spare. him at the
last, but kill him Ten thousand times, before they are so kind to give him
leave to die, by exquisite torments and insufferable affronts and by all the
barbarous cruelties and abuses that the most ingenious malice can invent.

This was the course that Sampson took, when he was sent for by the Philistines
to make them sport, and Saul and his Armor bearer to avoid the insolences of
the same barbarous People, fell upon their own Swords, and chose to die of
themselves; and besides, that this practice, of which there are so many
instances up and down in the Scripture, is not mentioned any where with any
reprehension, it seems by the example of Brutus to be not only natural, but
unavoidable for gallant minds in this extremity to betake themselves to this
course, for he, though he censured Cato so severely for it, (...), yet when he
came into the same circumstance he followed Cato's example, and chose rather to
die by the same fatal hand that was yet reeking in the blood of Caesar, than
submit to all the affronts and indignities of those, who had vowed to revenge
that ungrateful parricide upon him, and fought for nothing more than to appease
the angry Ghost of the perpetual Dictatours with the Blood of those bold
conspirators that had robbed him of his Empire and his life together.

I conclude therefore, what cannot be denied, whatever becomes of the
Lawfulness of such a course, which I am loath to concern my self about, utpote
quo nemo fortasse penitius intellexit, omnem istam, quae institui solet (...),
disceptationem, in summa rerum verborumque lub^icitateversari, yet that it is
at least an argument of a great and generous mind, and I cannot v. Lips. ubi
supra, collat. cum dissert 6 and 7. ibidem.
but wonder at the Stoics, who made so light a matter of bidding the World
good night upon every small occasion and yet pretended all the while that their
wise man was utterly destitute and devoid of passions, that he had no sense of
pain or of misfortune, and that he could be completely and entirely happy,
happy in himself, and in the pleasing sense of his own Wisdom and Virtue, in
the worst circumstances that fortune could inflict, or human life was capable
of being exposed to.

It is upon this occasion likewise further to be observed, that though the
Regicide of Elah by Zimri were, as it is expressly affirmed that it was, v. 13.
a calamity which was the effect of a divine Judgment for the sins of Baasha and
the sins of Elah his Son, and the same was the case of Jeroboam, whose Line and
Kingdom was destroyed in the person of his immediate Son and successor, Nadab;
yet Zimri who was the instrument of the divine vengeance, is by no means
excused or Justified for what he did, but on the contrary, the people disowned
and disavowed the fact, v. 16. and God himself brands it with the name of
Treason, v. 20. Now the rest of the Acts of Zimri and his Treason that he
wrought are they not written in the Book of the Chronicles of the Kings of
Israel? And how extremely displeasing that treachery and perfidiousness of his
was to Almighty God, may be seen in part by the shortness of his Reign, which
was but of Seven Days continuance, v. 15. And lastly his memory was so odious
to after Ages, that his name was made use of to a proverb, as the great example
of Treachery, and the warning piece to others to beware of the same Judgments,
which overtook him for it, as Jezebel said to Jehu when he entered in at the
Gate, had Zimri peace, who slew his Master? 2 Kings 9. 31. But of this and
other matters of a resembling nature, I have discoursed more largely in what I
have said elsewhere, concerning the revolt of Jeroboam from the House of David,
and concerning the instance of Nebuchadnezzar King of Babylon, who was forsaken
and abandoned, though, in the midst of the utmost cruelties and provocations,
never actually resisted and much less slain by his subjects; in which place I
have likewise explained that whole Chapter of the Prophet Daniel, with all the
certainty and unquestionable evidence even of direct and strictly Mathematical
demonstration, and to what I have said there, I shall here only add that,
nothing can justify Rebellion against a Lawful Prince, but such an express
Warrant and Commission as Jehu had, 2 Kings 9. v. 6, 7. where the Prophet
poured Oil upon his head, and said unto him, thus says the Lord God of Israel,
I have Anointed thee King over the People of the Lord, even over Israel. And
thou shall smite the House of Ahab thy Master. But I am very confident, if we
have no Rebellion, till we have so plain a Warrant and commission too, we and
our Children after us, may be very peaceable and quiet subjects for many, nay,
for all succeeding generations.

Zimri being thus dispatched out of the way, the next that succeeded him in the
Throne of Israel was Omri the Captain of the host, whom the people made King
over Israel in the Camp, and he, though it cannot be denied but he was a Lawful
King, the House of Baasha being extinct, 1 Kings 16. 12. And Zimri not being a
rightful Prince, but an Usurping Traitor, v. 20. And therefore in this case it
was Lawful for the People of Israel to choose them another to be King over them;
yet this is another instance of the Power of the Soldiery in deposing of
Princes, and in setting them upon the Throne, and of the dangers and
vicissitudes to which any Nation is exposed, when it is governed by the Sword,
and is at the mercy of a standing Army, in which every new sedition and every
fresh discontent endangers the continuance of the public peace, and makes a
proportionable revolution in the state.

Omri enjoyed quietly as long as he lived, the Crown and Kingdom of Israel,
which the Armies choice, v. 16. and his own merit and Loyalty, in revenging the
death of his late Master Elah, had bestowed upon him; but yet it is said, v.
26. that he walked in all the way of Jeroboam the Son of Nebat, and in his sin
wherewith he made Israel to sin, to provoke the Lord God of Israel to anger
with their vanities. However he Reigned quietly for the space of Twelve Years,
v. 23. and then he slept with his Fathers, v. 28. Which is as much as to say
that he died in peace and by a natural death, and Ahab his Son Reigned in his
stead, v. 29.

Ahab a very wicked and Idolatrous King, after having reigned for the space of
Twenty and Two Years, was slain at Ramoth Gilead in Battle against the King of
Syria, and was succeeded by Ahaziah his Son, whose Reign was very short, for he
Reigned but Two Years, 1 Kings 22. 51. and was succeeded by Jehoram, not his
Son, for it is said expressly, that he had none, 2 Kings 1. 17, but his
Brother, for Jehoram is expressly called the Son of Ahab, 2. Kings 3. 1. and v.
2. it is said, that he wrought evil in the sight of the Lord, but not like his
Father, (that is, Ahab) and like his Mother (that is, Jezebel) for he put away
the Image of Baal that his Father had made, that is again, Ahab; for so it is
said of Ahab, 1 Kings 16. 31. that he went and served Baal and Worshipped him,
and v. 32. He reared up an Altar for Baal in the House of Baal.

Jehoram was succeeded by Jehu the Son of Nimshi, the Captain General of all
Jehorams forces, a man very famous for his exploits in War, and particularly
for the boldness and fury of his attacks in Battle, who knowing very well, that
expedition is the very life of business, when the messengers from Jehoram came
one after another to ask him, is it peace? would not so much as stay to give
them audience, but with a military roughness, what have thou said he, to do
with peace? turn thee behind me, and so drove on with all the speed he could
for Jezreel, where Joram lay to be healed of the Wounds, which he had received
in a late Battle against Hazael King of Syria at Ramah; and the Watchman that
stood upon an eminence to observe what became of the messengers that were sent,
knew that it was Jehu by the fury of his driving, though neither of the
Messengers that were sent returned; the driving said he, is like the driving of
Jehu, the Son of Nimshi, for he drives furiously.

And though it cannot be denied that Jehu was in a most especial manner
appointed by God himself for the sins of Jehoram and the House of Omri to be
King, and was accordingly Anointed to the Kingly Office by the prophet, as has
already been shown, yet this divine designation had its effect by natural and
human means, by the power and interest of Jehu in the Army under his Command,
as it was in the case of Omri, the head of that Royal family which was
extinguished in the person of Jehoram, and of his Seventy Brethren the Sons of
Ahab 2 Kings c. 10. For so it is expressly said, when Jehu had acquainted the
Captains of the Host, with the subject of the Prophets message to him 2 Kings
9. 12. Thus says the Lord, I have Anointed thee King over Israel, that v. 13.
they hasted and took every man his Garment, and put it under him on the top of
the Stairs, and blew with Trumpets saying, Jehu is King; and Jehu's party that
had proclaimed him, was so strong, that the rulers of Jezreel and the Elders
that brought up Ahabs Children, being Seventy in number, c. 10. saw it was in
vain to insist upon their right, against so powerful a pretender to the Throne,
v. 4. behold, two Kings stood not before him (that is, Jehoram King of Israel
and Ahaziah King of Judah, how then shall we stand? so that they were forced,
though, as it seems, contrary to their Inclinations to comply with the
Conqueror in a very cruel and sanguinary Command, v. 6. take ye the heads of
the men, year Masters Sons, and come to me to Jezreel by to morrow this time,
and accordingly it came to pass, v. 7. when Jehu' s letter came to them, that
they took the Kings Sons (being seventy persons which were with the great men
of the City, that brought them up, v. 6.) and put their heads in Baskets and
sent them to Jezreel, and as he had served his Sons, so he served likewise, all
that remained of the House of Ahab in Jezreel, and all his great Men and his
Kinsfolks, and his Priests, until he left him none remaining. v. 11. So that
this is another instance of military revolutions, and of the mischiefs and
calamities, to which that nation is exposed, where Armies are in constant pay,
and are either divided among themselves, in the consequences of which division
the State cannot be unconcerned, or acted unanimously by their own discontents,
or by the designs, the ambitions, or the private and concealed resentments of
their leaders, or when being at leisure from any Foreign service they are at
leisure likewise to do the more mischief at home, as it is morally, impossible
so great a body of men, made up for the most part, as it is in all the world
besides, of a mixed multitude of Knaves and Fools, should not brew some
mischief, when they are out of Employment, and the Commanders have little else
to do but to lay out a Scheme of greatness for themselves, and then pursue the
means of compassing their designs.

Jehu Reigned Twenty and Eight Years, and at length died in peace, and slept
with his Fathers, and Jehoahaz his Son Reigned in his stead, 2 Kings 10. 35,
36. And in the line of Jehu the Kingdom of Israel continued, during the Reigns
of the four Immediately succeeding Princes, that is to say, Jehoahaz, Jehoash,
Jeroboam the second of that name, and Zachariah, against whom Shallum the Son
of Jabesh conspired, c. 15. 10. and that it was by a public and formed
conspiracy, as well as any of those other changes in the Crown of Israel which
have been mentioned, appears by this, that it is said, that he smote him before
the people and that he Reigned in his stead. The first of which he would not
have dared to do, and the last he could not possibly have effected, had he not
had before hand a considerable power and interest in the people before whom he
is said to have slain Zachariah.

But to see the inconstancy of disloyal Subjects, who have once forfeited their
Allegiance to their Lawful Prince, they can be true to no Interest, no Person,
or Estabishment (as it proved by our own experience in the late giddy times,)
when once they have prostituted that incommunicable fidelity, which is wholly
and entirely due to the rightful and Lawful King and to none else besides him,
for Shallum Reigned but One single Mouth and then gave place to Fate and to the
more powerful interest of Menahem the Son of Gadi, who went up from Tirzah, and
came to Samaria, and smote Shallum the Son of Jabesh in Samaria, and slew him
and Reigned in his stead, 2 Kings 15. 14. And with what cruelty he managed
that power which he had gotten, and the conquest which he and his party had
made over Shallum and his adherents, appears immediately in the next words, and
is a woeful example as well as the story of Jehu, of those unspeakable miseries
and devastations, with which all public revolutions are generally attended, v.
16. he smote Tiphsah and all that were therein, and the coasts thereof from
Tirzah: because they opened not to him therefore he smote it, and (as if Tipsah
and Tredagh had been the same) he put all the Inhabitants and the Garrison to
the Sword, And all the Women therein, that were with Child he ripped up; and the
cause of this cruelty being expressed, because they opened not unto him, this
shows what divisions and animosities there were at that time in Israel, some
taking part with Menahem, and some with Shallum, which factions were so great
and boisterous among them, that they could not be appeased with the death of
one of the contending parties but prevailed so far, that Pull King of Assyria
made use of this advantage and came against the Land, weakened and divided by
its own intestine broils, which were so great and dangerous, that Menahem found
himself obliged to make his peace upon the best terms he could with the
Assyrian King, therefore he gave him a Thousand Talents of Silver, that his
hand might be with him to confirm the Kingdom in his hand, which was the cause
of grievous taxations, and arbitrary fines levied upon the Subject, without any
regard to Equity or Justice, to the ruin and impoverishment even of the mighty
men of Wealth, who it seems, as they had reason, were very loath to part with
their money, but it was too late to dispute the power of two Kings together, and
one of them so potent, that he could force an obedience, if the thing it self
were but possible, to whatsoever he Commanded v. 20. And Menahem exacted the
money of Israel, even of all the mighty men of Wealth, each man Fifty Shekels of
Silver, to give to the King of Assyria: So the King of Assyria (well paid for
his journey) turned back and stayed not there in the Land.

Menahem Reigned Ten Years and slept with his Fathers and Pekahiah his Son
Reigned in his stead; but his Reign was but very short, he Reigned but Two
Years, and then Pekah the Son of Remaliah, one of the Captains of his host
conspired against him, and smote him in Samaria, in the Palace of the Kings
House, with Argob, and Arieh, and with him Fifty men of the Gileadites, and he
killed him and Reigned in his Room, 2 Kings 15. 25. And in his days, there
being, as it is more than probable, great divisions among the People of Israel,
Tiglath Pileser King of Assyria laid hold on the occasion, and took Ijon and
Abel-beth-maachah, and Janoah, and Kedesh, and Hazor, and Gilead, and Galilee,
all the land of Naphtali, and carried them Captive to Assyria. Neither was this
all, but Hoshea the Son of Elah likewise took the opportunity of those factions
which he found among the people to set up for himself, therefore, v. 30. he
made a conspiracy against Pekah the Son of Remaliah, and smote him and slew him
and Reigned in his stead, in the Twentieth year of Jotham the Son of Uzziah.
Lastly Hoshea Reigned in Samaria Nine Years, and then the great and final
Captivity of Shalmaneser happened, which put a fatal period to the Kingdom of
Israel, as it was distinguished from that of Judah, 2 Kings c. 17. and thus it
was exactly true of the Kings of Israel, who very few of them died a natural
death.

Ad generum Cereris sine caede and sanguine pauci
Descedunt reges, and sicca morte Tyranni.
Having thus given a particular account of the state of affairs in the Kingdom
of Israel from the time of its division, from Benjamin and Judah till the
Captivity of Shalmaneser, in which the very name and memory of the Ten Tribes
was lost, I could now make a no less pleasant, than profitable representation
of the state of Judah likewise, if it would not be a digression, but I have
done all that I designed already, which was only to show that the Kingdom of
Israel after the division of the two Kingdoms from one another, was governed
altogether by the power of the Sword, and that the factions prevailing from
time to time in the Israelitish Armies, and the power and interest of this or
that Commander among the Soldiers, were the true causes of those many and
great revolutions which happened among them, and of the supreme powers being so
frequently translated out of one Family into another, and that from hence it
may seem probable that there being Armies in continual pay, and the Levitical
Cities being emptyed of their old Inhabitants, that they were distributed among
the Soldiers, as well for the satisfaction of their arrears, as that the
Soldiery by this means being dispersed through the Land of Israel, might be
the more serviceable to keep the people in obedience, and might be ready at
hand in what quarter soever any popular tumult or insurrection should happen.
But I am not at all sollicitous, whether this be so or no, only if it be so, it
will serve my turn, to prove that the old partition of inheritances was at this
time destroyed, and if it be not so, yet it is certain that the Levites were
expelled, and we may be equally confident that these Cities were filled with
new inhabitants, it being the extremity of folly and dotage to imagine, that
they were suffered to lie Idle and Useless, without any new inhabitants at all;
and this it self will as effectually destroy the old partition as the other way.

Another argument by which it will undeniably appear that the Priesthood of
Jeroboam was by no means after the manner of the Levitical Priesthood, may be
drawn from the express words of Abijah, immediately subjoyned to those other
words of his which I have last produced by which the manners and customs of the
one are expressly distinguished from, and opposed to the manners, rites and
usages of the other, 2 Chronicles. 13. v. 10, 11. But as for us the Lord is our God,
and we have not forsaken him, and the Priests, which minister unto the Lord are
the Sons of A^^on, and the Levites wait upon their business, and they burn unto
the Lord, every Morning and every Evening, burnt Sacrifice* and sweet incense;
the Shewbread also set they in order upon the pure table, and the Candlestick
of Gold with the Lamps thereof, to burn every Evening; for we keep the charge
of the Lord our God, but ye have forsoken him.

A tenth consideration by which it may appear that the Priesthood of Jeroboam
was not after the Levitical manner, and that they were not placed by him in the
Levitical Cities, which the Levites themselves had been compelled to
relinquish, may be drawn from those words of Abijah which have been already
insisted upon, though not to the same purpose for which I now produce them, 2 Chronicles. 13. 9. So that whosoever comes to consecrate himself with a Younog
Bullock and Seven Rams, the same may be a Priest of them that are no Gods.
From, which words it is plain that Jeroboams Priests were Priests properly and
strictly so called; they all of them did sacrifice, and sprinkled the blood by
way of expiation for themselves as well as for others, otherwise they did not
consecrate themselves, as it is here expressly said they did, but they were
consecrated to the Priestly office, by those to whom the performance of this
sacrifice in their behalf appertained; now it is certain that this part of the
Priesthood, which consisted in sprinkling of the blood and making an atonement
for the Souls either of themselves or others, belonged only to the Priests
properly and strictly so called, this being the most sacred and essential
Character of the Priesthood, and therefore was not common to all the Levites,
who were dispersed through the whole Land, and had in a greater latitude the
charge of the holy things, but was peculiar to the Sons of Aaron, who had
always their constant residence at Jerusalem, and were bound to give their
daily attendance upon the Altar* so that the Priesthood of Jeroboam, being not
barely a Levitical, but a more strict, and sacrificial Priesthood, such as was
peculiar to the Sons of Aaron by the Law of Moses, and the only places of
Sacrifice set up by Jeroboam, being the two Altars erected at Dan and Bethel,
it follows plainly from the nature of his Priesthood, compared with the places
where it could only be exercised, that these two were the only places where his
Priests resided:

An Eleventh consideration by which the distinction of the Mosaic Priesthood
from that of Jeroboam will appear, may be taken from the different solemnity of
their respective consecration to the Priestly Office, as it is described Levit.
8. and 2 Chronicles. 13. in the words of Abijah so often appealed to.

A Twelfth argument shall be taken from the difference of the Feasts, which
were observed by the one Priesthood and the other, for Jeroboam to make the
greater distinction and the wider breach between the two nations of Israel and
Judah, had altered the time of the solemn Feasts, that the people might not be
tempted to go up to Jerusalem and do sacrifice, at the same solemn and stated
times when those of Benjamin and Judah repaired thither, 1 Kings 12. 32. And
Jeroboam ordained a Feast in the Eighth Month, on the fifteenth day of the
Month, like unto the Feast that is in Judah; it was like the Feast in Judah,
but it was not in the same Month, in which that Feast was kept, for it follows,
v. 33. so he offered upon the Altar which he had made in Bethel, the fifteenth
day of the Eighth Month, even in the Month which he had devised of his own
heart, and ordained a Feast (which had not been ordained before at that time)
unto the Children of Israel, and he offered upon the Altar and burnt incense.

If you ask me what Feast in Judah that was, which was resembled by this, I
Answer, it was the Feast of the Passover, and the reason I give of my opinion
is this; Epiphanius in his Haeresies mentions among the Samaritans a Sect
called (...), Sebuaei, who had their name from sheba, which signifies Seven,
because they observed the Passover in the Seventh Month, that is, in Tisri,
whereas by the Law of Moses it was to be observed in Abib or Nisan, that is, in
the first Month, and their name put into Greek is not (...), but (...), or
(...), as I have elsewhere observed against Joseph Scaliger. Now Seven and
Eight, in these cases are the same, as Grotius has observed before me, and
therefore Josephus says of the Passover, sometimes that it was a Feast of
Seven, and sometimes of Eight Days continuance; in the first account excluding
that day in which the Passover was killed, which did not belong to the Feast of
the Passover properly so called, and in the latter including it: And so here,
if you take in the Terminus a quo which is the Month before Nisan, then Tisri
is the Eighth Month, but if you consider the Months only inclusive, beginning
at Nisan or Abib, then it is the Seventh, which is a plain way of reconciling
this seeming disagreement betwixt Epiphanius and the writer of the Book of
Kings. And to show still more plainly that both writers are to be understood of
the same Feasts, it is to be considered that the Samaritanes received their
Religion from the Israelitish Priests, which were sent among them to instruct
them, as appears by the Seventeenth Chapter of the Second Book of Kings, where
the story of Salmanesers deportation is related, and these Priests were
subjects of that Kingdom and Priests of that Order and Institution of which
Jeroboam was the Founder; so that I think there can be no doubt, that the same
Feast is understood by Epiphanius, with that which is mentioned in the Book of
Kings, but Epiphanius his Feast is expressly said to have been the Passover,
therefore it follows that in the Book of Kings we are also to expound and
interpret it of the same; and as Epiphanius explains the sacred story, so on
the other hand the inspired Writer returns Epiphanius his kindness back again,
by giving authority and credit to his relation: And if we consider that
Epiphanius did not understand Hebrew, which it is easy to prove that he did
not, and I think I have done it in some other papers, the name it self does
sufficiently vouch the credibility of the story, since its signification is so
well accommodated to the practice of the sect it self which he describes. I do
therefore disown and recant those reasons, which I have given of the Samaritan
practice, as to this particular, in the papers I have mentioned, which being
already finished from the press, though not yet published, cannot be recalled;
since it appears so plainly that it is wholly owing to the perverse institution
of Jeroboam which was devised by him on set purpose, to make the breach wider,
and the enmity more irreconcilable betwixt the two Kingdoms of Israel and
Judah. And it is further to be noted that he did not only institute a new
Feast, or which is the same thing, an old Feast at a new time, but also that he
did sacrifice in his own person, by that means invading the Priestly Office, a
sin so grievous in the sight of God, that for this very thing, for offering
sacrifice of himself, before Samuel came into the camp, the Kingdom was rent
from Saul and his posterity, and Azariah or Vzziah only for burning Incense
upon the Altar of Incense, though in all other respects a very good, and a very
pious King, was smitten with the Leprosy all his lifetime after.

But in the thirteenth and last place, it appears beyond all possibility, all
color of contradiction, that the Priests of Jeroboam were not dispersed in the
Levitical Cities, all over the Land of Israel as the Levites themselves were,
but only in Dan and Bethel, from the express words of the text it self, 1 Kings
12. 32. And he placed in Bethel the Priests of the high places which he had
made; and there being the same sacredness of Dan as of Bethel, the same kind of
Priests belonging to them both, and the same sacrifices and ceremonies to be
performed at both places, there is no question but it is to be understood (...)
of them both, that Dan as well as Bethel was to be the residence and habitation
of Jeroboams Priests. Quod erat ostendendum.

And though these reasons are sufficient to prevail with me to retract that
opinion which I have elsewhere favored, though I could not positively affirm
it, that the Levitical Revenues and Demesnes were settled and conferred by
Jeroboam upon his new Priests; yet as to the matter in question, concerning the
time when the Mosaical partition ceased, and the ancient boundaries of
Inheritances were confused, it is all one to me whether it be true or no,
because it is certain upon the banishment of the Levites, that these Cities
were filled again by new Inhabitants of one sort or other, which is sufficient
of it self to destroy the old partition of the Tribes, when it appears so
plainly that one Tribe was totally expelled from their ancient seats, and that
into the places, which were by their departure left empty, there were other
Tribes and Families, that had formerly no claim or pretense to Inhabit there,
admitted. But this is not all neither, there is another consideration yet
behind, which will of it self demonstrate all that I design to prove, and that
is, that the Mosaical partition ceased, at the time of the division of the two
Kingdoms of Israel and Judah.

My argument is taken from those words of 2 Chronicles. 11. 13, 16, 17. And the
Priests and the Levites that were in all Israel resorted to him out of all
their coasts. -- And after them out of all the Tribes of Israel, such as set
their hearts to seek the Lord God of Israel, came to Jerusalem to sacrifice
unto the Lord God of their Fathers, so they strengthened the Kingdom of Judah
and made Rehoboam the Son of Solomon strong. So that here being, besides the
Levites, being one whole Tribe, so great a party flocking to Jerusalem out of
all the rest of the Tribes, as to be so great an accession of strength and
power to Rehoboam, these following things must unavoidably come to pass: First
that so many new Families being crowded in so small a compass, that the natural
growth and product of the Country seems to have been very far from being of it
self sufficient to maintain them, they found themselves obliged to enter into
commerce and traffic with their neighbor nations, and to improve their stocks
by trade; and it being utterly impossible that the trade of a nation should be
managed without taking money up at interest, unless people would be so good
natured as to lend it for nothing, which is not to be expected: And again, it
being equally impossible, that Usury should be practiced without the
destruction of that Mosaical Partition of Inheritances, for the preservation of
which the Prohibition of Usury was passed into a Law, as I have shown more
largely in my Discourse concerning the Marriage of Cousin Germans, it is a
plain case, that the old Distribution of Inheritances, which was established by
Moses, and by Joshua, must at this time begin to be confounded; and the same
Causes that first made the breach upon the Mosaical Platform, would soon reduce
it into such absolute Confusion, that the old Partition of the Tribes and
Families, as to the Lands or Messuages belonging to them, would be perfectly
destroyed.

And this Argument would be yet more strong, if it were true what is said, 1
Kings 12. 20. That there were none that followed the house of David, but the
tribe of Judah only; which seems to have been done in consequence of what God
himself had said to Solomon, c. 11. 13. Howbeit, I will not rend away all the
Kingdom: but will give one Tribe to thy Son, for David my Servant sake, and for
Jerusalems sake, which I have chosen.

But these things are not by any means to be understood in the utmost
Strictness and Propriety of Acceptance; for it is indisputably certain, That
that one Tribe was two and a half: and so v. 30. of this Eleventh Chapter,
Ahijah the Prophet catches hold on the new Garment that was on Jeroboam, and
rends it into twelve pieces, which twelve pieces were intended Symbollically to
denote the Twelve Tribes of Israel: and v. 31. He said to Jeroboam, Take thee
ten pieces: for thus says the Lord, the God of Israel, Behold, I will rend the
Kingdom out of the Hand of Solomon, and will give Ten Tribes to thee. From
whence it follows plainly, that there must be two remaining to the House of
David; and yet it follows, v. 32. But he shall have one Tribe for my servant
David's sake, and for Jerusalems sake, the City which I have chosen out of all
the Tribes of Israel. And again, v. 36. And unto his Son will I give one Tribe;
but it is clear, That that one Tribe was two; for it is said expressly, 1 King.
12. 21. that when Rehoboam was come to Jerusalem, he assembled all the House of
Judah, with the Tribe of Benjamin, an hundred and fourscore thousand chosen
men, which were Warriors, to fight against the House of Israel, to bring the
Kingdom again to Rehoboam the Son of Solomon. And v. 22, 23. the half Tribe of
Manasseh is likewise taken into the Account. The word of God came unto Shemajah
the man of God, saying, Speak unto Rehoboam the Son of Solomon King of Judah,
and unto all the House of Judah and Benjamin, and to the Remnant of the people,
saying, etc. Where it is manifest, that by the Remnant of the people, which is
here plainly distinguished from the Two Tribes of Benjamin and Judah, nothing
else but the half Tribe of Manasseh can be understood. And the true reason why
Benjamin sided with Judah in this Conjuncture, bating the Business of Religion,
which might be a Motive to them, as well as it was to several of the other
Tribes to come and associate themselves with them, seems to have been this;
That Benjamin it self was a Pretender to a Sovereignty over the rest of the
Tribes, in right of Saul the Son of Kish, who was the first King both of Israel
and Judah together, which was the reason of Shimei's cursing David, and of
Sheba the Son of Bichri's Rebellion against him, both of them being Benjamites,
and one of the Family of the House of Saul, and therefore Enemies to the Family
of David, and the Royal House of Judah; but when Jeroboam an Ephrathite, set up
for himself, they not being strong enough to make a distinct Kingdom by
themselves, chose rather to consederate with the House of David, who had been
chosen King, by God himself, and who was allied by Marriage to the House of
Saul, than to favor the Pretenses of an Upstart of the House of Ephraim, which
had never any just pretense or title to the Crown.

Another Reason which may be assigned of these Two Tribes and an half
confederating together, is the convenience of their situation, being all of
them the very next Neighbors to each other; for it is said, Josh. 10. 11. That
the lot of the Tribe of the Children of Benjamin came up according to their
Families, and the coast of their Lot came forth between the Children of Judah,
and the Children of Joseph. From whence it is manifest, that the Inheritances
of Judah, Benjamin and Joseph, did border and abutt upon each other; and the
Children of Joseph being divided into the Two Tribes of Ephraim and Manasseh,
by the Children of Joseph in this place, we are not to understand the Tribe of
Ephraim, of which Tribe Jeroboam himself was, and therefore that whole Tribe
sided with him, but of Manasseh, which was divided into Two; the one half on
the one side of the River Jordan, being a part of the Land of Canaan, and
belonged to the Kingdom of Judah, as well for the conveniance of its Situation,
as upon any other Account; and the other half was on the other side of the
River, together with the Sons of Gad and Reuben, and belonged to the Kingdom of
Israel.

Lastly, a third Reason which may be assigned, why these Two Tribes and an half
associated themselves together, or rather, kept steadfast in their Allegiance to
their lawful Prince, besides the Duty, and the comfort of Loyalty and Integrity
considered in themselves, may be fetched farther off from the Kindness and good
Will of the Progenitors or Patriarchs of these Tribes to one another; for Judah
saved Joseph from being slain by his Brethren, and by consequence was a kind of
Father to the Two Tribes of Ephraim and Manasseh, who, without this, had
perished before they were born; and it is well known what Kindness there was
betwixt Benjamin and Joseph, both of them the Sons of Rachel, the beloved Wife
of Jacob, and one of them the Fruit of his Fathers old Age, the Stay and
Support of his declining years, after the loss of Joseph, whom he gave over for
dead, and the unexpected Progenitor of so numerous a Tribe. But whether the
King of Judah were only possessed of that one Tribe, which gave denomination to
his Kingdom; or whether he were also, as I have proved he was, King over
Benjamin, and the Remnant of Manasseh likewise; yet it is certain, when we have
taken things in the utmost Latitude that the Truth will bear, that after all,
by the flocking of the whole Tribe of Levi into the Territory of Judah, and by
the concourse of so many others out of all the rest of the Tribes, it must of
necessity come to pass, That the old Partition of Inheritances must be
destroyed, and that the Land being too little to afford them all a sedentary
Subsistence at home, they must be forced to take up Money at use, to be
employed in a foreign Trade, which was forbidden only to preserve the Mosaical
Distribution, and which being once allowed, I have demonstrated Discourse of
Marriage of Cos^erm.
elsewhere, would as effectually destroy it, as if it had never been.

And to confirm this* it is observable, That in all those Countries where this
equality of Inheritances was observed, there for the better Preservation of it,
the Exercise of Usury was forbidden; as Solon, of whom Seneca observes, as I
have taken notice in that other Dissertation which is to follow this, That he
made all things in the state of Athens to be aequo jure, after a sort of
Gavel-Kind, did likewise forbid Usury by a Law which he called (...). Laertius
in Solone: (...). that is, Solon first of all introduced that Law among the
Athenians, which was called Sisachthia, that is to say, A releasing of the
Bodies and Possessions of those that were in Prison or Bondage, or had Morgaged
their Estates to satisfy their Creditors, the Usurers of those times; for men
paid Use with their Bodies, when they could not do it with their Estates; and
many were brought into slavery upon that account: Solon led the way himself, by
forgiving Seven Talents which were due to him, being parcel of his paternal
Estate, and exhorted others to follow his Example; and this Law was called
(...). Hesychius, (...). And that this was no other than an Eastern Law,
brought by him into the Practice of the Athenian Republic, appears by an
Observation of ( Observe. in D. Laert.
) Menagius, who tells us out of ( Biblioth. l. 1.
) Diodorus Siculus, That the Egyptians likewise, by whom perhaps we are to
understand the Jews, had such another Constitution among them; and that Solon
received his from thence, or if you will rather understand Diodorus, of the
Egyptians properly so called, this only confirms what I have already asserted
more than once, that many of those Laws which are to be found up and down in
the Code of Moses, were also in force both before and under the Mosaic
Dispensation among all, or most of those Eastern Countries, as well as among
themselves; neither is it any wonder to find this Hebrew, or Egyptian Law of
Solon, when it was transplanted into Greece, to be likewise called by a Greek
Name, as the Canary Vine transplanted into the German Soil partakes of the
Nature of the Climate where it grows; for so Bochartus In Criti^. Bochart.
Geog. Sacr. par. 1. l. 1. c. 15. p. 68.
expressly tells us out of Plato, Necesse habuit Solon cum Egyptia nomina non
posset carminibus suis inserere, his alia Graeca substituere ejusdem
significationis.

And here if it be true, that by the Egyptians in this place of Diodorus, we
are to understand that people properly so called, as they are distinguished
from the Jews, we have a very fair occasion to take notice, of the great
unskilfulness, or rather impudence of Maimonides, and Moses the In Moreh
Nevoch. in Deuteronomy. ^2. 23.
Son of Nachman and other of the Jewish Rabbis, who pretend to give an account
of several of the Laws that are to be met with in the Books of Moses, only from
this, that they were designed to thwart and oppose the customs of the Zabii by
whom See Cudworth of the Sacrament, p. 35, 36. Ed. Fol. 1676.
they mean the ancient Chaldaeans. Multarum legum, says the Aeyptian Moses,
rations and causae mihi innotuerunt ex cognitione fidei, rituum and cultus
Zabiorum, but from whence have these Zabii this name of theirs which is unknown
to any other Geographer, but to the Rabbis themselves? and they it is well
known, are the worst Geographers and Historians in the world, v. Constantin
L'empereur praef. and not. in Benjam. Tudel and Buxtorf. praefat. in lex
Talmud. and Is. Voss. de 70. interp.
or rather they are the shameless corrupters and depravers of Geography and
History, and of all good learning, they confound the names of places and
persons and the succession of times, and they are used either wholly to pass by
the truth and to give us nothing but monsters and incredible prodigies in its
stead, or else so to blind and corrupt it by figments of their own, that it is
utterly impossible by a Rabbinical light to discern truth and falsehood from one
another. Ep. 62. ad Isaac. Casaub. cit. Cudworth. ibid.


Joseph Scaliger, tells us they were called so from an Arabic word signifying
the ventus Apeliotes, or the Eastern wind, and so this name will comprehend all
the Eastern Nations; but now to say that the Jews abstained from any thing
merely in opposition to the Eastern Nations, in the general considered, is
certainly false, because I have given so many instances of a manifest,
unquestionable and undeniable agreement between them: Who then are these Zabii?
what particular people are they? Whereabouts shall we find them, if they are
not all the Eastern Nations? Why, in good truth, if we may be allowed to speak
out with the good leave of the Rabbanim and the (...), a sort of Gentlemen much
the less excusable of the two, for suffering themselves to be so miserably
deluded by errant Fools and downright Knaves, and yet pretending all the while
to be the Magisterial Oracles and Dictatours of a Learned Age, I say, with the
good leave of these two sorts of Asiatick Monsters more ugly and deformed than
any of those that Africa produces, the Zabii are certainly v. Bochart* Phaleg.
l. 4. c. 8, 9. and Lloyd lex Geograph. in Sab^i.
neither more nor less than only those, whom the Greek Geographers are used to
call (...) and (...) and the Latins Sabaei, a People bordering upon the Red
Sea of whom no ancient Geographer whether Greek or Roman, tells any of those
stories, which the Rabbis have fathered upon them, and though there be such a
man, nay, Four that are of that name, as Sheba or Shaba in the sacred story,
from whom these Zabii or Sabaei may very well be supposed to be v. Bochart. ubi
supra.
descended; yet there being no such people as the Zabii mentioned any where in
Scripture, I make no question but the Rabbis borrowed their name of Zabii from
the Greek (...) or the Latin Sabaei, but from whence they had their pretty
Romances concerning them, they know best themselves.

But let them even be who the Rabbis please, or who they please themselves,
let all the Eastern Nations be comprehended under the term of Zabii, as it were
from Shoub or Shab which signifies to return, because the Sun sets in the West,
and returns again, or rises in the East, or let them be only those whom the
Greeks and Latins call Sabaei: Or lastly, since there are four persons in
Scripture who are called by the name of Sheba or Shaba, let each of v. Bochart.
ubi supra.
them be supposed to have been the Father of a Nation, and let us place these
four Nations at the four Cardinal Points, if that may not be too much for the
Interest of Popery in an Age that is in it self so Popish and so Popishly
affected, without landing Pilgrims out of Terre del Fogo, or because they are
namesakes, let them live together, and let them all be inhabitants of some
Eastern Countries, where men hate Images, as we do the Pope, the Image of the
Beast, and Statuary General of the Western World.

But wherever they are whether some where, or any where, or every where, or no
where, yet how came the Jews, those learned and famous Antiquaries the Rabbis,
to be so well acquainted with the customs of other nations, who are so ignorant
of their own, as I have proved already in very many particulars? And it is the
character, which Joseph Scaliger gives of the Samaritans, very much to the
credit of the De Emend. temp* L 7. in not* ad Ann. samarit.
Jews, Gens est hodie supra Judiacam, totius vetustatis, etiam quae ad ipsos
pertinet, ignarissima. But I dare not English it, lest the Rabbis should be
angry, and they are a sort of men so musty and so sullen that I would not
willingly incurr their displeasure.

But not to play too long upon the skirts of the business and to insist only
upon generals, as if we were afraid of being more particular, which is the
Phanatick way of argumentation and dispute, when the point is as tender as the
conscience of a nonconforming Divine, and the good man is afraid of touching
or being touched, for fear of being made ashamed of himself and of his party,
there are two notions especially in which the Rabbis pretend to have received
a mavelous light from the customs of the Zabii compared with those of the
Jews.

The First of which concerns the Mosaical Prohibition of feeding upon Blood,
the Second that of seething a Kid in the Milk of its Dam; I shall consider both
of them as briefly and as clearly as I can.

As to the first of these Dr. Cudworth has p. 35. ubi supra.
these words: There is an excellent story in Maimonides his Moreh Nevochim,
concerning an ancient custom of the Zabii, of Feasting together with their Gods
in a federal way -- For going about to give the reason why the eating of Blood
was forbidden in the Law, he fetches it from the Idolatrous use of it then in
Moses' s time among the Zabii; according to his principles, who thought the
reason of all the Ceremonial Precepts was to be fetched from such accidental
grounds, because those Laws were not primae, but secundae intentionis, in God,
Multarum legum rations and causae, says he, mihi innotuerunt ex cognitione
fidei, rituum and cultus Zabiorum. Very like; but I long extremely to hear this
excellent story, and therefore enter Aben Tibbon Druggerman in chief to the
great R. Moses Ben Maimon; and what says he? why, he tells us, as he had it
from Maimonides his own mouth, upon the faith of a Rabbin, and by all that is
sacred in that Whisker of a Book the Talmud. Quod licet sanguis impurus and
immundus admodum fuerit in oculis Zabiorum; tamen ab illis comestus fuerit, eo
quod existimarunt cibum hunc esse Demonum, and quod is qui eum comedit, hac
ratione communicationem aliquam cum Demonibus habeat, it a ut familiariter cum
illo conversentur, and futura ei aperiant. An excellent story indeed! and every
whit as good sense as the plastic nature, and other pretty trangams in the
Intellectual systeme; but if no body be a Bishop till this excellent story be
true, the Apostolical succession from this time forward will fail.

But say you so Master Tibbon? and are you sure you had this from Maimonides
himself? Dah chi hadam hou Tame mod, etc. Know that the Blood was accounted
very impure in the Eyes of the Zabians, and yet they were used to eat it, etc.
This may be excellent for ought any body knows, because it is very strange and
this is the common Privilege of all strange things, that people are usually
very civil to Strangers, and therefore they pass for excellent without
Examination: Otherwise if a man were minded to be so barbarously rude, to call
any thing in question, which is affirmed either to be true or false, fide
Rabbinica, upon the skill or honesty of a Jewish Doctor, he might argue thus:

All things that were anciently looked upon as impure, were so upon one or both
of these accounts; either they were impure in Sacrifice or Food, or both; or by
impure was meant, That it was not lawful to touch, or have any thing to do with
them; now if the Blood were impure, that is, unlawful to be eaten; and if the
Zabians thought so, why did they eat it in Contradiction to themselves, and in
defiance to their own Consciences and Understandings? Again, though they had an
Opinion that it was impure, yet they offered it up in Sacrifice to their Idols,
that is, they used it by way of Expiation, as the words of Tibbon themselves do
very plainly aknowledg. And this indeed, was no wonder, for by Expiating and
Atoning for the Souls of men, it came to be impure, as being polluted with the
sins of those, in whose behalf it was shed; which by the way sufficiently
discovers the Error and Unskilfulness of the Papists, who pretend to drink the
very Blood of Christ in the Sacrament, which, as being the Blood of an
Expiatory Sacrifice, is for that reason unlawful to be drunk or eaten; and it
was for that reason, as the Author to the Hebrews tells us, That he suffered
without the Gate, as the Sin-offering was used to do without the Camp, because
he had contracted a Levitical Uncleanness, as the Sin-offering did, by being
polluted with the sins of those in whose behalf he was offered.

But then if you consider what has been already proved, That every Meal among
the Ancients, as well Jews as Heathens, had the nature of a Sacrifice; it
follows plainly, that the Blood of all Animals was accounted unclean, as being
always of an expiatory Nature. And therefore if the Zabians drank the Blood of
any Sacrifice, they might as well drink it at all their Meals; and to say, they
did at sometimes, but not at others, is to say, That they did that sometimes,
and which is worse upon a Religious Account too, which they knew was always
unlawful to be done, and which indeed was the highest Profanation of that
Victimary Service, in which all the Religion of the Ancient World consisted.

But whether it be owing to the Evidence of Truth, or the Inconsistency of the
former Tale to it self, or to spin out his time in a multitude of words, or for
what other reason, I know not; but he tells us afterward, That there was a
Faction among the Zabians themselves, and that there were some that made a
great scruple of this Eating of Blood, and therefore performed their Service
True notion of the Lords Supper, ibid.
in a little different manner, which is there described, eating the flesh
themselves, as the Jews were wont to do in their Peaceofferings, and in all
their Meals, which were, though not so solemn, of the same Nature; and feeding
the Demon with the Blood, that is, pouring it out upon his Altar by way of
Expiation, as the Jews themselves were wont to do by the express Command of God
himself, differing only from the Zabians of Maimonides, whom he endeavors to
expose, and whom he would make in every thing so opposite to the Jews, as to
the Object of this Ministration.

And indeed, the Argument which is there brought as the reason upon which this
other pretended Faction of the Zabii proceeded, is of it self abundantly
sufficient to confute the whole Story: Vehajou sham anashim shehajah kashah
beheneihem achilath hadam, chi hou dabar shejimashou tebah haadam. There were
some among them, to whom the eating of Blood seemed hard in their Eyes, because
it is a thing which the Nature of man abhors; and this a man would think might
be enough to persuade us, that it was never the constant use of the Sacrifices
of any Nation, that is, in effect of all their Meals which had all of them the
Nature of a Sacrifice, as has been already frequently declared.

But the learned Doctor goes on; and as for the former part of this Story,
says he, I find it also in R. Moses Bar Nachman upon Deuteronomy. 12. 23. where he
goes about to give the reason why Blood was forbidden in the Law, as Maimonides
did; although in the first place, he says, it was because Blood served in
Sacrifices for expiation, otherwise than Maimonides, for there was a great
Controversy between these two Doctors about the Nature of Sacrifices; but yet
in the second place he brings in this also, because it was used superstitiously
by the Heathens in the Worship of the Idol Gods. Vehajetha hahabodah hi
beachilath min hadam, etc. i. e. They performed this superstitious Worship by
eating of Blood in this manner; they gathered together Blood for the Devils
their Idol-gods, and then they came themselves, and did eat of that Blood with
them, as being the Devils Guests, and invited to eat at the Table of Devils;
and so were joined in federal Society with them. And by this kind of Communion
with Devils, they were able to Prophecy and foretell things to come.

As to the last part of the Story of foretelling things to come, though I am
far from denying, that there has been, or that there is such a thing as
Witchcraft in the World, or such people as Sorcerers and Witches, whom the Law
of Moses calls Chartoumim and Mecashphim, Wizards and Enchanters; yet as for
this particular Instance, all I have to say, is, sit fides penes Auctorem, and
credat Judaeus Apella; for I believe nothing barely upon the Testimony of a
Rabbin, without other sufficient Probability to back it; no more will any man
else that is not in love with being imposed upon, or that understands but half
so well as I pretend to do, the extreme folly and impudence of those fellows.

But when the Learned Doctor is pleased to tell us that there was a great
controversy between the two Rabbis, as little as they differ in name from one
another, for one is Rambam and the other Ramban, according to the Rabbinical
way of Rashei Teboth, and that this controversy consisted in this that
Nachmanides would have the Blood in Sacrifices to be of an expiatory nature,
which Maimonides denied, this does by the way sufficiently discover how
unskilful a sciolist and how insignificant a trifler the so much celebrated and
adored Maimonides was, not withstanding there have been those that have given
him this character, that he was primus Rabbinorum qui desiit nugari. For what
can be more foolish, nay, what can be more stupid, insensible and sottish than
to question the truth of that which is affirmed in express words by God
himself? An Authority which without detraction a man may safely say it is at
least equal to that of Moses Ben. Maimon. And he says thus, Levit. 17. 10, 11.
whatsoever man there be of the House of Israel or of the strangers, that
sojourn among you; that eats any manner of Blood, I will even set my face
against that Soul that eats Blood and will cut him off from among his People.
For the life is in the Blood, and I have given it to you upon the Altar, to
make an atonement for your Souls; for it is the Blood that makes an atonement
for the Soul. So that we see here that the reason why Blood was prohibited to
be eaten or drunk by the Jews, is expressly said to be this, because it is the
Blood that makes an atonement for the Soul, and because God had given it upon
the Altar to make an atonement for the Souls of men. And after all this, if
Maimonides will still go on to lay a groundless claim to that unbounded
privilege called liberty of conscience, and if in spite of so plain a text he
will needs humbly conceive, with or without submission to better Judgments,
that God himself is mistaken, who can help it? Maimonides is a Rabbin, and
great Rabbis and great Travelers may say what they please.

But though Maimonides be mistaken, yet the comfort is that Moses Bar Nachman,
who has his name from comfort, is in the right, as how should it be otherwise
in contradictory Propositions, but one must needs be false, the other true; but
yet as Maimonides upon examination does not appear to be full out so wise as
God himself, who certainly understood the meaning of his own Constitution, and
may be allowed to explain the sense of his own Laws, so neither is the
Comforter Nachmanides altogether so infallible as that other Comforter,
mentioned by St. John, one of whose great and excellent employments it is to
enlighten the understandings, as well as to restrain and govern the wills of
good men, and to lead them into all truth, as well as to strengthen and confirm
them under all temptation.

Vehajetha says Nachmanides, hahavodah hi beachilath minhadam, chi hajou
mekabtsim hadam lesheedim, vehem oclim halau oumiemennou. They gathered
together the Blood for their Idols, and then they ate of it together with them.
By which words a man would think, not only that they were used to eat of the
Blood, but also that gathering the Blood of several sacrifices together, they
used to eat of it, as beggars do pottage, without partaking of the sacrifices
themselves, whereas no custom can be shown in any Antiquity where the Blood of
any sort of Sacrifice, either among Jews or Heathens, was generally eaten, for
as for single instances, if any can be produced they are nothing to the
purpose, or where the Flesh of Sacrifices, unless in the Sin and Burnt
Offerings, was not, and indeed it is impossible in the Nature of the thing,
that Blood by it self should be the food of men, unless you may call that food,
which is poison too, and which would certainly clod and coagulate in the
stomachs of those that eat it, and by that means kill them; it is a barbarity
so contrary to nature that I believe scarce any Birds or Beasts of prey, not
even the Wolves not the Vulturs themselves are ever guilty of it.

Neither is this all, for it is still more pleasant what the Doctor tells us,
that Maimonides going about to give the reason, why the eating of Blood was
forbidden in the Law, he fetches it from the Idolatrous use of it then in Moses
his time among the Zabii; but how came this Rabbinical trifler to know what was
done in Moses his time? for unless he means himself or his Brother Nachman, the
comfortable importance of the Hebraizing tribe, I am sure he could know nothing
of that other Moses, but what is written in the Law it self.

The monstrous, absurd and ridiculous Winter tales which the Rabbis tell us
are enough to blast the credit of their traditions, and if you consider how
long it was before either of the Talmuds were compiled, the one not till Two,
and the other not till Five hundred Years after Christ, and these were the
First traditions that appear to have been put into writing; it is morally
impossible, especially among men so given to lying on the one hand, and
believing on the other, as the Jews, that any certain tradition should continue
so long, as from the time of Moses till then.

And as for the Traditions of Moses from mount Sinai, which they call the Torah
sheba hal phi or the Oral Law, I have in my discourse of the Samaritans, which
I intend shortly to publish, laid it so flatly and so fairly upon the ground,
that I am very confident it will never rise any more, and as it lies now, it is
with its face downwards not daring to outface the Sun, and that which is
brighter then the Sun, the truth, any longer.

To conclude this first point, it is still more pleasant to consider, that this
reason which is assigned by Maimonides of the prohibition of Blood, was not a
single reason by it self, but was in consequence of a Principle by which he
pretended to explain several other things. Multarum Legum says he, rations
and causae mihi innotuerunt, ex cognitione fidei, rituum, and cultus Zabiorum.
And the Doctor acquaints us, as from the Rabbin himself, that it was according
to his principles, who thought the reason of all the Ceremonial Precepts was to
be fetched from some such accidental grounds. But if his Principles led him, as
they did in this in instance of abstaining from Blood, to contradict the
express words of the Scripture and of God himself, what credit is to be given
to the Authority of a man, who proceeds not only upon so absurd, but also upon
so impious and detestable a Principle as this, or had he not as good have told
us in fewer words, that he was wiser then his Maker, and that he understood the
meaning of the Mosaic Laws better than he that made them. Besides, that it is
in general a false principle appears from this, that all the Ceremonies in the
Law of Moses, were for the most part of a Symbolical Nature, and this is the
true key which is all along to let us into their meaning, insomuch that even
this prohibition of Blood of which another reason has been already assigned,
is also founded upon a Symbolical bottom, and was intended as an aenigmatical
and figurative prohibition of all sorts of cruel and sanguinary courses, as
appears not only from the general constitution of the Law of Moses, which was,
like the religion of all the Eastern world, of an Hieroglyphick and Symbolick
Nature, but also from the express words of God himself in that Chapter of
Leviticus, which I have last produced, for it (the Blood) is the life of all
flesh; the Blood of it is for the life thereof: To intimate to us that this
abstinence from Blood was intended Symbolically to denote a caution that we do
not wrongfully or unjustly take away the life of another, and because it was
the life of all Flesh, therefore it was used by way of expiation, God being
graciously pleased to accept the life of the sacrifice instead of that of the
Offender himself, and to eat Bulls Flesh, and drink the Blood of Goats, when he
might in Justice have exacted the life of men, and might have enacted without
any wrong to any of his attributes, that he that had sinned should die in his
own person; and I appeal to all the World, of what Credit or Authority his
expositions or determinations ought to be, who has either never had, or has
lost that Symbolical Key, by which alone the Law of Moses can be opened, and
instead of that has substituted another in its stead which is so flat a
contradiction to the express words of Scripture and to the Laws it pretends to
explain, a Key that may break the Lock and it self, but can never fairly open
the door, a Key so very unfit for what it pretends to do, that a pick-lock is a
much more hopeful way of letting us into the sacred Temple of Truth, than all
the bunch of Keys that make so learned and so loud a noise at the girdle of a
Rabbi.

And is not this exceeding fine, when the Law of God enjoins expressly this
Abstinence from Blood, and sets down expressly the particular Reasons upon which
this Abstinence was founded; because it was an Atonement for the Soul; and
because it was the life of all flesh; yet the Rabbis think much to pay
Obedience to this Law, for the Reason upon which it was made, and upon which
alone God expected an Obedience from them, but they will needs do it for a
Reason of their own, because the Zabians, a certain sort of people that no body
knows where or who they are, were used to feed upon the Sacrificial Blood,
therefore, and therefore only they think it fit to abstain; as much as to say,
They will indeed obey the Law of God, but not out of a Principle of Obedience
to him, but out of a Spirit of opposition to their Neighbors, if indeed these
Zabii were so near Neighbors to the Jews, as is pretended, and are not rather
to be looked for in Lucian (...), or in Hevelius his learned Mapps of the
Bedlam World in the Moon. Or is not this exactly the Picture of our Sectarian
Malcontents, whose chief Scruple against Obedience, is, because good Subjects
practice it, and the Laws command it; and the only way to make them good
Christians or tolerable Subjects, is to enjoin Separation and Faction by a Law.

The second thing in which the Rabbis pretend to have received great light
from the Customs of the Zabii, for the clearer understanding of the Law of
Moses, concerns the Prohibition of seething of a Kid in the Milk of its Dam,
Exodus 23. 19. The first of the first fruits of thy land thou shall bring into
the House of the Lord thy God. Thou shall not seethe a Kid in his Mothers Milk,
and why not? a Question very luckily asked, just as Don Isaac Abrabanel comes
by, and very spruce he is in his Jom tob Attire, a Plush Jacket and a
Lace-band, but neither Point de Venice, nor Colbertine, nor any other sort of
Point whatsoever; for the Rabbis hate Points, though they made 'em themselves;
and therefore since it is our good Fortune to meet so luckily with this great
Rabboni, let us ask his opinion of the Reason of this Law.

Pray, Sir, you that are a Master in Israel, you that were privy to all the
Conserences of Moses upon Sinai; you that writ down all the Traditions as they
were delivered, and took the Thunder and the Lightning of the Mount, in
shorthand; Pardon me, I beseech you, mighty Sir, if I the vilest of the Gojim,
the veriest Heretic of all the Minim, the most contemptible and unworthy of
all the Children of Cuth, approach the awful and venerable presence of your
Hagaon Raphshippe; not the Ass of Issachar in a Lyon's skin, but the very Lion
it self of the Tribe of Judah, with an important Question fit only to be
resolved by a Master of Assemblies; this Gentleman and I, and please your
Lordship, have laid a small Wager concerning the meaning of that place of
Exodus, c. 23. 19. Thou shall not seethe a Kid in his Mothers milk; and we were
agreed to be determined by the next famous Rabbin that came by. Abrab. Hajother
nirreh Bazeh shehajah mimahaseh hobdei habodath Elilim.

Je n' entende pas de mots Hebreux, parlez vous Anglois, Monseignieur? A. Oues,
Monsieur, je parle Anglois, Francoise, Escosse, Espagniol, Italien, Allemagn,
Ebreu, Grec, Latin, Arabien, Ethiopien, Sclavonien, Grand Mogor, Prestre Jean,
toutes les Langues, B. En verite, Monseignieur, vos estes le plus admirable de
tout le monde. Parlez donc un peu d' Anglois, sil vous plaist, Monseignieur.
Abrab. Why then in short, Sir, thus, for I am in great haste, we are about
returning to the Land of Promise, and have a great deal of Business to
dispatch, and Lumber to remove.

It seems most probable, that this Command True Notion, p. 13.
was occasioned from a custom among the idolatrous Heathens, that at the time
of their gathering in of Fruits, they were wont to boil a Kid in the Dam's
Milk, thinking that by this means they were made acceptable to their Gods, and
did procure a Blessing by it. And so having told his Tale, away goes he in
smoking haste, without staying to answer Scruples and Objections, to pack up
his Awls for Jerusalem and the Land of Promise, where he designs to be no less
than King, and is full of Projects and Expeditions against the Turk and Tartar,
and Persian, and I know not who besides.

But however since he is gone, let him go, and though it be scarce civil to
object against a man behind his back, yet since it is necessary for the
discovery of the truth, I hope we shall at least be excused, and I desire it
may be considered to the advantage of our Cause, that his flying for the same,
is a plain Argument, that he cannot answer what shall be objected.

And does it then seem most probable, that this Command was occasioned from a
Custom among the idolatrous Heathens; but I pray, why does it seem so? have you
this upon the credit of any good Historian? then it does more than seem so; and
we have the same reason to believe it with any other matter of Fact whatsoever,
which our own Eyes did not see; but if you have it not upon any credible
Testimony, then why does it seem so at all? or may not any thing else, that
which is flatly contradictory to this seeming and incompatible with it, seem so
as well? It Is a fine Trade indeed, when men shall first make Stories, and then
believe 'em themselves, and say it seems so, and then impose 'em upon the
World, as if they were really true. But it seems to confirm this gloss, he
tells us of a Custom somewhat P. 14.
like to this, used in his time in some parts of Spain; and we perhaps might
have been so silly to believe him, if he had not spoiled his Authority already;
or if we knew distinctly whether this Custom were among the Spaniards or Moors,
that we might have fair play to examine into its Truth; or if we knew what was
the meaning of a Custom somewhat like, for a Custom somewhat like is a Custom
somewhat unlike too, and how much that is, no body knows.

But because Abrabanel does not tell his Tale so handsomely as he should, there
is a learned P. 14. ib.
Karraite called in to help him out; and these Karraites, you must know, are
desperate Fellows at a dead lift; they are a sort of Talmudical Dissenters,
that reject all Traditions P. 15. ib.
which are not grounded upon Scripture; they will submit to nothing, if you
cannot prove it out of a direct Text in the Bible: and yet very honest Genlemen
for all that, and just like the Dissenters of our times, who will neither Eat
nor Drink without a Text to justify the Action, and believe no tales but what
they make themselves. They are no Irish Evidence, I assure you, and therefore I
hope you will believe what they say; and that which they say, is this:

It was a Custom of the ancient Heathens, when they had gathered in all their
Fruits, to take a Kid and boil it in the Dam's milk, and then Derek Cashephah,
in a Magical way, to go about and besprinkle with it all their Trees, and
Fields, and Gardens, and Orchards, (certainly this must needs raise the price
of the Commodity, and make it almost as dear as Bristol Milk) thinking by this
means they should make them fructify, and bring forth fruit again more
abundantly the following Year. And for this Reason, says the Doctor, God
forbad his people the Jews, at the time of their in-gathering, to use any such
Idolatrous or Superstitious Rite.

And yet these are the Men that reject all Traditions that are not grounded on
Scripture; so that if we were to appeal to themselves for the truth of this
Story, all the Question would be, Whether this were a Tradition of the Rabbanim
for the Explanation of Scripture which is not grounded upon the Scripture it
self; And the Question, I think, is easily determined, if the Doctors own
Concessions and Quotations do not deceive us; or if the Bible of the Karraites
be the same with ours, and that they had such things as Traditions of their P.
23. ib.
own, though they rejected those of the Rabbis; and a Tradition is a Tradition
let it be whose it will, appears from another Passage in his Karraitish M. S.
where the Author tells us she col Jisrael modim, That it is confessed by all
Israel, that from the time of the Kingdom, they were ever wont to consecrate
the New Moons by the (...); and this being a Tradition of so great use, and of
so necessary Relation to the observance of their New Moons, and by consequence
of all their Feasts, this is another Instance of the Karraites expounding
Scripture by Tradition. And they expressly tell us, after a little pause, that
it is not a Tradition in general, but a Tradition of the Rabbis, contradicting
the Traditions of their Wisemen, that is, of the Karraites themselves, which is
the thing rejected by them, if I understand any thing of that Hebrew Sentence,
with which the Doctor has obliged the (...). And yet after all, we are not so
much beholding to Tradition for this notion, that the ancient way of computing
the New Moons was by the (...), as to the nature of the thing it self, and to
this honest Country Reason, which no learned man can confute, that Eyes were
made before either Almanacks or Letters.

And therefore this was the ancient way of the Romans, as well as of the Jews,
before the Fasti were published by Flavius, Saturnal. l. 1. c. 15.
the Scribe. Macrobius; Priscis temporibus, antequam Fasti a Cn. Flavio Scriba
invitis patribus in omnium notitiam proderentur, Pontifici minori haec
provincia delegabatur, ut novae Lunae primum observaret aspectum; visamque Regi
sacrificulo nuntiaret: that he might give notice, as I suppose, to the Country
round about. But whether the Air were all tuned to the Key of Mekuddash,
whether the Bells rung backward, P 24. ib.
and all the Beacons of the Country were fired, as if an Invasion were
threatened by the Man in the Moon, or the Gauls were set down once more before
the Capitol; of that Macrobius says nothing at all.

But the chief Excellency of all of this Karraitish Notion is behind, for he
tells us, That this has been the Custom of Israel ever since the Kingdom, to
compute the New Moons by the Phasis; as if it had not equally been so before,
when this has been proved by an Argument that cannot deceive, to have been the
most ancient way of Computation. But yet as pretty as the Tradition is, the
Reason which this Author alleges to confirm it, is still more pretty than the
Tradition it self; the very Etymon, says he, of the word P. 24. ib.
Chodesh, implies so much, for it signifies the renewing of something, so that
it is denominated from the change of the Moon or Phasis, as the Epoch or
beginning of it. Is it so? but why might not this change of the Moon, which is
the renewal of it, be computed either way from the Phasis, or by the Calendar,
or only by the latter of these, as it was actually for many Years, and then
what becomes of this hopeful Etymology, which concerns one way of Computation
no more than the other, but only proceeds upon a Supposition, that the Moon is
renewed as the Calendar does? Or, what if I should prove, as I shall do by and
by, that the middle of the Month, or the time of the full-Moon was anciently
called the Renewal of it, although that Renewal were not measured by the
Phasis, but by the Calendar, and indeed by a very unequal Computation? for the
Idus among the Romans, which is no other, as I shall show, than the Hebrew
Chiddoush, and signifies Renovation, if the Nones were quintanae fell upon the
fourteenth, but if they were septimanae, upon the sixteenth day of the Month;
and this must be granted to be a considerable difference in the Computation,
though the motion of the Moon be equal and the same in one Month, as another.

But after all, the Karraites are like other Dissenters, and though they are
all united in a common hatred against the Rabbanim, to whom the best Language
they can give, is, That they are Papists and Tories, and all the bad Names, and
stinking things that Billinsgate can afford, yet are they not agreed among
themselves, but the same Spirit of opposition that separates them from the
Traditionary Jews, divides each Karraite from his nearest Neighbor; and for
ought we know, the same man may be fallen out with himself, and then it will be
very hard to arbitrate the difference, when a man quarrels in despite of
himself, or to bring two parties to a better understanding, that are so
entirely angry with one another. For so the Doctor citing a Passage out of his
Karraitish M. S. a learned Book that has neither head nor tail, if we may
believe a man that does not always speak truth, subjoyns immediately the
following words, and I produce this the rather, because True notion. p. 15. p.
14. ib.
Abrabanel, toward the end of his comment on this place, mentions a gloss of
some Karraiteish Author upon it, although it be altogether unlike to this which
we have here related, scribunt sapientes Karraeorum ne coquas haedum in lacte
matris suae, hoc est, ne commisceatur germen cum radicibus.

So that the Karraites themselves not being certainly determined what to say,
or what reason to assign of this prohibition of the Law of Moses, sometimes
referring it to an abhorrence of the Zabii, and at other times to a Symbolical
reason, I hope we are no longer obliged by their Authority, who confess
themselves to be so much in doubt, and by their uneasy riggling out of one way
of ^o^^tion into another, to be altogether ignorant of the matter; but, though
I am far from doing this upon the Authority of any Karraite of them all, the
Karraites themselves being every whit as ignorant and as soppish as the rest,
yet because it is agreeable to the grain and genius of the Law of Moses, which
proceeds almost wholly upon Symbolical grounds, I affirm this last to be a very
good solution of the difficulty proposed. Ne coquas haedum in lacte matris
suae, hoc est, ne commisceatur germen cum radicibus. That is, it is a
prohibition of all incestuous and unnatural copulations in the ascending and
descending lines, for so if Mother and Son should commit uncleanness together,
there is in both respects, in the Act it self and in the consequences of it,
germen cum radicibus, and the infant begotten by such a foul conjunction, as
long as it continues after the first vitality be formed, and fed and nourished
in the Womb, is in the Symbolick language, so commonly used and so well
understood at that time in the East, Haedus in lacte matris suae, a kid seethed
in the milk of its Mother.

There are other expositions which in my own thoughts I did formerly pitch upon
my self, which might be assigned as the meaning of this place, but not to fall
too foul upon the Hebrew Doctors where there is no occasion, I must acknowledge
that I am infinitely pleased and satisfied with this, though it be expressed
after such a manner, that it will require some thoughtfulness and a little
dexterity in matters of this nature to pick out the meaning of the comment as
well as of the Text, and yet after all, I do not allow of this, as a
traditionary exposition upon the testimony either of a Karraite or of any
other, but as an ingenious conjecture at the meaning of the place, and it would
be hard not to allow the Rabbis so much, as well as other men, that by
considering a place of Scripture they may sometimes pick out its true meaning,
though it is certain they are generally men of shallow parts, and that where
there is any thing of Judgment or of nicety required, they are much oftener
mistaken then they are in the right.

Such another Symbolical prohibition as this, is that of Deuter. 22. 6, 7. If a
Birds nest chance to be before thee in the way, in any Tree, or on the ground,
whether they be Young ones or Eggs and the Dam sitting upon the Young ones, or
upon the Eggs, thou shall not take the Dam with the Young, but thou shall in
any wise let the Dam go, and take the Young to thee, that it may be well with
thee, and that thou may prolong thy days. Which precept as well as that
other of not seething of a Kid in the Milk of its Dam, though I make no
question but it was also literally to be observed, yet it was moreover a
Symbolical prohibition of all kinds and instances of cruelty or injustice,
because in this case the young ones may be bred up by hand, and will be well
enough pleased with the confinement of a Cage, but the old one that has been
used to liberty and the open air will pine and be fullen, and perish for want
of food, so that it is cruelty to take the Dam together with the young ones,
and when the Scripture enforces a Law that is in its literal sense of so little
avail or signification with so great a sanction as this, that it may be well
with thee and that thou may prolong thy days; It is as much as to say in
more comprehensive terms, that God will show mercy to men that show it to one
another, but that all manner of cruelty or injustice his Soul hates, and they
are a perfect abomination unto him. So also v. 8. of the same Chapter, When
thou buildest a new House, then thou shall make a battelment for thy roof, that
thou bring not Blood upon thine House, if any man fall from thence. Not that
there was so great danger of men's breaking their necks every day in the Week,
or every hour in the day, if men had not ballisters round about upon the leads
of their Houses, or that the inconveniences which those rails would prevent,
were great enough to compensate even the charge of making them through all the
Land of Israel, but the reason why they were set up being here so plainly set
down, it is as much as if God had said, that he intended them for a standing
Symbol of mercy, and that men were not only to avoid shedding of Blood out of
set purpose and malice prepense, but also to beware as much as might be of all
the accidental occasions and avenues to it.

So also v. 9, 10, 11. Thou shall not sow thy Vineyard with diverse seeds, lest
the fruit of thy seed which thou have sown and the fruit of thy Vineyard be
defiled, thou shall not plow with an Ox and an Ass together, thou shall not
wear a Garment of diverse sorts, as of Woollen and Linen together. Shall we
think that these were forbidden to the Jews, or that the Jews themselves
abstained from them only out of a cross-graind, covenanting humor, because the
Zabii sowed and plowed and were apparelled in that manner? No certainly there
can be nothing more ridiculous than to extend the Zabian Hypothesis to all
these prohibitions in the Law of Moses? And yet nothing can be more reasonable
neither, if what Maimonides has acquainted us be true, that the practices of
the Zabii are not only avoided in the abstinence from Blood, and from the
scething a Kid in the Milk of its Dam, but are to be laid down as a Principle
by which other Negative Precepts are to be explained, and if this be not a true
principle, as certainly it is not, how can any man think himself obliged to
acquiesce barely in the Authority of Maimonides, who is guilty of an error,
that branches it self out into so many several mistakes, and is so fruitful of
falsehood and deceit, without other good Authority from the reason of the thing,
or from the testimony of honester and wiser men? Or is not this way of
solution, under pretense of Learning, rather to be interpreted as a confession
of Ignorance, and as the Peripateticks and the Schoolmen fly to occult
qualities and substantial forms when nothing else can be found to give a
satisfactory answer; so here when the Rabbis are gotten into the dark, and
cannot find their way out of a prohibition, they call to the Zabii to lend them
their hands, and thus the blind lead the blind, and then no wonder if both of
them fall into the ditch of error, instead of that at the bottom of which
Democritus was used to say the truth it self lay concealed. Only there is this
difference betwixt the Aristotelians and the Rabbis that when the one flies to
a Quiddity or an Entelechia for want of something more plain and satisfactory
to say, though it be a Confession of Ignorance, yet it is an Argument of
Modesty too, to acknowledge themselves, though by an hard word, to be unequal
to the Mysteries of Nature, with whose sacred Depths, upon a serious and
impartial Examination of the whole Matter, the Corpuscularian Philosophers will
be found to be as little acquainted as the Aristotelians themselves; but when
the Rabbis, to explain that which they do not understand, are so bold to
impose their own Figments and Inventions, as the voice of God, and the only
true expositions of the Divine Law, what is this, but a Blasphemous and
execrable conjunction of the most childish Ignorance, and the most effronted
Impudence together?

But if instead of the Dreams of Maimonides and his very inconsiderate, however
haughty and assuming Disciples, we will submit our selves to the infallible
Conduct of that excellent Clue which the Law it self has given us for our
direction through the Mysterious Labyrinth of Antiquity, it will then be as
difficult to lose our way, as it is now to find it by the glaring and specious,
but deceitful Light of the Rabbinical Pretenders.

The Law it self gave this Reason why the Vineyard was not to be sown with
diverse Seeds, lest the Fruit of the Seed which thou have sown, and the Fruit
of the Vineyard be defiled. And if you ask wherein this Defilement consisted,
the answer is at hand, that it was not a Natural, but a Symbolical Defilement,
it was not a real Defilement in it self, but it was a Symbolical Prohibition of
that which was. And the same account is to be given of those other
Prohibitions, that an Ox and an Ass were not to Plough together, and that no
man was to wear a Garment of diverse sorts, of Linen and Woollen together; and
as the negative Precept, which has been already explained, of not seething of
a Kid in the milk of its Mother, was an aenigmatical Prohibition of incestuous
Copulations in the directly or obliquely ascending and descending lines, for
both of these are equally forbidden by the Levitical Law, so were these Laws
which have been last recited, a modest and clean way of forbidding those
Brutalities and Bestial Conjunctions, of which the Amorites were guilty, and
which were not forbidden the Jews, only because the Zabians, if any such people
there were, or the Amorites allowed themselves in the practice of so foul, so
horrid, so detestable a sin; but because it was the highest reproach and
indignity that could be put upon the Image of God in the Nature of man, because
it was so plainly against the Interest of Society, because it carries in its
execrable Womb such Monsters of impiety, as no Repentance, no Prayers, no
Sacrifice can expiate, because it brings an Universal Deluge upon all those
wholesome Principles of Chastity, Sobriety, and Religious Fear, without which
no Nation can be happy, nor any Government secure; or to sum up all in a word,
God does not forbid any thing for no Reason at all, but only for his own
arbitrary Will, or out of a Peevishness inconsistent with the Perfection and
Happiness of his blessed Nature* because the same things are practiced by those
against whom he has taken a Calvinistical and unaccountable Pique; but it is
either upon a Symbolical Reason for the sake of somewhat that is morally evil,
or because of the intrinsic and eternal Turpitude of the thing in its own
Nature.

And that this was the true reason of all those Prohibitions which I have last
recited, I gather from their extreme resemblance and likeness to one another in
themselves, compared with the Exposition of no less than two of the three,
which is to be found expressly set down, Levit. 19. 19. Thou shall not let thy
Cattle gender with a diverse kind: Thou shall not sow thy field with mingled
Seed: neither shall thou let a Garment mingled of Linen and Woollen come upon
thee. Where, in the first place, we are to take notice, that though Cattle be
only mentioned in this prohibition, yet Mankind is included under it a
fortiori; because the natural Reason why such unnatural Conjunctions are
forbidden in Beasts, is, because they are enemies to Generation, they would
spoil all the breeds of the several Kinds and Species in the World; and they
would generally beget nothing but Monsters, ungrateful to the sight, not sitted
with such Organs as are necessary to make them Vital; or, as is seen in the
Experience of Mules, unable to propagate themselves by Generation; and
therefore here our Saviors Argument takes place, Matt. 6. 26. Behold the Fowls
of the Air: for they sow not, neither do they reap, nor gather into Barns; yet
your heavenly Father seedeth them. Are ye not much better than they? And again,
v. 28. 29, 30. And why take ye thought for Raiment? Consider the Lillies of the
fields how they grow; they toil not, neither do they spin. And yet I say unto
you, that even Solomon in all his Glory was not arrayed like one of these.
Wherefore if God so cloth the Grass of the field, which to day is, and to
morrow is cast into the Oven, shall he not much more cloth you, O ye of little
Faith? And the same Argument in the instance of a Sparrow, is made use of, c.
10. 29, 30, 31. Are not two Sparrows sold for a Farthing? and one of them shall
not fall on the ground without your Father. But the very hairs of your head are
all numbered. Fear ye not therefore, ye are of more value than many Sparrows.
And so I say in this Case, if God forbid the unnatural Conjunctions of
different Kinds of Animals for the better preservation of their respective
Species, he is much more to be supposed to forbid the same in men themselves,
because the hairs of their heads are all numbered; that is, he takes a more
solicitous care of the Welfare of man, who is placed over the rest of the
Creatures, as God is over him; and he is in some sense, the God of this lower
World, though with respect to his Maker, he is but the Priest of this
magnificent Temple, to thank, and praise God for himself, and for, and in
behalf of all those Creatures, that are not able to do it for themselves; he is
Lord of the Earth, but a Servant to Heaven; he is like Eleazer, who was a
Servant to Abraham, though he ruled over all his house, and was the Master over
all besides; or like Melchisedech the King of Salem, to whom though Abraham
paid Tithes, yet he himself was but the Priest of the most High God, the God
of Gods, and Lord of Lords, God over all, blessed for ever.

Another thing to be considered upon occasion of these words, Thou shall not
let thy Cattle gender with a diverse Kind, is this, That Cattle very seldom or
never do gender with any Kind, but their own; and those few Instances of this
kind that are, it is perhaps impossible to prevent, unless we shall suppose the
Jews obliged by this Precept to sit up day and night to watch by their Cattle,
for fear of any such Heterogeneous Conjunctions, which I hope no man will be so
extremely credulous and silly as to believe. From whence it follows plainly,
that there are but two things that can be inferred from this negative Law; the
first is this: There were then as well as now, a certain sort of Creatures
called Mules, that were of a mixed or Hybridian kind, engendered betwixt Horses
and Asses in Conjunction together, of which the first mention is made, Genesis 36.
24. This was that Anah. that found the Mules in the Wilderness, as he, fed the
Asses of Zibeon his Father; And these, as being very fit for service and for
burden, were industriously propagated by the Husbandry of those times; but
because they were of a mixed and Heterogeneous Nature, because they proceeded
from such unnatural Copulations, as were so detestable in the sight of God,
because they could not propagate their Kind by Generation, and because all such
miscellaneous and Heterogeneous things had a Levitical or Symbolical
Uncleanness, they were forbidden by the Law of Moses.

Secondly, when that is forbidden to Beasts, which is so unnatural to them,
that they scarce ever use it, and which so much as they do, it is scarce
humanly possible to prevent, this is rather to be interpreted in such a Sense
as if it were only a more modest and a more cleanly way of Prohibiting the same
abominable Practices in men; as much as to say, Do not you, by any means,
defile your selves though the Amorites and other Nations whom I have destroyed,
have done it with those detestable Instances of the most degenerate and filthy
Lust, which are a Disgrace and Scandal to the Beasts themselves.

But then in the last place when to this Prohibition, Thou shall not let thy
Cattle gender with a diverse Kind, it is immediately added, Thou shall not sow
thy field with mingled Seed: neither shall a Garment mingled of Linen and
Woollen come upon thee; It is very foolish and absurd to imagine, that things in
their own nature perfectly indifferent, things that have no natural Pravity or
Desilement in them, should be equally forbidden with the greatest Villainies
that Wickedness it self can either devise or perpetrate, if it were not upon
account of a Symbolical Uncleanness, though they have none of their own; and
since there cannot be a more natural Symbol of Heterogeneous Copulations in
Animals, than the sowing of a field, or a Vineyard with diverse seeds, or then
the wearing a Garment of diverse sorts of Stuff, and since these are joined in
the Context with the other; I think for my part, that nothing can be more
plain, than that the same thing is over and over Symbolically forbidden; and
these Prohibitions being again inculcated, Deuteronomy. 22. 9, 10, 11. and under so
great a Sanction, which is to be added (...) to all those Laws, That it may be
well with thee, and that thou may prolong thy days: This is to show us how
solicitous the Divine Goodness is for the Welfare of Mankind, in which all
these Prohibitions are manifestly founded; and it ought to fill us with an
equal solicitude to please so merciful and so gracious a Being, who has thus
linked our Duty and our Interest together, and expects no instance of Obedience
from us, but what is for our own Advantage, as well as it is an Act of Homage
and Allegiance to him.

But yet I do not so wholly confine my self to this Interpretation of the
Mosaic Laws, which have been last recited, as to affirm, they had no other, for
though that be certainly one meaning which I have assigned, yet this hinders
not, but other very probable interpretations may be admitted, as being equally
connected in the Symbolical way to the types and shadows contained in the words
of those Laws; and therefore when the Jews were prohibited to Plow with an Ox
and an Ass; or wear Linsey Wolsey, or to sow a Field or Vineyard with two sorts
of Seeds, another meaning of these Figurative Precepts may very well be
supposed to be one of these two things, or indeed both of them together.

First, They were forbidden under these Types and Figures all manner of
Hypocrisy and Dissimulation, they were not to have an heart and an heart, as
the Hebrew Idiom excellently expresses it, but their Actions and Pretenses were
to be of the same Grain and Color with one another, and their outward
Appearances were to be but Copies of the original Realities within. Secondly,
by the same Prohibitions they were aenigmatically forwarned against all kind of
lukewarmness and indifference, they were to be true Blew, not parti-colour'd
men, or of a faint and Yellow dye, not Phy'lemorts, not halters between two
parties and different opinions; for syncerity and heartiness in every thing we
do, is so much for the benefit of the world, and for the interest of mankind,
and so like to God, who is the fountain of truth, and is what he is to the
utmost of himself, that though the sacrifice of the wicked be an abomination to
him, yet open wickedness it self is an acceptable sacrifice in comparison of
coldness and indifference and dissimulation.

Another Law which I shall mention to show that the Zabians do not keep the Key
of the Cabinet of Moses, but that the true Method of finding out the meaning
and design of all his Institutions, is to search for it in the Symbolick or
Hieroglyphick way, shall be that of Levit. 19. 23, 24, 25. concerning the
Fruits of Trees. And when ye shall come into the Land, and shall have Planted
all manner of Trees for Food, then ye shall count the Fruit thereof as
uncircumcised: Three Years shall it be as uncircumcised unto you, it shall not
be eaten of. But in the fourth Year all the Fruit thereof shall be Holy to
Praise the Lord withal; and in the fifth Year shall ye eat of the Fruit
thereof, that it may yield unto you the Increase thereof I am the Lord your God.

Now I dare appeal to all Mankind, would it not be very pleasant to say, the
reason why the Jews were so long before they Offered of their Fruits to God,
and so much longer before they partook of them themselves, was to be taken from
the Zabii, who were used to do these things either sooner or later than the
Jews are commanded to do? Or would it not be every whit as excusable to say,
that the reason why the Jews are any Victuals at all, was because the Zabii
never did? And yet there is no help for it; but the Customs of the Zabii must
explain this Law as well as any other, if it be true that their Practices are
to be laid down as an Hypothesis by which the reason of the Law of Moses is to
be explained.

But not to concern our selves any further with this miserable tool of an
Expedient, the most foolish and ridiculous that ever was invented. The Fruit
was uncircumcised; that is, it was unhallowed, or unclean, or unlawful to be
used for three Years, because till after then, their Juice was crude and
unconcocted, and therefore it was yet unfit to be Offered to God, to whom, as
every thing which was used in Food, was in some small proportion first to be
Consecrated and Offered up, that so the Primitiae might Hallow and Sanctify
the use of the rest; and that by this means an acknowledgment might be made, to
whom they were indebted for all the Necessaries, and all the Conveniences or
Delicacies of Humane Life, so was the Offering to be of the best in its kind,
because this was a Testimony of the most profound respect, and was an
acknowledgment of the Excellence of his Nature. And then after this it was
permitted to be eaten, but not before; for the same reason for which it was
unlawful in other Cases (...) to eat of that of which no part had before hand
been Sacrificed, by way of Acknowledgment and Thankfulness to the giver of it;
and therefore of these Fruit Trees it is said, When ye shall come into the
Land, and shall have Planted all manner of Trees for food, to intimate, that of
those Trees of which there was no use in Food, there was no need to make any
Offering neither; as it was in Animals, for the unclean Beasts which were not
permitted in Food, would not be accepted in Sacrifice neither. And so in
proportion, those Creatures that are the soonest in a condition to be eaten,
are likewise the soonest fit for Sacrifice, as I gather from that of Pliny, l.
8. c. 51. Suis foetus Sacificio die quinto purus est, pecoris die octavo. For
both these Animals being permitted in Food among the Romans, who were used to
abuse the Jews for their abstinence from Swines Flesh, and among whom the Sumen
was accounted so delicate a Dish; the Reason why one was capable of being
Sacrificed sooner than the other, was without question to be derived from this,
that it was sooner fit for Food.

Farther yet as another argument, besides what has been already very largely
represented upon this Subject, that the Law of Moses did neither forbid nor
command any thing, how commodious or hurtful soever the thing forbidden or
commanded might be in it self, merely because the Egyptians or the Zabians or
any other Heathen Nation did either practice or disallow it, I shall instance
in Circumcision it self which was the peculiar mark of the Covenant which God
had entered into with Abraham and his Posterity, and whichr seems to have been
parctised very anciently, among theall Eastern Nations, the Philistines only
excepted, who are the only Men in Scripture that are reproached with
uncircumcision, and by the Philistines, I mean all the Inhabitants of Palestine
but the Jews. Herodotus, and out of him Josephus in his first against Appion,
mentions many Nations by whom this rite has been very anciently parctised, and
the Jews at this rate of arguing would have been obliged to leave it off, at
least when not only in the thing it self, but in the manner of it, they saw
themselves so exactly Imitated by Barbarous and Idolatrous People; for the
Priests of Cybele, did not only use the rite of Circumcision, but they
performed it with a sharp Stone, in the same manner that Zipporah Circumcised
her Son. Juvenal.

Semivir, obscaeno facies reverenda minori, v. Etiam Seldom alicubi in de Diis
Syris ex Strabone.

Mollia qui rupta secuit genitalia testa.
And the same may be said likewise of that Custom, Exodus 21. from v. 2, to 6.
in these words, 2. If thou buy an Hebrew Servant, six years he shall serve, and
in the seventh he shall go out free for nothing. 3. If he came in by himself,
he shall go out by himself; if he were Married, then his Wife shall go out with
him. 4. If his Master have given him a Wife, and she have born him Sons or
Daughters; the Wife and her Children shall be her Masters, and he shall go out
by himself. 5. And if the Servant shall plainly say, I love my Master, my Wife
and my Children, I will not go out free: 6. Then his Master shall bring him
unto the Judges; he shall also bring him to the Door, or unto the Door-post,
and his Master shall bore his Ear through with an Aul, and he shall serve him
for ever. For this custom obtained in other places of the East, as well as in
Judaea, as is manifest from another passage in the same Author.

Sed Libertinus prior est, prior, inquit, ego adsum,
Quid timeam, dubitemve locum defendere, quamvis
Natus ad Euphraten, molles quod in aure fenestrae
Arguerint, licet ipse negem?
The reason of which Ceremony was, that the Ear was aunciently looked upon as a
Symbol of Obedience, because hearing is a necessary Praerequisite in order to
it, from whence it is that as Ozen in Hebrew, signifies an Ear, so the Verb in
Hiphil Heezin derived from it, signifies to give an aweful and dutiful
attention, and so Lamech uses it, Genesis 4. 23. speaking to his two Wives Adah
and Zillah, with the Authority of an Husband in those times, which we have
already shown to be very great, Shmahan Coli, Neshei Lemech, Haazenah Imrathi.
Hear my voice ye Wives of Lamech, hearken unto my speech, and thence in Greek
(...) and in Latin Obedire, (that is, Obaudire) and Auscultari signifies to
Obey; and as the Ear was a Symbol of Obedience in the general, so the boaring
of it, by the Master of the Family upon the Door-past of his own House, were
Ceremonies denoting the Object of this obedience, and specifying in a more
especial and particular manner, to whom this Obedience was to be paid; and
this explains that passage of the Psalmist, Ps. 40. 6. Sacrifice and Offering
thou did not desire, mine Ears have thou opened, that is, it is obedience
rather than sacrifice that God requires, according to that of Samuel to Saul,
that to Obey is better than Sacrifice, and to hearken than the fat of Rams,
though I am not v. L. Cappel. crit. sacr. and Is. voss. de 70. Interp.
ignorant that the Greek Interpreters have rendered this place to a far
different sense, and that they are followed in it by the Author to the Hebrews,
however the sense as it lies now in the Masorethical Bibles must be
acknowledged to be very good, and very suitable to the context, and to the whole
drift of that Psalm.

Add to all this that the reason why the Servant was to be let free in the
seventh year, was it self also of a Symbolical nature, in memory of that great
sabbatisme after the Creation of the World was finished, upon which also the
weekly Sabbath and the Sabbatical Year, and the Year of Jubilee, which was the
great septenary multiplied into it self, depended; but though at the expiration
of the sixth Year, the Hebrew servant was at liberty himself, yet he could not
carry his Wife and Family along with him, in case he did not bring them
thither, but Married while himself was in the condition of a Servant, to
another Servant of the same Family, because in this case she was only Vxor
Vsufructuaria, and the Master of the House did not lose his propriety in her as
a Servant, by suffering another to enjoy her as an Husband, and for the same
reason the seventh year being intended only to release the Person of him, who
had put himself into a Voluntary Subjection, it did not extend to those who
were born in a state of bondage, and did not come into the possession of their
Master by Compact or Agreement.

But yet notwithstanding, though they were not released together with their
Father at the Seventh year, yet being come of Israelitish race, they were not
in a state of perpetual servitude neither, but were to come out at the year of
Jubilee, and if the Seventh year, and the year of Jubilee were coincident, then
he and his Children were to go free together, Levit. 25. 41. Then he shall
depart from thee, both he and his Children with him, and the same must be
understood of his Wife also, supposing she were of the seed of Abraham, for
this was the general Rule that none of their own Nation, upon any pretense
whatsoever, without their own consent and choice were to be an Haereditary and
Perpetual possession, Levit. 25. 45, 46. and the year of Jubilee, being the time
when all things were restored to the old and true Proprietors, this was the
time, when the disposal of every Man and Woman's Person, as well as of Estates
and unalienable Possessions did Naturally devolve upon themselves again; so
that when it is said, Exodus 21. 7. If a Man sell his Daughter to be a
Maidservant, she shall not go out as the Menservants do, this must be
understood only of the seventh year, not of the year of Jubilee when all things
were restored, and as the reason why the Maid and the Manservant had not equal
Privilege, is to be referred to the different Esteem and Dignity, which the
one Sex had above the other in those times, so the reason why she also was
restored to freedom at the year of Jubilee, is to be referred, as has been said
to this, that no person whatsoever of the Hebrew race, was to be an everlasting
and perpetual slave.

Thus I have considered the Zabian Hypothesis, of which Doctor Cudworth is so
fond, and upon which he has thrown away so much Hebrew to no purpose, a thing
as full of Ostentation, and as empty of truth, as it is assertour; it is now
high time to look back, and to consider what it was which gave occasion to this
discourse Page 237. Supra.
of the Zabii, which was this; I had demonstrated beyond all possibility of
doubt or scruple, that the old Partition of Inheritances which was established
by Moses, and by Joshua, allotting to every Tribe and Family a proportion of
Land, which it was not in their Power to alienate from themselves, any longer
than till the Year of Jubilee, was destroyed at the time of the Division of the
two Kingdoms of Israel and Judah from one another, and that one Consequence of
this Alteration, was, that Usury which was forbidden by the Law of Moses, for
the continuance and preservation of that partition, must now of necessity begin
to obtain, it being no where forbidden upon any other account, than only for
the preservation of such a partition, as that of Moses was, from whence I took
occasion to observe, what had before hand been sufficiently proved, by many
other instances, that the Jews were so far from declining any thing purely,
because it was practiced by the neighbor Nations, without any other reason,
that this very prohibition of Usury, if it be true that it was forbidden by the
Egyptians, as well as by the Jews, was but another instance, after many that
had been taken notice of before, of the agreement of the Laws and Usages of the
Mosaic dispensation, with those of the Heathen Nations round about, and
therefore that it must needs be false, besides other very great inconsistencies
and incongruities, which I have found in the thing it self, that the Jews
abstained from any thing merely because it was in use among the Zabij, as
Maimonides would have them to have done.

And that this equality of Inheritances, which was engrafted into the Laws, not
only of the Egyptians and Jews, and from thence of the Athenians, nay, and
Lacedaemonians too, if we may believe Plutarch in the life of Lycurgus, but also
of the Romans, I say, that this equality cannot otherwise be preserved, than by
a prohibition of Usury, besides the reason of the thing appears by the last
instance of the Romans, among whom it is certain it did at first obtain. They
are the words of D. Sigon. de antiq ^ur. Ital. l. 2. c. 2.
Sigonius, a very good Judge in these cases. Primum igitur Romulum Regem ex
agro Publico viritim diviso bina jugera singulis assignasse invenio. Testis est
hujus divisionis, praeter Dionysium, Varro, cujus haec verba sunt in libro de
Re Rustica primo. Antiquus noster (Romulus) ante bellum Punicum pendebat (...)
jugera quod a populo primum diviso videbuntur, viritim, quae, quod haeredem
seque bantur, Haeredium appellarunt, and the same thing is no less plain from
all the Colonies that were from time to time, deduced by the Romans, into the
conquered places, in which you may see every where in Livy, there was an
equality of distribution observed at first, but yet this equality could not be
preserved, in a place where Usury was so excessively practiced, as it was among
the Romans, among whom many of the public disturbances and commotions that
happened were occasioned by this sort of oppression, as may be seen up and down
in many places in Livy.

And how could it possibly be otherwise, where Usury was publicly allowed, and
extortion privately practiced, where Lands, when they were sold, were sold
outright, without any Year of Jubilee in which they were to return to the old
possessour again, but that a difference, as there will always be between one
man and another, in industry, Frugality, Ingenuity, Craft, Ambition and the
like, must very soon make the industry of one encroach upon the sloth, the
frugality of one upon the profuseness, the ingenuity of one upon the dullness,
the Ambition of one upon the Indifference, and the Knavery of one upon the
honest and undesigning temper of another.

From whence it came to pass in the compass of not many years, that the
disproportion was so great, that it began to be complained of as a grievance by
the poorer Live. l. 6.
sort, which occasioned that Law of Licinius Stolo, ne quis plus quingenta agri
Jugera possideret; which Law was afterward broken by himself, and he severely
sined, ib. l. 7.
quod mill Jugerum agri cum silio possideret; emancipandoque filium fraudem
legi fecisset.

Another uncontrollable testimony to the truth of this, as to matter of fact,
besides the natural evidence of the thing it self, shall be taken from the Book
and Story of Nehemiah c. 5. whose words I will here transcribe at large, from
v. 1. to 12. inclusively.

1. And there was a great cry of the People, and of their Wives, against their
Brethren the Jews. 2. For there were that said, We, our Sons and our Daughters
are many: therefore we take up Corn for them, that we may eat, and live. 3.
Some also there were that said, We have Mortgaged our Lands, Vineyards, and
Houses, that we might buy Corn, because of the dearth. 4. There were also that
said, We have borrowed money for the Kings tribute, and that upon our Lands and
Vineyards. 5. Yet now our Flesh is as the Flesh of our Brethren, our Children
as their Children: and lo, we bring into bondage our Sons and our Daughters, to
be Servants, and some of our Daughters are brought into bondage already,
neither is it in our power to redeem them: for other men have our Lands and
Vineyards. 6. And I (Nehemiah) was very angry when I heard their cry, and these
words. 7. Then I consulted with my self, and I rebuked the Nobles, and the
Rulers, and said unto them, Ye exact Usury, every one of his Brother. And I set
a great assembly against them. 8. And I said unto them, We, after our ability,
have redeemed our Brethren the Jews, which were sold unto the Heathen; and will
you even sell your Brethren? or shall they be sold unto us? then held they
their peace, and found nothing to answer. 9. Also I said, It is not good that
ye do, ought ye not to walk in the fear of our God, because of the reproach of
the Heathen our Enemies? 10. I likewise, and my Brethren, and my Servants,
might exact of them money and Corn: I pray you let us leave off this Usury. 11.
Restore, I pray you, to them, even this day, their Lands, their Vineyards,
their Olive-yards, and their Houses, also the hundredth part of the money; and
of the Corn, the Wine, and the Oil, that ye exact of them. 12. Then said they,
we will restore them, and will require nothing of them; so will we do as thou
say. Then I called the Priests, and took an Oath of them, that they should
do according to this promise.

Upon which words that I may descant with the greater clearness, it is first to
be observed that this happened just upon the return from the Captivity, in
which state while the Jews continued, being utterly dispossessed and ejected
out of their respective inheritances, they had no way to subsist but by trade,
so that they could not subsist without usury, or at least not without making a
gain by the exchange of the Commodities which they sold, which was one sort of
usury prohibited by the Deuteronomy. 23. 19.
Law of Moses, and comes under that general term of increase of Victuals, or
usury upon any thing that was lent upon usury, which the Law forbad as well as
increase of money, and though this were only prohibited them with respect to
one another, ^b* v. 20.
but permitted upon the alien or the stranger, yet in the Captivity it was
impossible, but it must be exercised mutually upon each other likewise, for
they had no subsistence but by trade, and to trade without making some
advantage by the exchange, when they had no other way to live, and were at a
constant charge, for the maintenance of themselves and Familes, would in a very
small time bring a Noble to Ninepence, and was, as we are used to Phrase it, to
buy and sell and live by the loss.

From whence it is easy to perceive, according to the different industry or
ingenuity of men, according to their greater or lesser opportunities of
advancing themselves in the way of traffic and commerce, according to their
greater or lesser charge by reason of the number of their own Families or the
incidental and external necessities of their relations, according to the
greater or lesser degrees of Thrift and Parsimony of one man compared with
another, and lastly, according to the different honesty, or Capacity of those
they had to do with, but this must needs make very great inequalities among the
Jews themselves, one must be excessive rich, and another poorer than beggary it
self, one rather than give, would lend at usury out of hopes to make an
advantage that way, and another must be forced to borrow at any rate, and be a
slave to the lender.

And these hard circumstances instead of being abated or redressed by their
return from the Captivity, were rather increased by it, for in the first place
it is to be considered, how they were interrupted in the building of the Temple
and City, in the Reign of Artaxerxes the successor of Cyrus, Joseph. Antiq. l.
XI. c. 2. and 5.
whom Josephus calls Cambyses (as that other Artaxerxes who succeeded Darius,
is by that Author called Xerxes) by the Artifices of Rehum and Shimshai (called
by Josephus after the Apocryphal writer of Esdras for the greater softness of
the Joseph* Antiq. l. XI. c. 2. 1 Esdr c. 2.
sound, Rathymus and Semellius) and this could not but be accompanied with a
proportionable oppression, because the reason why they were forced to desist,
was because they were represented as a Rebellious and Seditious people, which
oppression though it were soon after taken off, in the Reign of Darius the Son
of Hystaspes (for that of Artaxerxes or Cambyses was but very short,) so that
by virtue of Darius his decree, they were encouraged a fresh to set upon the
building of the Temple, which was actually finished, and the Feast of
Dedication kept, in the sixth year of that King, Ezr. 6. 15, 16, 17. nay, and
as it seems the Walls of Jerusalem were completed likewise, yet this new scene
of Affairs was but of short continuance, for in the twentieth year of
Artaxerxes, the Immediate Successor and Son of Darius, when Nehemiah enquired
of his Countryman Hauani, concerning the Jews that had escaped which were left
of the Captivity, Nehem. 1: 2.
and concerning Jerusalem: The answer which he received was this, The remnant
that are left in the Captivity there in the Province, are in great affliction
and reproach. The Wall of Jerusalem also is broken down, and the Gates thereof
are burnt with fire. And Josephus adds what is but a very Antiq. XI. 5.
easy and necessary consequence of what Nehemiah has written. (...), that is,
that the Nations round about made perpetual inroads upon them, pillaging and
ravaging the Country in the day, and surpriseing their Towns and Villages in
the night, and filling all the ways and passages with heaps of dead Bodies. And
though this insolence at the instance of Nehemiab were not long after severely
forbidden by the Decree of Artaxerxes or Xerxes the Son of Darius, yet this
hindered not but Sanballat and Tobiah, and their adherents did still do all
they could to plague and torment the Jews, and to hinder them from repairing
the Ruins of their slighted Wall Nehem. c. 4. so that they were forced the one
half of them to be a guard to the rest, while they proceeded in their work, and
the other half in a mixed condition betwixt that of Laboring and military
persons, were necessitated Nehem. 4. v 13. ad fin. cap.
to hold a Sword in one hand, while they employed a Trowel with the other.

The consequence of which was, that the Land all this while lay unmanured,
while the people were all of them so wholly taken up in the defense of
themselves, and in the building of their Wall and City, and if they had Tilled
and Sowed, or Planted their ground with never so much industry and care, yet it
could not be otherwise in this posture of affairs, but the Enemy would either
have spoiled and wasted what they had done, or being so strong as they were in
the Country round about, while the Jews were all of them employed in the
building of Jerusalem and in the Nehem. 4. 22.
defense of the builders, they would have enjoyed the Fruits of what the others
had Planted and Sown.

Wherefore these causes, as very well they might, produced a Dearth of Corn and
of all manner of sustenance among the Jews, Nehem. 5. 3. and this Dearth which
was enhaunsed by this, that they were not only to maintain themselves and
Families, but v. 4.
were also to pay a Tribute to the King, compelled them to mortgage their
Lands, Nehem. 5. 2, 3, 4.
Vineyards and Houses, that they might buy Corn for themselves; and their Sons
and their Daughters, which were many, that they might eat and live. Which
hardship of theirs, would have been still greater, if Nehemiah, who was the
Tirshatha or Governor appointed by Artaxerxes, had exacted the Governors
allowance, to which he had a right equal to that of any of his Predecessors,
who without the addition of any of those calamities which have been lately
mentioned, were themselves a sufficient plague and burden to the people, not
being content barely to oppress them themselves, but permitting their very
Slaves and Servants to Lord it over the Heritage of God, and to play the worst,
because the meanest of Tyrants, by all manner of cruelty, rapine and injustice.
But Nehemiah notwithstanding his charge was very great, for he had an hundred
v. 14, 15.
and fifty constant guests of the best quality among the Jews at his Table,
besides those that came from among the Heathen that were about them, and his
allowance was suitable to so numerous a company consisting of persons of so
considerable a rank, v. 18. ib. v. 10. ib.
yet for all that required he not the Bread of the Governor, because the
bondage was heavy upon the People. No wonder therefore when the old partition
of Inheritances was destroyed, when the Dearth was so great, and the oppression
greater, if they were not only forced to mortgage what they had of real estate,
that they might take up Money, to maintain themselves and Families, and to pay
the Kings Tribute which lay very heavy upon them, but also when this was done,
and yet proved insufficient to satisfy all their wants, to sell their very
Sons and Daughters into bondage to be Servants, whom, as they complained very
^. 5. 5.
justly, it was not in their power to redeem, because other men had their Lands
and Vineyards.

Which things being premised, for the better understanding the true state of
affairs at that time, I shall now for the explication of this Chapter of
Nehemiah, do these two things. First, I shall show in what sort and manner, and
to what degree Usury was practiced among the Eastern Nations. And Secondly, I
shall show that the Old Laws and Usages of the Romans which concerned Usury,
were derived from thence.

As to the First of these, that is to say, in what sort and manner and to what
degree Usury was practiced among the Eastern Nations, or at leastwise among the
Jews, as well before as after their return from the Captivity of Babylon, may
be seen from this place of Nehemiah compared with some other places in the Law
of Moses; and in the general it is certain, that Usury was two fold, it was
either increase of Money, or increase of Victuals, or indeed of any thing
necessary or convenient for the support of humane life; as has been already
sufficiently declared, and this Usury in respect of the difficulties to which
it reduced those who were involved in it, was called in Hebrew Neshec from a
word that signifies to bite, because in time it ate quite through their
Estates, and in like manner all kind of Extortion and immoderate Exaction is by
the Turks called eating at this day, and this is the very word by which the
Prophet David describes the unjust man, and the oppressor. Have all the
workers of iniquity no knowledge? who eat up my people as they would eat bread,
and call not upon the Lord. Psalm. 14. 4. and 53. 4. and as with relation to the
party borrowing it was called Neshec, so with respect to the lender, there are
two words by which it is expressed, Tarbith and Marbith, both from the same root,
and both signifying improvement or increase, but in case they could not duly
pay their Use, or being reduced to extreme want, having but just a bare
subsistence for themselves, and perhaps hardly that, they could not pay it any
longer, then if they had any Lands or Vineyards, or Houses, they were forced to
Mortgage or Paun them till the year of Jubilee. Lastly in case of a still
greater necessity which sometimes happened, as it did in Nehemiahs days by
reason of the Famine and the Kings Tribute, notwithstanding the Tirshatha's
allowance were not exacted; then they sold themselves or else their Sons and
their Daughters into bondage, by virtue of that absolute power and Authority
which they had over them, the Men till the Seventh year, and the Women till
that of Jubilee, the reasons of which difference have been already explained.

If you ask to what degree this Usury was exacted, the Text of Nehemiah tells
you expressly, it was the Hundredth part of the Money, and of the Corn, the Wine
and the Oil. Hebr. Mead hacheseph Vehadagan, etc. but the Seventy have
Translated it to another sense, (...) ((...).) The sense of which is that
Nehemias not only exhorted the Creditors to restore the Lands, and Vineyards,
and Houses which they had in Mortgage, but also out of their own Pockets to
furnish their necessitous Neighbors and Kindsmen; for it was they, who were
the first Mortgagers in all these cases, with whatsoever was necessary for
their present support; wherefore the Seventy instead of Mead read it Meeth
with a very little alteration: but, I confess, I prefer the Masorethical
reading before it, not only because the condition might seem too hard to be
submitted to, that they should restore the Principle and forgive the Use, and
furnish them de suo with large contributions for their support into the
bargain, but also because the Romans, who as I have said, as to the case of
Usury, received all their customs from the Jews, did exact it in the same
proportion in which Nehemiah affirms the Creditors among the Jews, in his time
to have done, as shall be shown more largely by and by.

And to begin with Names before we pass to other particular circumstances of
the matter in question, there are two names in Latin by which the Principle,
and two by which the Usury of it was expressed. The Principle was either caput or
sors, and the advantage redounding from it was either Faenus or Vsura, all
which are plainly and unquestionably Hebrew, or at least Oriental Names; Caput
is manifestly the Hebrew Gabhouth, by which any sort of Eminence, or Hill, or
Top of any thing was aptly signified, so that nothing can answer more exactly
either in word or signification then the Hebrew does to the Latin, and thence
the Capitol was called not a Capite Toli, as the Roman Etymologists, who did
not understand their own Language, ignorantly tell us, but it was as much as
Gabhouth el or Gabhouth al, more broadly according to the manner of the
Chaldees, whose a is as broad as the Dorique, and does almost answer the
pronunciation of o, as much as to say the Hill of God, or the Hill where God
was anciently Worshipped, as it was the custom all over the East, from whence I
make no question but the Romans were a Colony) to Worship God in Hills and High
places whence Ramah, and Gibeon, and Gilboah had their names, as being such
Eminences or High places, as it seems, set apart anciently for the Worship of
God.

And such another account as this, is to be given of several other of those
famous seven Hills upon which the old Rome was afterward built, the Mons
Palatinus is not a balando, as the Roman Grammarians would needs have it to
signify, but it is from the Hebrew Phillel, from whence with an Heemantique is
the noun Tephillah, which being rejected, as not belonging to the root, mons
Palatinus is the Mountain of Prayer, so also the Vatican Mountain, is as much
as, har Hahatik, the Old Mountain, where the first Planters of the Colony seem
to have Worshipped God, by changing the hajin into an Aeolique Digamma, which
answers to the Latin v consonant and f, of which I shall give more instances
very suddenly, for that it is not a vatibus, according to the Latin Analogy, is
clear from this, that the Syllable ti in vatibus is short, but in vaticanus
long according to that of Martial

Et vaticanis condita musta cadis.

Though I deny not but vatis it self, if it be not a fando, as the Greek (...)
is from (...) may very well be supposed to be from the Hebrew Hatik, because
the Seers and Prophets of Old time were generally old Men, and from vatis is
vaticinium, that is, Hatikinium, an old Saying, or an ancient Prophecy, so that
these things do naturally strengthen and confirm one another.

Again the esquiliae or the mons esquilinus, had its name from the Thickets or
Groves that grow upon it, for that is the signification of Eshel in Hebrew,
whence was the Latin Asilum, and as the name so the thing it self, was derived
from the Cities of Refuge among the Jews, as well as the pomeria among the
Latins, which was nothing else but aliquid extra and intra muros vacui at
humano cultu soli, for the Cities of the Levites, and consequently those of
Refuge, were to have a Suburb of a thousand Cubits round about, this was their
pomaerium, and at the farthest boundary of this, the jus asylorum took its
beginning; and because where such shady Groves are used to be found, there are
usually Medows and Watercourses adjoining, therefore Eshel seems in differently
to signify all these, and accordingly it is usually rendered by the Seventy,
by the general name of (...), which signifies properly any arable Land, (though
neither the pomaeria of the Romans nor the Suburbs of the Levites were ever
Plowed upon any occasion whatsoever) and from hence Asilus in Latin is a
certain fly or Gadbreeze, troublesome to Cattle, which breeds in such Meadowy
or Woody places, which the Latins call otherwise Tabanus and the Greeks (...).
Virgil,

Est lucos silari circa Ilicibusque virentem
Plurimus Alburnum volitans, cui nomen Asilo
Romanum est, aestrum Graii vertere vocantes,
Acer, acerba sonans, quo tota exterita sylvis,
Diffugiunt armenta, fugit mugitibus ether
Concussus, sylvaeque and sicci ripa Tanagri.
Lastly as from Eshel is the esquiliae, and the mons Esquilinus, and the
asylum, and asilus, so from Ethel which is the same in Chalday, that Eshel is
in Hebrew is the Latin Italia, by reason of its Fruitfulness and pleasant
situation, as one of part of it was called Campania, and the Metropolis of that
Province Capua, from the Greek (...), so widely are they deceived who would
have Italy derive its name from the Greek (...), for a fabulous and foolish
reason, or rather for no reason at all, but only the resemblance in sound.

But enough of this, I could show the same of the rest of the Roman Hills, that
they had their names from the East, which is sufficient to prove the
inhabitants of that place to have been a Colony from thence; but I return to
the business of Usury which occasioned this digression, and the Second name by
which the Principal sum is called in Latin, is Sors, which is derived from the
Hebrew Joresh, signifying an Inheritance or Estate; and because the
Inheritances among the Jews were divided by lot, therefore sors in Latin does
also signify chance or fortune, and sorts are lots, and sortiri is to cast
lots, or to obtain by lot.

These are the two words by which the Principle is signified in the Latin
tongue, the use as has been said is either faenus or usura. Faenus is hanoush,
from hanash, paena affecit, mulctavit, mulctam imposuit, as much as to say, id
quod mulctae loco exigitur, by changing the hajin into the Aeolique digamma, as
in the instances above mentioned of vatis, vaticinium and vaticanus, and in two
other instances that shall hereafter be produced, and the word is used in
Chalday, Esra. 7. 26. Lahanash Nicsin, which we render by confiscation of
Goods, and the Seventy by (...), which is proportionably the same in Usury as
in confiscation. Lastly, utor, and usus, and usura, are the first of them from
Hathar in Chalday, the two last from Hasar in Hebrew, signifying a tenth,
because this was the ancient usura centesima, or in the Language of Nehemiah,
the hundredth part of the Money, the Corn, the Oil, and the Wine. For the year
anciently consisted of ten Months, before it was reduced (by several degrees,
and upon necessary considerations because of the seasons of the Year, as it
were shifting their course, and passing successively through all the Months) to
a perfect equation with the motion of the Sun, and one in an hundred for one
Month, is ten in the hundred for the year, as afterward by the addition of two
other Months it came to be twelve in the hundred; and that we may understand
the better how perfect the analogy is, it is to be observed, that as hasar is
decimare, to receive the tenth, or use of any thing, for one in the hundred,
for one Month is ten in the hundred, that is one in ten, a tenth of the whole,
for the use of an year, so in Puhal, mehousar, or by letting out the formative
honsar, is id quod decimatum est, or id omne quodcunque usurae nomine
accipitur. So that I think there is nothing at all precarious in this account,
unless it be that one of these two things do not seem sufficiently proved.
First, That there was anciently an Eastern year which consisted of ten Months.
Secondly, That the use of Money and of all things else was Monthly paid. And
for the First of these it is certain that Romulus his Year consisted but of ten
Months, as Ovid expressly tells us in his Fasti,

Tempora digereret cum conditor urbis, in
Constituit menses quinque bis esse suo. (anno
For which the learned Poet alleges several reasons, the first is taken from
the supposed ignorance of Romulus in the course and motion of the Stars.

Scilicet arma magis quam sidera, Romule, noras.
Curaque finitimos vincere major erat.
But this by his favor could not be a good reason, neither can it be thought a
likely matter, that a wise Man living a great many Years in the World, and
observing in every one of them the seasons of the Year, and by consequence the
course of the Sun, should think the solar Year to consist but of ten Months;
for if you go by the Lunar, those ten Months will be so many several Years,
being so many several complete and entire descriptions of the Lunar Circle, and
indeed something more, if you assign thirty days to each Month; which I shall
prove by and by to have been the true ancient ten Month Year; neither was Ovid
himself satisfied with this solution, as appears by his substituting two others
in its stead, one of which is, that this was that Period of time wherein the
Widow was used to mourn for her deceased Husband.

Per totidem menses, a funere conjugis, uxor
Sustinet in vidua tristia signa domo.
And this I do not deny to be a possible reason, but I am far from thinking it
is the true one; nay, I am rather of opinion that the contrary is true, that
is, that the reason why the Year consisted of ten Months, was not because the
Widow mourned so long for her Husband, but the reason why the Widow mourned so
long, and no longer for her Husband, was because it was customary to mourn for
a Year in this case, and the ancient Year consisted of ten Months, though the
time of mourning was not enlarged together with the Year, as many of our
customs depend upon reasons which are now long since expired and forgotten, but
I speak this only with reference to the ancient Romans, for at this day it is
manifest that the Year of mourning is measured by the Sun.

But the true reason of this ancient Year consisting of ten Months is yet
behind, and is assigned by Ovid in the words immediately preceding those which
I have newly cited, namely that it was taken from the time of Childbearing, or
from the usual Period that is found to pass from the time of conception to that
of parturition.

Quod satis est utero matris dum prodeat infans
Hoc anno statuit temporis esse satis.
And this discovers withal from whence the Romans had their ancient Year, for
there is no question but they received it from the East, where there was such a
Period of ten Months taken from this last reason which Ovid assigns, and which
was properly and peculiarly called the time of life. So the Angel called it in
his promise made to Abraham, Genesis 18. 10. I will certainly return unto thee
according to the time of life, and lo Sarah thy Wife shall have a Son. And that
this time was a fixed and certain Period, by which it was well understood, what
time was meant in those days, appears plainly by v. 14. where it is called the
appointed time. Is any thing too hard for the Lord? at the time appointed will
I return unto thee, according to the time of life, and Sarah shall have a Son.
And that we may see more plainly that this was an usual Period in the East, and
this which is here mentioned, a stated and settled form of expressing it, the
very same words are repeated in a like case, by the Prophet Elisha to the
Shunammite Woman, 2 Kings 4. 16. about this season according to the time of
life, thou shall embrace a Son. and again, v. 17. And the Woman conceived and
bare a Son at that season that Elisha had said unto her, according to the time
of life; and that by this appointed time of life, the space of ten Months was
understood, is clear besides the experience of the thing it self in the usual
Periods of parturition, from the words of the Text themselves, especially if we
compare them with the version of the Seventy, who translate Mohed and Heth
Hazeh, at this time or this appointed time by (...) and (...), in the places of
Genesis which I have produced, (...), and in those of Kings, (...), which
passages are not so to be interpreted, as if the Angel in one place, or the
Prophet in the other had said, at this time twelve Months I will return unto
thee, or this time twelve Months thou shall embrace a Child, but at the return
of this season of the Year, which must of necessity happen within less then ten
Months dividing the Year into four quarters, each of which is in Greek properly
called (...) or (...), and in Hebrew Mohed, as in that place in the first of
Genesis, where the Stars are appointed Leothoth, Oulemohadim, Oulejamim,
Veshanim. For signs, and for seasons, and for days, and years. Where the
Seventy render it, (...).

Further that the Romulian Year consisting of ten Months was without question
taken from the East, may appear by reflecting upon Rome and Romulus themselves;
for both those names are taken from the East, Rome is from Rom, excelsum esse,
exaltari, and may signify any high place whatsoever, as Ramah and Gibeon might
also have done, though they have been appropriated to two particular places;
and Romulus is the God of that high place, by the addition of el. Romulus, if I
am not mistaken, is the same with Remus, the latter being only a corruption of
the former; though tradition and common speech, which made the corruption, have
to justify it, invented Fables concerning them, as of several persons, and as
Romulus is the same with Remus, so is Numa the Second King of the Romans, the
same perhaps with Numitor, the Father of Rhea, and the pretended Grandfather of
Romulus; for Amulius his Brother is certainly a fained person, his name being
given him only from his Emulation and Ambition, and as it were to justify the
story that is told concerning him; that he deposed his Brother Numitor from the
Kingdom. Romulus, was otherwise called Quirinus and this not for any of the
reasons assigned by Ovid in the Second of his Fasti,

Sive quod hasta quiris priscis est dicta sabinis,
Bellicus a telo venit in astra Deus:
Sive suo regi nomen posuere Quirites,
Seu quia Romany juxerat ille Cures.
But Quirinus is (...) from the Hebrew Keren signifying an Horn, which was in
the East accounted an emblem of Dominion and Power, for Quoi, and Qui, and Cui
are the same, as in that of Catullus,

Quoi dono lepidum, novum libellum
Arida modo pumice expolitum?
Corneli, tibi, namque tu solebas,
Meas esse aliquid putare nugas.
And by the same Analogy, what the Latins call Quintus, when it is a Praenomen,
that the Greeks call (...), and from (...) is the Latin Quino, with its
compounds inquino and coinquino.

Further yet, the First place where any temple was built, and where the ancient
Romans preserved the Images of all their Gods, there where the Capitol it self
was afterward built, was called mons Tarpejus, not from Tarpeius, the supposed
Governor of the Citadel, or from his Daughter Tarpeja, who is slandred by
Antiquity with having betrayed it to the Romans, for want of a more likely tale
to give an account of the Etymon of the place; but because the Idols, which the
Romans Worshipped, which Idols are properly called Teraphim in Hebrew, and in
construction Tarphei, were in that Mountain kept and preserved.

The manner of Romulus his being translated to Heaven, according to the
relation of those who pretended to be Eye witnesses of it, was either a
pretended imitation or a manifest corruption of the stories of Enoch and Elijah
in the sacred Volume, and the stratagem by which the Romans procured Wives to
themselves, having none of that Sex among them, by inviting the Sabines to come
and see the Consualia Celebrated by them in Honor of Neptunus Equestris, is
answered exactly by the story of the Benjamites with relation to the Daughter
of Shiloh in the last Chapter of the Book of Judges, so that not only as to
names and words, but as to events and things themselves there is a plain and
undeniable Orientalism in the Roman story, as is evident before we leave
Romulus by the name of Rhea the vestal Virgin (impregnated by Mars) who is
pretended to have been his Mother; for this Rhea properly signifies a
Priestess, from Rhaah vidit, as the Priests and Prophets in Scripture are
frequently called Rhoim or Seers. Romulus was succeeded by Numa the Sabine, and
Numa being a Lawgiver had his Name from thence, for this is the very word by
which God himself in Scripture expresses his Legislative Authority and absolute
Power, Neoum Jehvob, thus says the Lord, and this perhaps is a better
derivation of (...), and of Nomisma or Numisma derived from it, then the usual
Etymology of the Grammarians from (...), neither can any thing be a greater
confirmation of this, then what we find recorded in the History of Rome, that
Numa received all his Laws from the Nymph Egeria, for this Egeria is Hagar,
which St. Paul tells us in the Cabalistical and Arcane Language signified,
Mount Sinai in Arabia, and is as much as to say, that Numa had all his Laws and
Institutions out of the East; and still further to strengthen this matter, it
is to be noted, that among other things introduced and instituted by Numa, were
the Salii, the Ancilia and the Luperci; I shall pass my conjecture at the
meaning of all these, and so conclude this digression, the Salii were the
Priests of Mars, twelve in number, with Shields or Targets called Ancilia, from
El or Al which the Latins call Sol, as much a Solii, the Priests in general of
God, or more particularly of the Sun, to which all the Heathen Deities are
reduced by Macrobius, and I appeal to any Man whether this be not a better
Etymon then the common one a Saliendo, especially if you consider these two
things; First, What Macrobius tells us, that in his time the Salii did not
understand their own Songs, and solemn Hymns, which shows then to have been
written in some Exotique Language and probably in the Eastern. And Secondly,
That the same persons are by Catullus, Epigr. 17. called Salisubsuli, which, if
this Etymology were true, would be at once a saliendo and a subsiliendo, which
is perfect nonsense as any thing can be.

Again, their Arms or Targets were called Ancilia, not ab Ancidendo, as the
Grammarians would have it, without any ground in Analogy to favor their
conjecture, but because the Salii in their dances were used, as I conceive, in
certain measures to beat or play upon their Shields, ingeminating these words
in honor of their God, Even ca el, Even ca el, there is none like God, or there
is none like our God, which it is very natural and easy for any Man to
conceive them to have done. Lastly, The Luperci the Priest of Pan, or of the
Demourgick and Plastic nature of the universe, whose business it was to run
naked though the Streets, Mulierum palmas uterosque caprina pelle ferientes,
Lloyd lex George. and Poet. in voce.
qua re faecunditatem and facilem partum sieri putabunt, had their name from
the words which they seem to have pronounced in the performance of this
Superstitious office, lou parothka, or lou parothk. utinam parias, and though
the Original of these things be driven back by some as far as Evander himself,
at his First coming into Italy, which according to the general computation is a
great while before the time of Numa, yet it is sufficient that they were most
certainly and most solemnly practiced in his time, and that when ever they
began, as the Chronology of those ages is very confused, yet they are most
probably of Eastern growth, and speak a Language intelligible to the East, but
not to any other besides them.

But to return to that which occasioned this digression, and that is the
Romulian or the ten Month Year: Another instance remaining to this day of the
ancient Period of ten Months in the East, is to be found in the (...) of the
Babylonians, for the Babylonians or Chaldeans had three several ways anciently
of measuring time, by their (...), their (...), and their (...), which have
never yet been satisfactory explained; their First Kings they tell us Reigned
One hundred and twenty Sari, but what Period of time the (...) was, is not so
easy to determine, Hesychius is content to tell us in the general that it was
(...), A certain number or measure of time among the Babylonians, but there is
a fragment of Abydenus preserved in Eusebius, which gives a more particular
account See the most learned L. Bp. of Chester upon the Creed, Artic. 1. p. 59.
of the matter, (...), the (...) contains Three thousand Six hundred Years, and
with Abydenus Berosus and Alexander Polyhistor do exactly agree, at which rate
the Sum total of an Hundred and twenty Sari, amounting to so vast and
prodigious a number, being in all Four hundred thirty two thousand Years, which
are all of them pretended to have been taken up in the Reign of ten Kings only;
so that one King with another the proportion will be Forty three thousand two
hundred Years a piece, an incredible time for the whole life, and much more for
the Reign of one Man, which is but a part of it, and sometimes no very
considerable one neither; this was the reason why Anianus and Panodorus with
great Judgment concluded these Babylonian Years to be indeed but days, (as I
have demonstrated elsewhere that every Discourse of the true time of our
Saviors Passover.
revolution of any of the Heavenly bodies, so as to describe an entire Circle,
and end where it began, is in Hebrew, Greek, and Latin, rightly called Shanah,
(...), and annus) and this conjecture of theirs was no other then the very
truth, not only as to the (...), but as to the (...), and the (...), as I will
now prove by showing the Etymology of each, the Saros say they, is Three
thousand Six hundred Days, but yet in this they are mistaken, that where they
reduce these Days into Solar Years, they proceeding according to the most
perfect equation of the Suns course, consisting of three hundred Sixty five
Days and a quarter in each Year, have made the whole Saros to be but nine
Years, six Months, and odd Days, whereas according to the account of the
Chaldeans themselves, whose Solar Year consisted but of Three hundred Sixty
days, the whole Saros contained ten entire and perfect Years, I do not say or
mean perfect in themselves, but in the v. Scal. d^ Emend. temp. l. 3. and Cl.
Stillingfl. orig. Sacr. l. 1. c. 6.
account and esteem of those unskilful Ages, till at last by the variation of
the seasons of the Year, or at least by a foresight that this in time would be
the consequence of it, the Egyptian Priests bethought themselves and added
Five Days more to the ancient account, of which Plutarch from the monuments De
Iside and Osiride.
of the Egyptians has given a fabulous account, which it is needless to
mention; it is sufficient that the ancient Solar Year consisted of no more then
Three hundred and sixty days, now Three hundred and sixty days multiplied by
ten, make Three thousand Six hundred, which was the Chaldean Saros, From the
Hebrew hasar, by the Elision of the Gutturall, which is in a manner a Quiescent
letter, and so it appears in the version of the Seventy in the proper names,
who sometimes leave it perfectly out, as in heden, which they have expressed by
(...), without taking any notice of the Consonant at all, though sometimes they
render it by the Grecian Gamma, as in hamorah, (...), Chedarlaomer, (...) and
the like; and by the same Analogy with this from the proper name Asshur, which
begins with an Aleph, a Quiescent letter, we have not only the Greek (...), but
sometimes by the Elision and Omission of the Quiescent (...), so that the
Analogy being so perfect, and answering so exactly to the thing pretended to be
explained by it; I make no scruple confidently to affirm that this is a plain
and true account of the Saros which will be still further confirmed by
considering the (...) and the (...), which I am now going very briefly to
explain; and as the Saros was a Period of Three thousand Six hundred Days or
ten solar Years, so is the Neiros an intervall of Six hundred Days, or two
times of life, or Periods of ten Solar Months, and the Sosos of Sixty Days, or
of two such Months as the Neiros had ten; as to the first of them it is to be
noted, that in Hebrew Nechirim or Nechiraim signify the two Nostills, from the
Singular Nachir, whence by the Elision of the Guttural is the Latin nar, naris;
and by the same expedient, that is, by omitting the Guttural which the Greeks
cannot properly express by any letter of their own, proceeds that which in the
Chaldean account of time was called the (...), being two equal and similar
Periods of time, as the Nostrils are similar and fellows to one another, which
making up together Six hundred, it is manifest that each Period considered by
it self, must on both sides be an equal Period of Three hundred Days, or a Year
of Ten Months according to the time of life, which was the thing I undertook to
prove, and to make the Analogy yet more clearly out, we have the same in (...),
which is from the Hebrew Nachal, or as the Egyptians perhaps might call it
Nachil, by the Elision of the same Cheth, which as I have said cannot be
properly and truly answered by any Greek Letter whatsoever, and so what the
Hebrew calls the Land of Chavilah, Genesis 2. 11. which is encompassed by the
River Phison, that the Seventy call (...), and other Authors (...), both by the
Elision of the Guttural, and both meaning Africa by it, of which this (...) was
a promontory toward the Sea side, from whence the whole Coast might very well
derive its name; and I hope this may pass for as handsome a conjecture, as the
ab Illaa of some other Learned men, upon no better grounds then only because
Festus who did not understand the punick Language, has been pleased to tell
us, that Abyle in that Language does signify montem excelsum.

But let that be as it will, yet that by Havilah, Africa is understood, is
plain to me from what is added concerning the place, Genesis 2. 11, 12. There is
Gold, and the Gold of that Land is good, For the Gold of Ophir was famous all
over the East, and Ophir and Africa are the same, and so were Ophir and Havilah
in a manner the same, that is, they were both the Sons of Joktan, Genesis 10. 29.
and both of them probably co-planters and co-inhabitants of the same Country,
whence it was called by some Havilah and by others Ophir, whence the Latin
After and Africa are derived.

And now there is only the Sosos to be considered, which was a Period of Sixty
Days, or Two solar Months, from the Hebrew Shish, which perhaps by the
Chaldeans was called Shoush, signifying Sixty, as the Plural Shishim in Hebrew
stands for Sixty.

So that it is now clear, which was the First thing to be proved, that there
was anciently in the East a Period of time consisting of Ten Months, allowing
to each Month Thirty Days, which in the Sacred story is called the time of
Life, and which being doubled did constitute the (...) of the Babylonians,
against which if it be objected that even so long ago as in the History of the
Flood, the Year is represented as consisting of Twelve Months; to this there
are two things to be answered, First, That Moses in his account of the Flood
does without question reduce the Years of that age, which to me seem to have
been only Lunar, to the Calculation of his own time, but because Mr. Burnet in
a late Book of his, Theory of the Earth.
the design of which I do by no means approve, though otherwise I acknowledge
him to be an excellent person, has made it his business Elaborately to defend
the Years of the Patriarcks to have been solar Years, which I do no more
believe, then I do that they were so many several revolutions of the Circle of
Saturn, therefore I will take time to consider further of it. But a Second
answer to this objection, which is taken from the pretended length of the
Antidiluvian Years, is this, that these two Periods the solar and that of Ten
Months, are not inconsistent together, since nothing hinders but that they
might both be used at the same time, not only with relation to different
things, but also to the same, though by a different way and measure of
computation, as it is certain before Elisha's time that the Year of Twelve
Months obtained amongst the Jews, as is manifest by David's Calculation of the
Years of human life, arising no higher then Threescore and ten or Fourscore,
which is the usual Period of it now a days, in such as live temperately and are
strongly made, but yet Elisha, long after David's time, makes mention of the
time of life, which was a Period of Ten Months, as has already been proved,
and so the Chaldeans at the same time they had their Neiros, had their Saros
also, one of which was a Period measured by the time of life, and the other by
the solar Year.

I am far from denying, that the solar Year was in the East a very ancient
measure of time, it was as ancient as Numa among the Romans, who to the Ten of
Romulus added Two more, and those both of them as to their very names taken
from the East, but what was the exact form of Numa's Year, is not so easy at
this distance of time to tell, only thus much we know from what Livy has
informed us concerning it, that to speak properly it was neither Lunar nor
Solar, only it consisted of Twelve Months, and that the intercalations of each
beyond the Lunar Year were so ordered, as that in Twenty Years time the account
was made even, and the New Moon answered exactly to the same place; from whence
the Sun set out Twenty Years ago. The words of Livy concerning Numa are these,
in his First Book, Omnium (inter Romanos) primum ad cursum lunae in duodecim
menses describit annum, quem, quia Tricenos dies singulis mensibus Luna non
exple^, desuntque dies solido anno qui solstit^ali, circumagitur orb,
intercalares mensibus interponendo ita dispensavit, ut vigesimo anno ad metam
eandem solis unde orsi essent, plenis annorum omnium spatiis dies congruerent.
Which place of Livy never yet explained or understood by any, I will now
clearly vindicate from obscurity any longer.

Numa's Year as I have said was neither perfectly Solar nor Lunar, not
perfectly Solar, because it did not consist of perfectly Solar Months, by
reason of the different intercalations in different Months, so that the Sun in
each Month did not describe an equal segment of the Solar Circle, (and yet in
this sense it might then, as it may now be said to have been Solar, because the
Months were so ordered, that at the end of Twelve of them, the Sun returned to
the same point of the Heavens from whence he set out Twelve Months before;) nor
perfectly Lunar neither, because of the same Intercalations, which were
sometimes one, and sometimes two Days longer then the description of the Lunar
Circle; But now supposing the Solar Year to be as it is, about Thirty Days
longer then Twelve complete Revolutions of the Lunar, and supposing first one,
and then two Days every other Month, to be added by way of Intercalation to the
course of the Moon, it must of necessity so happen that the Intercalations must
fall every Month lower into the age and course of the Moon, and in twenty Lunar
Months by this alternate Intercalation of one and two Days, there would in the
whole be an Intercalation of thirty days, which is the space of a Solar Month
or thereabouts, (and what it wants may be adjusted by the Intercalation of an
odd Day in certain Months,) so that it is manifest the Intercalations^ having
run through all the Lunar Months, and being equal in the whole to the Solar,
the New Moon, and the Sun, that is, the beginning of one Twelfth Section of the
Suns motion must set out together, and thus it would be true if we understood
Livy of the Lunar Year, ut vigesimo anno ad metam eandem solis undo orsi
essent, plenis annorum omnium spatiis, dies congruerent, that is, The Sun and
Moon would now conspire and agree in their motion as they did at first. But
then the meta eadem, must not be so understood, as if the Sun were in the same
point of the Zodiac, that he was, when he and the Moon set out together Twenty
Months ago, but only that they do so exactly agree, as if they had set out
together, as they did, and had kept equal pace all along with one another. But
I confess this is an hard exposition of eadem meta, but though the place of
Livy be not to be understood of Twenty Lunar Months, but Solar Years, yet this
which I have said concerning the Intercalations or Embolisms at the end of the
Lunar Months, will, if attended to, infallibly conduct us to the truth it self,
for if the New Moon by virtue of this intercalation, be at the end of Twenty
Months again co-incident with the beginning of a Monthly segment of the Solar
Year, then there being Twelve, such coincidences in Twenty Years, all of them
happening from one another at the distance of a Twelfth part or segment of the
Solar Circle; for Twelve times Twenty Months, is Twenty times Twelve Months, it
will unavoidably happen that at the end of Twenty Years these co-incidences
will have run through the Zodiac, and will fall upon the same point from whence
they first set out, which is an exact Interpretation of the words of Livy; Vt
vigesimo quoque anno ad metam eandem solis unde orsi essent, plenis annorum
omnium spatiis, dies congruerent.

The late Eminently Learned John Frideric Gronovius has in his Book of
Observations a particular disquisition upon this place of Livy, which I
Remember to have read many Years ago, but at this distance I am not able to
give any particular account of it, only that it is not that which I have given,
and that it depending, as I take it, upon a different reading and many
Elaborate Criticisms which the place does not need, I make no scruple to
affirm, that it cannot be the right, and that this exposition which I have made
of the words is without question no other then the very truth, and carries its
own evidence along with it.

The two Months which Numa added to Romulus his Year, were January and
February, for the Year of Romulus began in March, according to that of Ovid,

Martis erat primus mensis, venerisque secundus. And again, presently after
speaking of the Year of Numa, he says,

At Numa nec Janum, nec avitas preterit umbras,
Mensibus antiquis apposuitque duos.
Janus or Januarius is from the Hebrew Shanah signifying a Year, not that a
Month and a Year are the same, any otherwise then in the Lunar sense, but that
in this Month the Year returned into it self, it was the boundary of the Year
past, and the beginning of that which was to come; therefore Janus was Painted
with two Faces, looking two several ways, the one backward upon the Year past,
and the other forward upon the ensuing new Year, and in one of these respects
he was called Clusius because of his shutting up the Old, and in another
Patulcius by reason of his opening the New Year, as he speaks of himself in the
Fasti,

Nomina ridebis, modo namque Patulcius idem,
Et modo sacrifico Clusius ore vocor,
Scilicet alterno voluit rudis illa vetustas
Nomine, diversas significare vices.
And in another place a very little above

Quicquid ubique vides caelum, mare, nubila, terras
Omnia sunt nostra clausa patent que manu,
Me penes est unum vasti custodia mundi,
Et jus vertendi cardinis omne meum est.
Because the duration of all these things is measured by time, which time is
opened and shut up by Janus in that manner which has been already declared.

That Janus was not Originally an Italian God, but a deity of Foreign growth,
appears by this, that in his Coins or Medals, as on the one side there were two
Heads or Faces, so on the other there was the appearance of a Ship to signify
that he came thither from beyond the Seas.

And this is the reason he gives of Saturn's having the same device upon the
reverse of his Coyns or Medals, though it had been more properly applied to
himself, concerning whom the Question was asked by the Poet.

-- Sed cur navalis in aere
Altera signata est, altera forma biceps?
To the last of which Questions, for he speaks first to the last of these, he
is not very clear in his Answer, but I have already explained it, to the sormer
he Answers Thus:

Caussa ratis superest, Thuscum rate venit in amnem,
Ante per errato falcifer orb Deus.
Hac ego saturnum memini tellure receptum,
Celitibus regnis ab jove pulsus erat,
Inde diu genti mansit saturnia Nomen,
Dicta quoque est Latium terra latente Deo.
At bona poster it as puppim servavit in aere,
Hospitis adventum testificata Dei.
Now it had been much more pertinent to have spoken this concerning himself,
and such an Answer as this, so seemingly foreign to the Question proposed,
cannot otherwise be reconciled to any thing but cross purposes, then by saying
that Saturn and Janus were the same; for as Saturn was the ancientest of all
the Gods the emblem of Time as appears by the sith, which he carries in his
Hand, so is Janus the first, that is, the oldest Month in the Year, and as
Saturn came by Ship to Rome, so did Janus too, and the Romans were beholding to
some Eastern Traditions, for the name of this and other Months, as well as for
the measure of them all, and for the form of their Year. The Analogy is
perfect, natural and easy, for as from (...), is Juno, from (...) Jugum, so
from Shanah, which it is likely was anciently pronounced with the Sibilus of a
z, Janus, as at this day among us, almost all those words, which are pronouced
by us with an s, are by the Inhabitants of Somerset shire and those Western
parts, pronounced by a z.

From Janus is Janua, because of its two Faces or surfaces, one of which looks
inward toward the House or Temple, and the other outward or abroad into the
World, or as it is excellently expressed by the same Ovid,

Omnis habet geminas, hinc atque hinc janua frontes,
^E quibus haec populum spectat, at illa Larem.
And from Janua is Janitor, as much as to say shanitor, from shanah iterare
because he watches both ways at once, and looks after all that go in or come
out, as Janus himself speaks in the same place,

Vtque sedens vester, primi prope limina tecti,
Janitor egressus introitusque videt;
Sic ego perspicio caelestis janitor aulae,
Eoas parts, Hesperiasque simul.
Lastly for the same reason, that the first Month of Numa and of the more
perfect Roman Year was called January, from shanah iterare, or shanah annus,
because in this Month the New Year begins, and because this Month looks
backward and forward, upon the Year past and to come; for the very same reasons
the Old Egyptians and at this day their posterity the Coptites describe the
Year, by a serpent returning into himself, as the Year does, and Biteing his
Tail, which they call (...), from the Hebrew Nashak, which signifies to Bite;
because the end of one Year and the beginning of another are contiguous, and do
as it were bite and tread upon one another.

Numa's Second Month was called as ours is now February, and this was also
taken from the East, where the Ammonites were used to make their Children pass
thorough the Fire to Molock, as some conjecture by way of Sacrifice, and as
others would have it by way of lustration, but as I am of opinion, for both of
these causes; and this passing through, is by the Hebrew expressed by the verb
habar, whence the hajin being turned into the Aeolique digamma, as in some
other instances that have been already mentioned, the Latin Februa is derived;
by which word all things that were used in their lustrations was signified, and
not only Februa, but Febris also, which is a kind of passing through the Fire,
as the Ammonites did, and thence it is called in Greek (...); for the
signification of Febris it is well enough known, and for the other we have the
Authority of the same Ovid in the Second of his Fasti.

Februa Romani dixere piamina patres,
Nunc quoque dant verbo plurima signa fidem.
Portifices ab rege petunt and flamine lanas,
Queis veteri lingua februa nomen erat.
Quaeque capit lictor domibus purgamina certis,
Torrida cum mica farra vocantur idem.
Nomen idem ramo qui caesus ab arbore pura,
Casta sacerdotum tempora fronde tegit.
Ipse ego flaminicam poscentem februa vidi,
Februa poscenti pinea virga data est.
Denique quodcunque est quo pectora nostra piantur
Hoc apud intonsos nomen habebat avos.
And by exactly the same Analogy with this, there are two other words which
come just now into my mind, and which I did not think of before, which are very
plainly of Hebrew Origination, the first is facio, from the Hebrew hasah, as
appears not only by the Analogy it self, which is the same in all these words,
but also by the exact agreement of them both not only in their common, but even
in their more rare and unusual signification; how they agree in their common
signification is known to all, that understand any thing of these matters, or
will but consult an Hebrew Lexicon, for their information; but they have also
this peculiar signification both in Hebrew and Latin, to denote the preparation
and ordering of any Animal by killing, flaying, embowelling, Roasting and
Boiling either for Sacrifice or Food, so the Hebrew word is used, Genesis 18. 7.
And Abraham ran unto the Herd, and fecht a Calf tender and good, and gave it to
a young man and he hasted to dress it, that is, to do every thing which was
requisite to the making it fit for food; the Hebrew words are Vajimaher
lahasith othoh, and just thus the Latin facio is used in that known place of
Virgil

Cum faciam vitula pro frugibus -- And from thence is carnifex, a carne
facienda, and sacrificium, a faciendo sacro.

The Second instance is in the Hebrew heth, whence is the Latin fatum; heth is
a time or an appointed time, and fatum is that hour which presides over such
appointed times and seasons, and brings every thing to pass in its predestined
and predetermin'd order, according to the opinion of the ancients, as is
manifest by that place of Seneca and by many others, where speaking according
to the sentiments of the Stoics he says, Eadem necessitas etiam deos alligat,
irrevocabilis divina pariter ac humana cursus vehit, ille ipse omnium conditor
ac rector, scripfit quidem fata, sed sequitur, semper paret, semel jussit; and
just so Ovid describes his Janus as having the dominion of all things both in
Heaven and Earth, in words that have been already taken notice of; and again, a
little after, Janus says of himself,

Praesideo foribus coeli cum milibus horis.
It, redit officio Jupiter ipse meo.
And as fatum is that power which Governs and Orders all things by certain and
predetermin'd causes, so fortuna is that which presides as it were over the
irregularities of nature, where this Order is broken and things happen by
chance, and the Latin words sors, fors, forte, and fortuna, are all of them
derived from the Hebrew joresh, of the Etymon; of the first of which an account
has been given already, and the three last are derived from it, as in the
other Etymologies which I have last mentioned by the addition of the Aeolique
Digamma, of which more instances come into my mind, but I will not suffer my
self to digress any further.

Therefore to conclude this matter, because of the Ammonites and other
Easterlings passing through the Fire to Molock by way of Lustration or
Sacrifice, which included an expiation, therefore all kind of lustrations and
expiatory rites, were by the Latins properly called Februa; this was the reason
why there could be no proper Sacrifice without Fire, because of its cleansing
and purifying nature, and the Greeks and Romans burning the Bodies of their
dead, depended upon the same reason, because they had received it, by tradition
from the East, that a dead Carcass was an unclean thing, and that Fire was a
Symbol and an Instrument of cleanness and purification, and therefore they
applied the one to the other; this reason is expressly assigned by the old
Scholiast upon Homer; where speaking of Cillus the Auriga or Charioteer of
Pelops, who died at Lesbus, as they were going to Pisa, a City of Peloponnesus,
where Pelops designed to Fight Oenomaus the Father of Hippodamia, who would not
part with his Daughter upon any other terms, then to such as could first
Atcheive the conquest of himself, which had been the death of many of her
Lovers, he says, (...) Ad il. ^. ^. 38.
that is, As soon as Pelops had got as far as Lesbus on his way to Pila, his
coachman Cillus died, and appearing to Pelops, who was greatly afflicted for
his death in a dream, he did at once bemoan his own misfortune, and beg of
Pelops to take care that the Funeral justa or exequiae should be performed, at
which Pelops arising out of his sleep, after he had cleansed and purified the
dead Carcass by Fire, buried the Ashes, and erected a sumptuous Monument to the
memory of Cillus over them; and a little after he cites a passage of Euripides
to the same purpose, though this was not the thing which he designed to show in
either of these places,

(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
And as Fire, so also Water was used in lustrations by reason of its cleansing
and purifying Nature, but Ovid was very much mistaken when he refers the
Original of these things to Greece, for they all of them without question came
out of the East, but so he tells us,

Omne nefas omnemque mali purgamina causam,
Credebant nostri tellere posse senes.
Graecia principium moris fuit, illa nocentes
Impia lustratos ponere facta putat.
Actoriden Peleus, ipsum quoque Pelea Phoci
Caede per Hemonias solvit Acastus aquas.
Vectam frenat^ per inane draconibus Aegeus
Credulus, immerita Phasida fovit open.
Amphiaraides Naupactoo Acheloo,
Solve nefas, dixit, solvit and ille nefas.
Ah! nimium faciles, qui tristia crimina caedis,
Fluminea tolli posse putetis aqua!
But of this matter and others that have a connection with it, I have discoursed
more largely in some other papers, which together with some other disquisitions
of inconsiderable bulk, I design to make public some time or other under the
Title of Miscellanies.

Lastly, Though Ovid has already told us that Numa added two Months to Romulus
his Year, which agrees with Livyes account, and therefore is most credible; yet
in the words immediately following those I have newly cited, he quite and clean
changes his note, and says that January and February were the two ancient
Months of the Roman Year, and that they had no other Months besides them, till
the other ten were added, in process of time, by App. Claudius and the rest of
the Decemviri.

Sed tamen (antiqui ne nescius ordinis erres)
Primus ut est Jani mensis, and ante fuit.
Qui sequitur Janum, veteris fuit ultimns anni,
Tu quoque sacrorum, Termine, finis eras.
Primus enim Janimensis, quia Janua prima est,
Qui sacer est imis manibus, imus erat.
Postmodo creduntur spatio distantia longo
Tempora bis quini continuasse viri.
But I confess I am of Ovid's first opinion, that the ancient Year of Romulus
consisted of ten Months, First, Because March was manifestly the beginning of a
Year in some ancient account or other, as is manifest by the names of
Quintilis, Sextilis, September, etc. which are computed from it. Secondly, The
Saturnalia were celebrated in December, and Saturn seems to have been
Worshipped in Italy long before the times of Numa or of Romulus himself, as
they are usually computed, and much more of the Decemviri, he seeming to be the
very ancientest of all the Deities worshipped in that Country, as may
sufficiently appear from what has been already spoken. Thirdly, The name of
the Month Martius, which is from Mars is manifestly of Hebrew Origination,
notwithstanding that the Decemviri received all their Laws and Institutions
from Greece, for Mars is Mecharesh, he that makes or uses the weapons of War,
by the Elision of the Guttural cheth, as in several instances already produced,
from charash, insculpsit fabricavit, and from thence is the noun charash, for a
Smith or other manual artificer: and macharesha is interpreted, rutrum,
sarculum, and macharesheth, vomer, and the Sabine word quiris was from the same
root and signified a Spear, as Ovid tells us,

-- Hasta quiris priscis est dicta sabinis. And thence Quirites, is as much as
to say, Hastati, who were a particular Order of Soldiers in the Roman Camps,
as may be seen in many places of Livy, and by rejecting the Formative, and
dissolving the Guttural, as in the Latin Mars, is the Greek (...), which
answers exactly to the Hebrew charash, signifying a Smith or other worker in
Iron, or instruments of War, whether they be for personal Combat or Battery,
as (...) is both in that known verse of Homer

(...). And by retaining the Guttural, as in Quiris, is the Latin Mercurius, by
the addition of Mar signifying a Prince or Lord, as much as to say, Mar
Choresh, the chief Engineer or chief Deviser, as Mercury was by the ancients
supposed to be the God of subtilty, stratagem and invention, who is called in
Greek (...), that is, Haarami, the Assyrian God, whom they Worshipped by
casting of Stones, to which that place of the Proverbs, is by the most Learned
and Skillful of the Jewish Interpreters thought to refer, c. 26. 8. As he that
binds a v. Buxtlex. Talmud. in Markolis. and authors ab eod. cit. ut and
Jac. ouzel. ad min-Felicem.
Stone in a Sling, so is he that gives Honor to a Fool, where the word
Margemah which we Translate a Sling, is by some of the best of the Jewish
expositors, interpreted by acervus lapidum, and so the vulgar Latin renders it
likewise, sicut qui mittit lapidem in acervum mercurii, etc. as much as to say,
that to give Honor to a Fool, has some resemblance and agreement with
Idolatry; because it is in both cases the placing Honor upon a false object,
and these heaps of Stones were by v. Jac. Ouzel in minut. faelicem.
the Greeks called (...) and (...), as the Statues of Mercury himself were by
the Greeks called (...) and by Cornelius Nepos, Herniae.

Wherefore my opinion upon the whole matter is, that the Year of Romulus, as I
have said, consisted of ten Months, and that these two Months were added
afterward by Numa, and taken from the East, as their names show, and perhaps
from some place where their account of time was so imperfect, that they had no
other Months in their Year, which answers exactly to the Sosos of the Chaldeans
already described, and might well enough give occasion to this tradition in
Ovid; and so much may suffice to have spoken, upon occasion of what was first
proposed to be proved; namely, that there was anciently a Year or Period of ten
Months, returning into it self, by which they anciently measured time in the
East, which I think is now sufficiently done.

But Secondly, I am to prove that in the East the usury of Money and other
things was Monthly paid; from whence it follows supposing the Year to have
consisted of ten Months, that the usura centesima was ten in the hundred, that
is, one in ten for the Year; and for the proof of this I shall first show that
it was so among the Romans, whom I have already shown not only to have borrowed
the names of some of their Months from thence, but also the very words by which
both the Principle and Interst of Money, or any other improveable substance or
thing is expressed in Latin, and for this I shall content my self with the
testimony of John Gerhard vossius in his Etymologicon, under the word Calendae.
Antiquis, says he, moris erat pecunias calendis credere and usuras exigere,
unde est quod, Plutarchus libello de non fenerando, ait, Neomenias ac Calendas,
Dies sacratissimos, a faeneratoribus reddi nefandos ac detestabiles, and to
this purpose he applies that place of Horace, l. 1. sat. 3.

-- Tristes misero venere Kalendae. Although in another place he says that the
Ides were the times when the Creditors called in their Money. l. epod. -- od.
11.

-- Faenerator Alphius
Omnem relegit Idibus pecuniam,
Quaerit calendis ponere.
To which words Vossius has subjoyned this Comment. Iduum eo meminit Poeta,
quod faeneratorum is fuerit mos, ut quamquam Calendis usura deberetur, tamen in
Idus concederent dilationem, Quam consuetudinem, ait Pythaeus reperisse se a
veteri glossario annotatam ad illud Ciceronis in catilinam, Praetermitto ruinas
fortunarum tuarum quas omnes impendere tibi proximis Idibus senties. And this
indeed is of necessity to be admitted, supposing the Usury were Monthly due, as
there is no question but among the Romans it was, and supposing that they did
Calendis ponere, put out their Money upon the Calends or the New Moon, as Horace
tells us in this place they did, that the Use must become due at the next
Calends, or at the return of the New Moon, and if they did not exact the Use or
call in the Principle till the Ides or the Full Moon, this must needs be by way
of forbearance, not by any thing of right in the Debtor to defer his payment so
long.

But Secondly, not only the names of several of the Roman Months, but also of
the Calends, Nones, and Ides into which the Roman Month was divided were
manifestly derived to them from the East. Indeed Joannes Tzetzes in his
Chiliads tells us a pleasant story of three very charitable and well disposed
Gentlemen, whose names were Calandus, Idus, and Nonus, the first of which fed
and supported the City of Rome in a great Famine eighteen days, the second
eight, and the last of them four; and in this he is followed by Balsamon upon
the Councils, but who sees not the imposture of this pleasant Tale? especially
if we consider the date of it, which falls so much lower than the known
Antiquity of the Roman Month, Macrobius and Festus and others, have much more
of probability in the accounts which they give, but yet their accounts are far
from the truth it self, which they did not understand for want of skill in the
Learning of the East, and were for the same reason ignorant of the far greatest
part of the Antiquities of Rome. The Calendae they tell us were a Calando,
because then the Quirites were summoned to a general Assembly in the Curia
Kalabra, the Nonae were so called, quod ab iisdem novem dies ad Idus
putarentur, and the Idus were from the Greek (...), or qu. vidus a videndo, or
from an obsolute verb Iduare which signifies as much as dividere, either
because at the Ides, that is, the Full Moon, the Moon affords the fairest show
and appearance of her self, or because the Full Moon is in the middle way
betwixt the New and Old, and divides the Month into two equal halves, but these
though better and more tolerable then the Fable of Tzetzes, are all of them
very cold and contemptible Interpretations, but the true Etymologies, if I am
not much mistaken, are to be sought for in the only true Fountain of all
ancient Learning, that is, in the East, and therefore from thence I shall
endeavor to fetch them. The Calendae were as much as kahal hedah, for the New
Moons were always looked upon in the East, as days of the most Sacred and
Religious Solemnity in the whole Month, as is manifest from many places of
Scripture, which it is altogether needless to insist upon; and these
Solemnities themselves are a sufficient indication, that there was once in the
East a Year measured by the motion of the Moon, at the beginning of which there
was always an extraordinary concourse of People, and all the public
demonstrations of joy and gladness imaginable. Such a solemn Assembly as this
in the Full Moon, that is, at the time of the Passover, is expressly called
colkehal hadath, Exodus 12. 6. and by the Seventy it is rendered (...). to which
it is but inserting an n for the better sound sake, and we have exactly the
Latin Calendae, as from the Hebrew Hathik, by the very same Analogy is the
Latin, Antiquus, and from the very same word without the interposition of an n,
which the softness and volubility of the Greek pronunciation would not so well
bear, for

-- Graiis dedit ore rotundo
Musa loqui --
I say, from the very same Hebrew root, v. D. Hei. Aristort.
the Attici among the Greeks had their name, as much as to say hathikim, the
Ancients or the Old People, whose Antiquity was such, that it could hardly be
traced. Though I do not altogether disapprove the conjecture of Macrobius, that
the Calends were called a Calando, for Kalare in Latin and in Greek (...), are
both of them from the Hebrew word already mentioned, and that which the Greeks
call (...), answers exactly to the Hebrew Kahal; but this is so far from doing
any prejudice to the Etymology which I have laid down, that it gives further
strength and confirmation to it. And farther, whereas Macrobius tells us that
the Quirites on that day, were used to be summoned into the Curia Kalabra, it
is to be noted that though this solemnity it self, and the name of the time
wherein it was performed were derived from the East, yet they did not meet
together in the Curia Kalabra, Young and Old, Men, Women, and Children, as the
Jews did at the Passover, and other solemn Feasts (though I know not, when it
is said that all the Congregation of Israel shall kill the passover, whatever
becomes of the Eating of it, whether we are to understand it of any more than
the Adulti, or perhaps the Patres Familiarum) but only the Quirites, that is,
such as were fit to bear Arms, as has been already shown, and therefore this
Assembly was called Kalabra, that is, Kahal Abirim, the Congregation of strong
and fighting Men, and from thence perhaps Calabria had its name, as being a
maritime Province of Italy, and probably first possessed by Garrisons of the
Phaenicians or other Easterly Nations, who built them Forts there for the
convenience of Trade. Lastly, As another indication of the word Kalendae, its
being of Hebrew Origination, I will argue from its being spelt with a k, a
Letter almost unknown to the more Flourishing and polite Ages of Rome, but in
this word it has been preserved, as well as in Karthago, answering in both
cases to the Hebrew Koph, in Kahal and Kereth, the latter of which signifies a
City, (and was applied by way of Eminence to Carthage, as Rome was called
peculiarly Vrbs, and Athens (...)) and from Kereth is the Chalday Kartha,
whence Karthage is immediately derived, and this is likewise for the same
reason, the true spelling of Kalare, and Kalabra.

The Nones were so called not for the reason v. D, Heiu^ in Aristurchy and
Lloyd lex. geogr. and Poet in Ninius.
above mentioned, but from the Hebrew Nin, whence with a servile letter is the
noun Manon, which by the detracting of that letter is exactly Non signifying a
Son, as much as to say the Sons or Daughters of the Calends, and therefore as
being under their protection they had no particular Tutelar of their own,
according to that of Ovid.

Vindicat Ausonias Junonis cura Kalendas,
Idibus alba Jovi grandior agna cadit;
Nonarum tutela Deo caret. --
And it seems to be to this that Ovid imputes the unluckiness of the day after
the nones of any Month, because the Nones themselves were not under the
Patronage of any of their Gods. For it follows immediately.

-- -- Omnibus istis
Ne fallare cave, proximus Ater erit.
Omen ab eventu est, illis nam Roma diebus
Damna sub adverso tristia mart tulit.
But Livy makes the reason to be rather accidental, depending upon the Ides,
because the day after the Ides of any Month was accounted unlucky, for such
another reason as Ovid assigns in this place, where speaking of the great
slaughter of the Romans at the battle of Allia, he says, l. 6. c. 1. Quod
postridie Idus quintiles non litasset Sulpicius Tribunus militum, neque inven^a
pace. Deum post diem tertium objectus hosti exercitus Romanus esset, etiam
postridie Idus, rebus divinis supersederi jussum: inde ut postridie Kalendas
quoque ac Nonas eadem religio esset, traditum putant.

The Nones had no Religion in themselves, but only they were preparatory to the
Religious Offices of the rest of the Month, and the Country people upon those
days were used to repair to Rome, to be informed by the Priests, in what manner
they were to celebrate the Feasts and Solemnities of the Month ensuing; and
here it is to be noted, that as there were some Gentilitia sacra, some
Sacrifices or Ceremonies peculiar to certain Families amongst them, so there
were some that were peculiar to certain Towns, and according as the Solemnities
of the Month ensuing, were either more or less, and required more or less time
to adjust and settle; so the Nones were computed either five or seven days
after the Calends, and in the first case were called Quintanae, in the second
Septimanae, and besides this, the time betwixt the Calends and Nones, was a
sort of Term time among the Ancient Romans, wherein the Causes of the Country
round about were heard and their grievances redrest; and why this time was
longer in one Month than another, was perhaps perfectly Arbitrary, and depended
upon no better reason, then the difference of our Terms as to their length does
at this day.

Lastly, the Ides, were not from (...) or qu. vidus a videndo, or from Iduare,
as has been above represented out of the Roman Authors, though as to the thing
it self upon which these Etymologies are founded, they are very much in the
right, but from the Hebrew Chiddoush signifying renovation, as the Moon is then
most properly said to be renewed, when from her utmost waining, she comes to
shine pleno orb again; and these things show clearly, not only that the Romans
had their division of the Month from the East, but also that whence soever they
had it, it was from a place where the Month was perfectly Lunar, without any
sort of intercalation, or which is all one, where they measured their time by
Lunar Years, which shows plainly that there was such a Year in the East as the
Lunar, or a Year consisting but of one-Month, though Proclus upon the Timeus
had been silent, and yet he tells us also of the Egyptians, from the Authority
of Eudoxus, (...), that the Egyptians called a Month a Year; for it is clear,
whatever the Roman Etymologists are pleased to tell us, that the Calends did
not always fall upon the New Moons, nor the Ides upon the Full, but by reason
of the intercalation at the end of every Month, it would fall out unavoidably
that the Ides and Calends and the intercalations themselves would travail by
certain and regular proportions, through all times of the Moons Age, and this
is the true notion of Intercalatio, it is as much as intercahalatio, or it is
that time which after the expiring of the Lunar Period, consisting of twenty
eight Days or thereabouts, was added before the beginning of the next Month,
when the Kahal or general Assembly of the Romans was called; but yet the names
of the Calends and Ides, (added to this Tradition which we see was always
preserved among the Romans, that they did at least originally, light always
upon the New and Full Moon, though when the Year came to be altered and the
Months were brought to an equation with the Suns motion, it was impossible they
should do so;) these, I say, are clear testimonies that they received this
division of their Month from the East, and from some place where their Year was
perfectly and unquestionably Lunar, and therefore it is no wonder, that in the
Roman story we do not find any where any such fixed and stated Solemnities, upon
the New and Full Moon, as we meet with in the Scripture History, because by
reason of this intercalation and the reducing their Year to the course of the
Sun, the New and Full Moon came to be neglected, but so, as that though the
Romans themselves did not understand it, yet the Festivities and Religions
which they had upon their Calends, were borrowed and taken from the New Moons
of the East; and those which they were used to have upon the Ides, were taken
by Tradition from the Eastern Celebration of the Full Moon, which was every
whit as sacred as the other, and at this time were Celebrated by Gods own
appointment the Feast of the passover, and also that of Tabernacles, and
Jeroboams Feast which was instead of the passover, was on the fifteenth of the
eighth Month, and the Feast of Purim ratified by an Edict of King Ahasuerus,
upon the fifteenth of Adar Yearly; and this is the Second reason that makes it
highly probable, that Usury was exacted Monthly in the East, that not only the
names of some of their Months, but the division of them all, was manifestly
borrowed and derived from thence.

Thirdly and Lastly, By this it appears that the payment of Usury was Monthly
among the Jews, that Nehemiah tells us so plainly it was the hundredth part of
the Money, the Corn, and the Wine, and the Oil that was exacted of them; which
hundredth part if you understand it of the Year was next kin to no Usury at
all, and could not be the cause of so many loud complaints, and so universal a
calamity, as at that time overwhelmed in a manner the whole Nation of the Jews;
but if we understand it of one in the hundred, for a Month, this was twelve in
the hundred for the whole Year, and this added to those other causes of
scarcity and dearth, which are by Nehemiah in this Chapter recited, might well
enough produce those dismal and deplorable effects, which it is said to have
done.

This was the very reason why the tenth of all things was paid to the Priests,
for their support and maintenance; for the Priests, are as it were the Family
and Household of God, who is the Great pro-prietor of all things, to whom by way
of acknowledgment, for the benefit and advantage we receive from them, the
tenth of all things was to be paid, this being, as I have shown, the Ancient
usura centesima, upon which the payment of all Tithes was founded; and though
we will not stand too Critically upon the proportion, yet there is thus much of
natural reason in the case, that the Priesthood who are set apart to the
Service of God, and are, or ought to be so great instruments of the public
good, ought always to have a just and honorable maintenance, independent of
the People, and paid, as of right, to them, without any thing of obligation to
their charges for it, that so they may be the more at leisure to attend the
Ministry of the Holy things, and may have no temptation to comply with every
popular humor, against the duty of their places, and this welfare of the
public.

But though as well by the place of Nehemiah, as by the proportion of the
Priests in the payment of Tithes, it appears that the Usury of all things, was
the centesima or ten and twelve in the hundred, yet afterward there came to be
a very great difference between the use of Money, and that of other things, as
Corn and Oil and the like; the use of Money for the most part continued within
the compass of the centesima, and when it exceeded those bounds, it was
restrained by several Imperial Edicts, still extant in the bodies of the Civil
Laws, both of Theodosius and Justinian, but in other things it was advanced
very much, that is, the lender was to refund a third part increase, or an half
of the whole, so as for example, he that borrowed two bushels of Corn was to
refund three, and this was that which was properly called usura Hemiolia,
concerning v. D. Goth^f. in C. Th. l. 2. tit. 33. l. 1. de modo usurarum.
which, there are still extant several imperial Laws, and the reason of this
increase of Usury in Corn and Oil, and other things above what was allowed, or
practiced in Money, are learnedly set forth by Dionysius Gothofred in his
Elaborate Notes upon the code of Theodosius.

Another instance of a manifest resemblance betwixt the Jews and Romans, as to
the business of Usury, was this; Nehemiah tells us, the People in his time were
reduced to such extremity, that they were forced to sell their Sons and
Daughters into bondage, and sometimes in cases of this nature they sold
themselves, though they had still the privilege to become free again, after a
certain time, and could not be compelled to serve longer then the Year of
Jubilee; the like was in the usage of the Romans, though more severe and cruel,
and without any such return, into the state of freedom after the expiration of
such a certain time, and they that were thus enslaved, are called nexi and
addicti corporibus, and nexu vincti, and the like in many places of Livy, and
how very hard and severe it was of Ancient time upon the Roman Debtors, is in
many places very dolefully and Tragically described by him, and the same was
also the practice among the Athenians, as Sup. p. 238.
has been seen already, out of a passage of Diog. Laertius concerning the
Sisacthia introduced by Solon.

I shall conclude this discourse concerning Usury with this observation, that
it being forbidden the Jews only upon a Political reason, which had a peculiar
reference to the partition of Inheritances among them, which by the practice of
Usury would have been destroyed, and for no other cause or reason whatsoever
that can be discerned in the Sacred Writings, but on the contrary they were
permitted to practice it upon the Stranger, where this partition was not
concerned; it follows unavoidably that in any other polity, then such an one as
that of the Jews was, the practice of a moderate Usury is a Lawful thing, and
indeed it is no more in effect, then selling of Commodities for a moderate
gain, or receiving of rent for Land, and therefore the Greeks called it, not
only by the name of (...), from its increasing nature which answers to the
Hebrew Tarbith, and Marbith, but also (...), from (...) or (...), terra, and
(...) from (...) signifying the same, and both of them properly and peculiarly
denoting the rent of Land.

So that it being now abundantly proved, that the Marriage of Boaz and Ruth,
was by virtue and in consequence of that Mosaic Law, by which the Brother was
obliged to raise up seed to the Brother, in case he deceased without Issue
Male, and that the obligation of this Law, together with that partition and
distribution of Inheritances upon which it depended, ceased to be any longer
regarded among the Jews themselves, after the division of the two Kingdoms of
Israel and Judah in the time of Jeroboam, and that wherever the same sort of
partition was observed, there either Usury was forbidden as among the Jews, or
else the Partition was destroyed and broken down by the practice of it; again,
it being further clear that the Jews did not abstain from any thing, merely
because the Zabii or any other Nation round about them practiced it, and for no
other reason; and lastly that the Customs of the Romans, as to the proportion
of their Usury, and the time of payment, and many other things of their most
remote, but yet undoubted and unquestionable Antiquity, were derived from
thence. There remains now only one single objection very briefly to be
considered, which is by some, as well in Antiquity, as of later date alleged
against what has been said, and that is the solution of Africanus in Eusebius,
by which he endeavors to reconcile the difference between the two Evangelists,
St. Matthew and St. Luke; in the Genealogy of our Savior which solution if it
should be admitted as good, it would follow that the fratres uterini, were
under the same obligation to raise up Seed to their deceased Elder Brother, as
those which were born of the same Father, but this conceit is so substantially
exploded by Mr. Seldom himself, and by Grotius in his Learned Commentary upon
the Gospels, and by Valesius in his excellent Observations upon Eusebius, who
is so bold as to call in question, as it did very well deserve, the matter of
fact it self, and wishes that Eusebius for the credit of his History had not
inserted it in it; as Grotius supposes the Tradition to have been corrupted,
and Africanus not rightly to have understood the meaning of his Informers: that
upon all these accounts I think I am excused from a particular examination and
confutation of this legend, to the uttur ruin and disgrace of which, so many
truly great and Learned Men, have with so great unanimity and constancy
conspired, and all of them upon such weighty reasons, as do sufficiently
justify themselves, and recommend the Judgment of their Authors.

At least it is sufficient in this case to say, what appears upon the most
diligent inquiry to have been most true, that all this difference between the
Evangelists was occasioned only by the carelessness, folly, or which is worse,
the design and manifest roguery of Transcribers, among whom in the Ancientest
Mss. of these Gospels there appears to have been a most incredible dissension;
they are the words of Erasmus, who had compared them together, In recensendis
nominibus mica in Graecorum codecibus confusio, ne Latinis quidem inter se
consentientibus, alibi deerat, alibi supererat; in versa ac depravata pleraque
quae nos diligentissima collatione, qua licuit, restituimus, and Valesius
observes that though Matthat be the third from Joseph, in the present Copies of
St. Luke, yet by Africanus, and Gr. Nazianzen and St. Ambrose he is called
Melisio, and in this very instance of Jacob and Eli, one of which is the Father
of Joseph in St. Matthew, the other in St. Luke, it is to be noted that in some
Mss. as may be seen in the Oxford Edition of the New Testiment, for (...) there
is (...) to be found, which shows the Original of the mistake, for it was
anciently in both places (...), only Israel and Jacob, being exactly the same
person, some Annotator in the marmargent, had placed (...) by an abbreviation,
thus (...), which being the name of no body, as Eli was, who was also expected
to forerun the Messiah, for Eli and Eliah were the same, this gave occasion to
the substituting the one for the other.

Erasmus, who refers this difference to a certain dyonymie of the same persons,
is not to be regarded, not only because it is precarious in it self, but which
is still worse, it is justified only by the Authority of Annius the
counterfeiting Monk of Viterbo, who not content to have counterfeited Berosus
and Manetho, did also obtrude a Philo upon the World, and upon his Authority
this conceit was vented, but yet so lamely and so like a counterfeit, that
Erasmus himself began to suspect the matter, for so he says, Neque pauca refert
Joannes Annius ex Philone, ea quanquam admodum probabilia sint, tamen quoniam
is non tam certo citat, quam vellem, praesertim in recontroversa neque nobis
erat Graeci Philonis copia, paucis attingenda Judica vimus; In a word, Grotius
is so little satisfied with the solution of Africanus, as if St. Matthew
regarded only the natural succession, while St. Luke had reference only to the
legal, that he enclines rather to believe the directly contrary, of each of
these Evangelists, and his opinion wants not more tolerable reasons to support
it, than those which Africanus has produced, which are with a deserved scorn
rejected by Valesius and by Grotius too, nay Africanus himself was so
distrustful of the truth of his relation, that he concludes with saying, For
want of sufficient testimony to support it, it ought to be embraced for want of
a better.

FINIS.
ADVERTISEMENT.
THere is now in the Press a Second Part of this Treatise, containing Remarks
and Animadversions upon it, wherein some things are Illustrated and others
Amended, and the Theology and Mythology of the Fabulous Antiquity, is for the
most part of it occasionally explained, by the same Author.


