A SERMON Preached before Sr Patience Ward, UPON THE Last SUNDAY of His
MAYORALTY.

Anno 1681.

With ADDITIONS.

By John Turner, late Fellow of Christ's College in Cambridge.

Virtus repulsae nescia sordidae
Intaminatis fulget honoribus,
Nec sumit aut ponit secures
Arbitrio popularis aurae.
LONDON, Printed for Walter Rettilby at the Bishop's Head in St. Paul's
Churchyard. 1683.

SUMMA PRIVILEGII. Constitutions and Canons Ecclesiastical, 1640. Artic. 8.
WHereas the Preaching of order and decency, according to St. Paul's rule, does
conduce to edification, it is required that all Preachers (as well beneficed
men as others) shall positively and plainly preach and instruct the people in
their public Sermons, twice in the year at least, that the Rites and
Ceremonies now established in the Church of England, are lawful and
commendable, and that they the said people and others ought to conform
themselves in their practice to all the said Rites and Ceremonies, and that the
people and others ought willingly to submit themselves unto the authority and
government of the Church, as it is now established under the King's Majesty.
And if any Preacher shall neglect or refuse to do according to this Canon, let
him be suspended by his Ordinary during the time of his refusal, or wilful
forbearance to do thereafter.

I. COR. 14. 40. Let all things be done decently, and in order.
THE unhappy breaches and differences among us in matters of Religion are at
present the subject of universal Complaint; and though nothing be more talked
of than an Union among Protestants against the common Enemies of our Liberties
as we are English men, and of our Faith as we are Christians; yet, if we will
believe men's Actions, rather than their Words, there is nothing that seems less
heartily to de desired, or, if you will give me leave to speak a little
plainer, for it is not now a time to mince the matter, with more solicitous
Care and Industry to be avoided.

For my part, I am not come hither to inflame those differences, and, if I
were, it is twenty to one but I should lose my Errant, for they are so great
already that perhaps they are incapable of being increased.

But, if you will allow me that liberty which every man now pretends to as his
birthright, that is, to spend my private opinion about the public Concerns, I
will put you in a way by which this blessed Union can only be effected, and
that is, by keeping up strictly to the Discipline of the Church, and by doing
all things decently, and in order.

We have, almost every day, many excellent Discourses delivered in the Pulpit,
to persuade us to mutual Charity and Forbearance with one another; and indeed
this is in a manner the whole design of Christianity, to produce in us those
calm and peaceable dispositions of mind which are best fitted to make us happy
in this life, and to prepare us for the blessedness of that other state, whose
very nature consists in perfect Charity and perfect Peace. Wherefore Saint Paul
tells us plainly, that without charity, which is the very bond of Peace, and of
all virtues, all our pretenses to Religion, and all our seize in it, our
proficiencie in spiritual knowledge, and our super-errogation, if that were
possible in good works, will signify just nothing at all; though I speak with
the tongue of men and Angels, says he, and have not charity, I am become as
sounding brass, or a tinckling Cymbal; and though I have the gift of prophecy,
and understand all mysteries and all knowledge; and though I have all faith, so
that I could remove mountains, and have not charity, I am nothing; nay, though
I bestow all my goods to feed the poor, and though I give my body to be burned,
and have not charity, it profits me nothing. And if to the Testimony of St.
Paul you will add the greater Authority of our Savior himself, he makes
reciprocal Charity and Love to be the distinguishing mark and character of his
Disciples, By this shall all men know that ye are my disciples, if ye love one
another.

If therefore this Charity which is so essential to a Disciple of Christ, that
he cannot be so without it; if the Union of the spirit in the bond of peace can
be preserved under differing denominations of different Sects and Parties,
notwithstanding the different external forms and circumstances of Divine
Worship; if all or any of those pious and learned Exhortations, which have been
made to persuade you to this Christian temper, can have that good effect which
is intended by them, notwithstanding the various forms of Church Government,
and the diversity of all other outward appendages and ceremonies of public
Worship; if we can fear God, and honor the King, and love one another, as well
and as heartily in the midst of these differences, as if there were no such
things to be found among us, then, by my consent, let all the Ecclesiastical
Enclosures be laid open, and let every man worship God, so he do but worship
him in spirit and in truth, and believe aright as to the fundamental Articles
of the Christian Faith, according to his own particular humor and fancy;
because by gratifying such an harmless, though unaccountable humor, there can
no inconvenience follow, but by disturbing and crossing it there may; and
therefore the ends of Religion will be better served by a diversity in Worship,
than by an uniformity of it.

But now, on the contrary, if it should prove true, as it will most certainly,
if either Experience or Reason can be heard amongst us, that the only way to
Unity and Peace is by an Uniformity of Discipline and Obedience, as to the
external circumstances of Divine Worship, then this great end, being so
necessary as it is for the procuring us all that Happiness which either this
World or the next can afford us, will justify all the necessary means that can
be used in order to the obtaining it.

Wherefore Uniformity being necessary as a means to Peace, and yet being
impracticable unless the Church be supposed to be invested with a Power of
prescribing the external modes and circumstances of Obedience, it follows
plainly, that the Church is actually invested with such a Power, and that all
its members are bound to obey its Prescriptions.

For the Topic of Experience, it is not without some unwillingness that I
mention it, much less do I think it proper at this time and place to lay open
the wounds of our late unhappy times, or present you with a mournful Scene of
those Miseries and Distractions which neither can nor ought to be remembered
without Amazement and Horror.

But if you will, every one of you, retire into your own thoughts, and ask your
selves the question, What it was that brought those dreadful Calamities upon
us, that involved three flourishing and powerful Kingdoms in Blood, and
Slaughter, and Confusion, that made the Gods to dye like men, and fall like one
of the Princes; while Slaves were set over us to be our Masters, and Frogs were
heard croaking in the Chambers of our Kings; then you your selves will answer
for me, It was the tender Conscience dissolved into rebellious Pretenses, that
carried Order and Government before it, and overflowed all things with a
resistless Stream; it was a Cry against Discipline, and Ceremonies and humane
Institutions; it was a Clamor for Liberty, against Will Worship and the
Ordinances of men; it was a Spirit of Sedition, a Thirst after Innovation, an
insatiable Humor of being dissatisfied with all the wholesome Establishments
of Unity and Peace; it was an Itch of new-modelling both Church and State; it
was a Pharisaical Pretense to farther Improvements of Purity and Holiness; it
was Discontent, and Jealousy and godly Fear, lined with Hypocrisy and
Dissimulation, that reduced our Beauty and Order into Ashes, that laid the
magnificent and comely Fabrics of the British Church and Empire, the Amazement
of themselves, and the Envy of their neighbors, equal with the ground; and,
instead of one firm and well-compacted Building, raised paper Tenements of
crumbling Sects and Factions, which, instead of being able to support
themselves, betrayed us in a manner into that Security which we now enjoy.

While we, forgetful of those Miseries under which our Fathers and our selves
have groaned, unthankful for those Blessings which, under the shade and
protection of a wise and happy Government we receive, ungrateful to Almighty
God, who out of that Chaos of Confusion has reared this new world of
Establishment and Order, displeased with the fatness of the Olive, and the
sweetness of the Fig Tree, and quarrelling with the friendly and sociable Vine
that cheareth God and Man, are calling again for the Bramble to reign over us,
and for the Thorns and Briars to protect us; or like the Israelites in the
Wilderness, surfeited with Miracles, with Manna, and with Quails, with the dew
of Heaven, and with the fatness of the Earth; with liberty and ease and plenty;
we are looking back for Slavery from our old Taskmasters in the Land of Ham,
and longing for the Garlic and the Onyons of Egypt.

But because an instance taken from our late Confusions, may but exasperate
whenit should convince. Let us avoid the mention of that Crying Guilt, for
which this Land of our Nativity has wept in tears of Blood, and should for ever
mourn in Sackcloth, and humble her self before the Lord in Ashes; and let us
trace the footsteps of Antiquity, and search the Records of the more innocent
and early Ages.

What was the reason in the Mosaic Dispensation, why all the external niceties
of divine Worship, in their Feasts, and in their Sacrifices, and in their
Lustrations were so carefully adjusted, by the particular designation and
appointment of God himself?

It is true indeed, that most of those Ceremonies were of a symbolicall nature,
and were designed to shadow out unto the Jews, either that purity, simplicity
and innocence of mind which God expects from all his worshippers and servants;
or else they were figurative and emblematicall Representations of the life and
death and sufferings of the Messiah, and of that more perfect Dispensation
which was to be introduced into the World by him.

But yet notwithstanding, it must not be denied, that there are many Ceremonies
to be found in the Law of Moses, which being equally commanded by God himself,
were of equal obligation as to their performance, with any of the rest, of
which no such Typical account can be given. And therefore the reason of their
Institution can only be this, That since every thing must of necessity be done
with some Ceremony, in some Place, or Time, or Order, or Gesture, or Manner and
Circumstance, or other; it pleased God for the avoiding of Confusion, and for
the preservation of an uniform and orderly way of Worship, which would
otherwise be exposed to perpetual change, disturbance and alteration, to adjust
and determine the particular circumstances of those indifferent matters,
because considering the perverseness of some men's minds, and the diversity of
their several fancies and humors, such changes and alterations could never
happen without a considerable breach of Charity and Friendship among men; which
must needs be a wonderful Obstruction as well to the interest of the Civil
State, as to all the religious Performances and Duties, both as to their
devotion in themselves, and as to their acceptance with Almighty God.

If therefore the nature of Mankind, be still the same under the Gospel that it
was under the Law; if the reasons for the necessity of Uniformity be the same
now that ever they were in former ages; if the method of this Uniformity be not
adjusted by God himself under the Gospel, as it was under the Law; and if this
Uniformity cannot be obtained unless the Church be invested with a right and
power of prescribing the terms of it; than it follows plainly, as has been
already observed, that the Church must be invested with such a power, because
else it would want the necessary means of its own unity and preservation, which
every Society must be supposed by the Laws of nature and reason, to be invested
with; and if the Church be invested with such a power, then all its Members are
under an indispensable obligation to obey it, because that Power which may be
lawfully disobeyed, is no Power at all: And this is sufficient to vindicate the
exercise of Ecclesiastical Censures.

And if you demand further, Whether it be lawful for the civil Sanction to
interpose in behalf of the Church, to see that its Orders and Injunctions be
duly and faithfully executed and obeyed, I answer that it is for this plain
reason, because the Civil Power has a right of exacting all kinds of lawful
Obedience from its subjects; and this obedience if it were not Lawful, could
not be enjoined by the Church it self.

But besides the express provisions of the Law of Moses it self, there were
also several pretended traditions of Moses from Mount Sinai; there were
likewise the determinations of their Wise men in controverted cases; the
Decisions of the Tannaim and the Amoraim; and of the Schools of Hillel and of
Schammai, the two so much celebrated, but disagreeing Founders of the
Pharisaick Order. For which Traditions and Determinations of their famous
Masters, the Jews had usually as great if not greater Veneration than for the
Law it self; and they were at length swelled into so vast a bulk, that (like
the Missals and the Rituals of the Romish Church at this day, which are so full
of Ceremonies, burthensom in their number, frivolous and superstitious in their
use) they ate out the very life and heart of true Religion; as our Savior
himself in several places of his Gospel with no less Justice than severity
complains.

The Heathen World had also their Sacred Offices prescribed by a certain Form
as well before as under the Law: And the same is the case with the Mohammedan
and Pagan Idolaters at this day; which Ceremonies of theirs, though for their
number they be intolerable to a devout Soul, which cannot suffer it is self to
be so far taken off from the more inward and substantial part of Religion,
though in their nature they be mostly foolish, and in their use Superstitious,
and in their design Idolatrous, as being directed to a false object; yet as
well these as the Jewish Formalities do prove thus much by the common consent
of Mankind, that an Uniformity in the outward circumstances of Divine Service,
is necessary to the more due and solemn performance of Religious Worship, and
to the public peace and quiet of the World.

What is the reason that at this day the French Persecution against the
reformed Religion and its Professors, rages with so much violence and fury,
thorough all the spacious Territories and Dominions of that mighty Monarch?
Shall we think it is a Zeal for the Catholic Religion, as they are pleased to
call it, that is for a Fardle of absurd, ridiculous and blasphemous
Superstitions, that inspires so wise and powerful a Prince, with so mean
thoughts of Cruelty and Revenge? Shall we think he acts upon a principle of
Conscience, who has sufficiently discovered to the world by his insatiable
thirst after Empire, which cannot be purchased without the price of Blood, that
he has no other principle of action than that of a boundless appetite of Rule
and Greatness? Shall he be thought to act upon a principle of Duty and
Religion, who makes destructive and depopulating Wars without giving a reason,
and violates the faith of Peace by arbitrary Dependances and unwarrantable
Claims? Who conquers more by the peremptory Decrees of his late erected
Chambers, than by the conduct of his Generals, or by the numbers, discipline
and valor of his Armies?

What therefore can be the true cause and motive, why he that glories in the
blessed title of the Most Christian King, should yet notwithstanding, persecute
Christianity it self? What else can be the true reason of all this Cruelty and
seeming Madness, but that he wisely considers that the true way to Empire
abroad, is by unity and peace at home, that a Kingdom divided against it self
cannot stand; and that these differences of Religion, as they have done already
in the experience of that Kingdom as well as ours, will some time or other
prove the occasions of great disorders and commotions in the State?

And shall we not then make use of the same wisdom for the support of
Christianity, which is with so much diligence and zeal made use of by others
for its Extirpation? For Popery is either no Christianity at all, or it is
Christianity wrapped up and hid in such an heap of Ceremonies and Superstitions,
that it can hardly be discerned.

Is it worth our while to contend about Ceremonies when we are losing the
Substance? to squabble and fall out about indifferent things, when our Religion
and our Liberty, our temporal and eternal Interest lie at stake? If the
things prescribed be indifferent and consequently lawful, why do we not show
that they are so by complying with them? If the quarrels raised about
indifferent matters, do yet notwithstanding rise as high, as those which are
agitated between the Papists and us about matters of a necessary and
unalterable nature; why do we not cement and compose these unhappy breaches, by
adding Humility to Obedience, and by submitting to every ordinance of man, so
far as we may without any violation of the Laws of God or right reason?

All our public feuds and animosities are comprehended in our Religious
Disputes, and if they were but once composed, we should be an happy Nation. The
King would be glorious, and his People secure. We should be safe at home and
formidable abroad. We should be in a condition to succor our Allies, to relieve
the distressed Protestants, to keep the balance even betwixt our neighbor
Princes, and to stop the progress of the Arms of France, which threaten to
involve all Europe in Slavery and Superstition together. Whereas now all we are
able to do, is to give protection for a while to persecuted Religion when it
flies hither for shelter.

But what will become of us, when the same torrent of Ambition, having
overflown what ever stood in its way, shall at length beat upon the British
Shore? Shall we suffer our selves to be devoured by our own intestine
Divisions, when the Enemy from without is battering our Walls and throwing in
his Bombes among us? or shall we not rather unite together for our common
safety? and shall we not severely repent that we did not sooner do it before it
was too late, that we did not take sweet counsel together and go into the
house of God as friends?

Certainly this one consideration, if it were but powerfully and frequently
impressed upon our minds, must needs have a wonderful influence upon us, and
must even fright men, and compel them by arguments both of fear and love, into
a thorough Reconcilement with the best of Churches, before it be too late, as
well out of a principle of Interest as Duty; for besides the considerations of
this World, it ought to afford matter of very sad reflection to us, or at least
to so many of us, as have been active either in causing or someting the
Differences that are among us, that we must one day give a dreadful account
before the Judgment Seat of God, for a great part of that Blood which has been
spilt, and of those Spoils, Rapines and Depredations, which have been made by
the ambition or injustice of our Neighbors. We must be accountable for the
oppression of our persecuted Brethren beyond the Seas; and for ought we know,
if these destructive Animosities be not soon composed, for the removal of the
Candlestick from among our selves, and for the small extirpation of the
Protestant Religion.

The Jews had their Ritual, and the Christians their Liturgies or set forms of
Divine Service, the one before Christianity, and the other long before Popery,
were known in the World.

And first, As to the Jewish Ritual, which cannot be denied to have been a
thing of humane Institution, it was so little disapproved by our Savior, or
rather so highly approved, that he has been observed by Scaliger, and Buxtorf,
and Camero, and Hugo Grotius, and other learned men, to have borrowed most of
those expressions which he makes use of in the Institution of the blessed
Sacrament of his Body and Blood from thence; and that Hymn which after the
Celebration of that blessed Feast, he and his Disciples went out to sing
together on the Mount of Olives, was by Paulus Burgensis a Converted Jew and a
learned Bishop of the Christian Church, and out of him by Buxtorf, Drusius, and
others, conjectured to be the same which the Jews are used to call the Hallel
hagadol, being a Song of Praise and Thanksgiving, consisting of several Psalms,
and used to be sung in consort at the Feast of the Passover and other solemn
occasions.

And that God Almighty has actually approved those indifferent circumstances in
Divine Worship which have not been of his own appointment, being either not
contained in the Law of Moses, or no where commanded in Scripture, and in use
long before the Law was delivered; I will here prove by two other Instances,
which I the rather mention, because they are omitted by the learned and
judicious Writer of the Libertas Ecclesiastica; and because they are no where,
that I know of, taken notice of to this purpose.

The first shall be taken from that passage in the Psalms, Early in the morning
will I direct my prayer unto thee, and will look up, in which words, the
Psalmist, addressing himself immediately to God Almighty, expresses the Posture
in which he would pour out his Prayers before him, by looking up toward
Heaven; now, because we cannot imagine he would have made this Vow of looking
up to God in Prayer, if he thought it would have been displeasing to him, and
if, on the other hand, it can be proved that this was the general custom of
that Country in all their Prayers and Supplications; then we have here an
Instance of an indifferent Posture in Prayer, which the general custom of
Judaea had by degrees brought into the authority and reputation of a Law, which
yet was no where instituted by any Divine Command; but that this was the
general practice is plain from the Roman Authors, who tax them upon this
account with worshipping the Clouds and the Host of Heaven. So Juvenal,

Quidam sortiti metuentem sabbata patrem.
Nil praeter nubes and caeli numen adorant.
And in the Catalecta of Petronius,
Judaeus licet and Porcinum Numen adoret,
Et coeli summas advocet auriculas.
Which places, though they be otherwise interpreted by Mr. Seldom and other
Learned men, and the reading of the latter of them questioned by Doctor Isaac
Vossius, in his Notes upon Pomponius Mela, yet I conceive the first place dos
sufficiently vindicate the reading of the latter; and the Interpretation of Mr.
Seldom, instead of destroying, will rather help and encourage that which I have
given; for the reason why the ancient Jews called God by the name of Shamajim,
or Heaven, was the same with that, for which they looked heaven-wards when ever
they prayed unto him, namely, because they thought the more peculiar and
beatifick presence of the Divinity to be there; and this is the first Instance.

The second shall be taken from those words of God to Moses, Exodus 3. 5. Draw
not nigh hither, put off thy shoes from off thy feet, for which he subjoins
this reason, for the place whereon thou stand is holy ground: now though it
is true that. Moses was bound upon the least signification of the Divine
Pleasure to obey it, yet this would have been no reason of his Obedience had
there not been such a custom in the World before that time; which, not having
the least foot-step of a Divine Command, was probably owing merely to humane
institution, but yet we see was approved by God himself.

This Custom prevailed also under the Law; though in the Law it self it be no
where enjoined, in all their solemn Feasts, as appears from this, that the Jews
are commanded to eat the Passover with their shoes on; which would have been a
needless Command, if in their other Festivals they had not used to put them
off; which was therefore done, because every meal among the Jews, but more
especially their solemn Feasts, was in the nature of a Feast upon a Sacrifice,
as I could prove more largely if it would not be a digression; and therefore,
being about an act of religious Worship, they were used to put their shoes off,
as the custom of those Countries was in like cases.

For this reason the Turks at this day do always go barefoot into their
Moschs: and it was a Precept of Pythagoras recorded by Iamblichus, in his Life,
(...), sacrifice and worship God with your shoes off. The Romans also did the
same at their Feasts, as is evident from several places of Martial and others.
Joshua is likewise commanded, by the Angel of the Lord, to do as Moses had
done before him, Josh. 5. 15. Loose thy shoe from off thy foot, for the place
whereon thou stand is holy; and Joshua did so. Marinus relates of Proclus,
that he, being about to worship God, made use of this Ceremony in the
performance of his Devotions, (...).

And, because the Servants, as I conceive, were used to attend their Masters to
Divine Service, as Naaman the Syrian was used to go along with his Master to
the Temple of Rimmon, and there to take off their shoes or sandals for them;
from thence is that proverbial Speech of John the Baptist concerning our
Savior, whose Forerunner and Harbinger he was, Joh. 1. 27. He it is who coming
after me is preferred before me, whose shoe latchet I am not worthy to unloose.
Lastly, in allusion to this custom is that passage of Juvenal, in his sixth
Satyr,

-- deinde adamas notissimus, and Berenices
In digito factus pretiosior; hunc dedit olim
Barbarus incestae, dedit hunc Agrippa sorori,
Observant ubi festa mero pede sabbata reges,
Et vetus indulget senibus clementia porcis.
So that here we have two plain Instances of Institutions in matters of an
indifferent nature approved by God, but commanded only by men, for an
immemorial custom whose original or legislative sanction cannot be traced, and
perhaps it never had any, but crept in by degrees, is as much an humane
Institution as a possitive Command, of whose Author we can give never so clear
an account, as the Common Law of England, is every whit as much of humane
institution as the Statute; and those Tenures which hold only by Custom or
Prescription are to all intents and purposes as good as those which have Deeds
and Charters to produce.

Wherefore, if Custom may be complied with in these cases, then so may any
other humane Institution, and if Custom may not, then is it unlawful for us to
go to our Devotions at those times when our Neighbors and Countrymen are
used to frequent them, because this is an Imposition upon our Liberty, which is
not tied up either to place or time any more than to any other indifferent
circumstance of action.

But if the places and times of Divine Worship may be lawfully determined by
the Authority of the Church, (and if they may not, then the Church has no power
to see that God be worshipped at all, for he must be worshipped at some place
or time or other,) then I see no reason why the same Authority may not equally
extend to all other indifferent circumstances of action.

As for the use of Liturgies and Set-forms of Prayer in the Christian Church,
there is nothing more plain than that, as far as we can trace Antiquity, they
have been constantly used, several of the ancient Liturgies are at this day
extant among us; and the Service both of the Church of Rome, and our's, is in a
great measure taken from thence: nay, so ancient and in such constant use have
they always been in the Christian Church, that we have unquestionable
Instances of them: in the Apostolical times themselves, as has been learnedly
observed by a Dr. Lloyd, Bishop of St. Asaph.
Reverend Prelate of our own from Justin Martyr, in his second Apology, who
calls the Prayers of the Christians in his time, (...), Common Prayers: and
from Pliny, in an Epistle to Trajan, very often cited by Learned men in defense
of the Christians of the primitive times, who, being examined by him concerning
their Manners and Religion, affirmabant hanc fuisse summam vel culpae suae vel
erroris, quod essent soliti stato die ante lucem convenire: carmenque Christo,
quast Deo, dicere, secum invicem, etc. The Learned Prelate, whom I have newly
mentioned, understands this place of Verses answering one another by turns, as
we speak the reading Psalms; and I know not, says he, how he could better
express it. And indeed this must be allowed to be a very proper, and a no less
acute and ingenious Interpretation; for the Psalms themselves were many of them
nothing else but Hymns of Praise and Thanksgiving which were composed for the
Service of the Temple, and this ancient way of worshipping God by Hymns, as
well in the heathen World as among Jews and Christians, is evident from the
Hymns of Homer, Orpheus, Callimachus, and others among the Greeks; from Hymns
of a like nature to be met with in the Interludes of the ancient Dramatick
Poesy, in the Odes of Horace, and in the Writings of Statius, Catullus, and
others: And in allusion to this it is that the same Pliny says, in a
Complyment to Trajan, Animadverto etiam deos ipsos non tam accuratis adorantium
precibus quam innocentia and sanctitate laetari: gratioremque existimari qui
delubris eorum puram castamque mentem quam qui meditatum carnem intulerit.

Among the Christians, to be sure, the singing of Psalms and Hymns in honor of
God and Christ, and for the mutual benefit and edification of one another, was
always looked upon as a special Duty, and we have several places of Scripture
which do not only vouch and justify, but also enjoin this Practice.

If therefore Hymns and Psalms, in which many are to bear their parts, cannot
possibly be sung but by a Form; if they must be composed before they can be
sung; if this be a true and proper exercise of Devotion and Divine Worship; if
Praise and Thanksgiving be essential parts of Prayer, as is manifest from that
Petition in our Savior's own Form, Hallowed be thy Name; nay, if it be the
most exalted and sublime exercise of a devout mind; and if all this may be
done, and in many cases must be done by a Set-form; then, why may not the same
be true of all other parts of Prayer? and, why may we not from hence conclude,
that a Form of Prayer, as it is always lawful, so it is in some cases
necessary to be used? it is necessary, because Psalms and Hymns cannot be sung
without it; and it is necessary, because in some cases we are enjoined to sing
Psalms or Hymns by the express command of Scripture.

And here, before I pass by farther, let me ask our dissenting Brethren one
Question, they in their Congregations are used to sing together the Psalms of
David converted into English Rhimes, some of them of one man's composing, and
some of another; now, though the words of the Psalms themselves, especially as
they are in the original, were divinely inspired, and therefore they may
pretend, though it be a Form, yet it is not a Form of humane Institution; yet
the words of him that puts them into Meeter are not David's words, any more
than a Paraphrase and the Text are the same: the same sense may be expressed in
different words, and those different words are so many different forms to them
that read them; from whence it is manifest that they do not pray by David's
Form which was inspired, but by the Translator's, which is of humane
Institution; and why then do they declaim so loudly against a Form of Prayer?
Why they will tell us, the Scripture has no where enjoined it; but I have
proved the contrary, and they themselves confute their own Pretenses by their
Practice.

But, suppose the Scripture did not enjoin it, what then? if we must neither
pray with a Form nor without, unless the Scripture bid us do one or the other,
then we must not pray at all; for the Scripture does not any where command
either of these, unless it be in the use of the Lord's Prayer; and yet at the
same time enjoins us to pray without ceasing.

But these Gentlemen, if they were half so good Philosophers as they are bad
Divines, would have understood before now, that all Prayer is a Form, and that
without a Form it is impossible to pray at all: for the sense at the bottom of
all Prayer is the same; it is either a devout acknowledgment and admiration of
the Divine Excellence and Perfection, or it is a thanksgiving for his Mercies,
or an humbling our selves before him for our Sins, or entering into new
engagements and resolutions of a new Life, by offering up the Sacrifice of a
broken and a contrite Heart; or lastly, it is a deprecating those Judgments
which hang over our heads for our Sins, and an entreating his Goodness for
those Blessings which the necessities of our nature, or the circumstances of
our fortune and condition do require; and let these things be expressed with
never so much variation of phrase, yet it is not that variation in which the
true nature of the Prayer consists; but it is the sense which is at the bottom,
which is always the same, as a tune is the same, though it be pricked down by
never such variety of marks, and a sentence the same, expressed by several
ciphers.

It is not the words that God regards, but it is the inward Ardency and
Devotion of the mind, which may be the same with a Form as without it; nay, in
truth, it may be greater with a Form than it can be without it, because then he
that officiates, not being to seek for what he is to say, and his fancy and
invention, not being perpetually upon the rack, his mind is the more intent and
fixed upon the Object of his Devotion, and upon a sober and considerate
reflection upon those things which make up the entire theme and subject of his
Prayer: he is not apt to dishonor God, nor to expose himself and Religion to
contempt by rash and inconsiderate expressions uttered in the heat of a
distempered and inconsiderate Zeal, which we find by experience, I speak
without reflecting upon any particular person, many of our nonconforming
Brethren do, as well in their Prayers as Sermons, for want of duly considering
what they have to say beforehand, which shows plainly what extreme Presumption
and Folly they are guilty of, when they pretend to utter such contemptible
stuff by the assistence of the Spirit.

It is true indeed, there was in the first ages of the Church such a thing as
the Gift of utterance, but it was when men of mean parts and education were
sent forth to preach the Gospel by our Savior himself, who with out this could
not have delivered themselves as became the Ambassadors of so great a King; it
was at a time when the World could not be converted without Miracles, when the
Fears of Death and Torments and Persecution would have put all their natural
faculties to silence, had they not been assisted and encouraged by an
extraordinary influence of Divine Grace from above: It was at a time when they
were to be carried before Magistrates and Rulers, to give an account of
themselves and of that Gospel which they preached; and then it was necessary
indeed, that a particular assistence of the Divine Spirit should overpower the
fears of death, and remove all apprehensions of danger out of their way, and
that the words which they were to speak should be given them and put into their
mouths at that very instant, lest otherwise, for want of ability or courage,
they should expose and betray themselves and the Gospel.

But at this time of day there is no necessity of any such supernatural
assistence; and that it is not actually afforded appears partly from the
experience which we have of those that pretend to it, and partly from this that
Saint Paul expressly tells us, that the Gift of Prophecy, of Tongues, and of
Knowledge were in time to fail; and if they be not failed already, as well as
those other miraculous Powers of Healing Diseases, and of Casting out Devils,
we have little or no reason to believe that ever they will; besides, that the
Gift of Tongues being manifestly ceased, and these three being mentioned
together, we have abundant reason to conclude, that those of Prophecy and
Knowledge are ceased together with it.

But after all, we have no Promise in Scripture, that God, though by his Spirit
he will furnish us with affection and zeal to the end of the World, will ever
put the very expressions into our mouths; the Spirit it self helps our
infirmities, says Saint Paul, speaking of this very business of Prayer, but it
is not with a Gift of utterance, but with Groans that cannot be uttered: let
our words be what they will, so our hearts be but right, God is well pleased.

Compositum jus fasque animo, sanctosque recessus
Mentis, and incoctum generoso pectus honesto.
Haec cedo ut admoveam templis, and far litabo.
It is true indeed, such is the nature of style, that the same sense clothed in
different expressions, shall either extort respect or laughter; the reason is,
because all speech is either proper or metaphorical; in proper speech, where
the words are the real and immediate marks of the things they express, there we
are affected with the sentence according to the opinion we have of those things
which are contained under it; but in metaphorical, we are differently affected,
as the Metaphors are taken from things of a contemptible or a serious and
useful nature.

Now nothing is more plain than that in religious Discourses, whether in Prayer
or Sermon, nothing ought to be said after such a manner as to move laughter or
contempt instead of exciting Devotion and serious attention; but whether this
end be more likely to be attained by an extempore or well-considered and
premeditated Prayer, let any man of common sense and understanding judge.

And though such rash and inconsiderate expressions may be well enough approved
where they are uttered among people that are affected by noise rather than by
sober and judicious expressions, by a sound and wholesome Form of words, yet it
ought to be considered, one would think, how unbecoming such things are to the
gravity of one that pretends to teach and instruct the World, or to the Majesty
of that Person whose Character he sustains; what scandal it gives to
understanding men, and what advantages to the prosane: and lastly, how
unsuitable it is to the design of Religion, which is to make men happy by
creating in them a calm and sedate temper; not so much to move their Passions
as to inform their Judgments, and to prepare them for Happiness by wisdom and
instruction.

But if there be any who, by the strength of natural parts, by the quickness of
their fancy, or the volubility of their tongues, by long custom, or acquired
habits, by art and study, by ringing the changes and by shuffling the same
expressions at several times into a several order and method, shall from thence
seem either to themselves or others to be possessed of this Gift of Prayer, yet
they are in truth and reallity very much mistaken, and it will appear they are
so, in that they generally use these, whether talents or acquirements, or
artifices and devices of theirs, rather in a way of ostentation than use, by
spinning out their Devotions to an unusual length, and by endeavoring to
captivate the ears and hearts of inconsiderate people by that much speaking
which our Saviviour condemns.

Thus it appears plainly that a sober and well-considered Form of Prayer is a
manifest advantage both to the Speaker and the Hearer, and to the latter it is
an advantage in a respect which I have not yet mentioned.

If I pray in an unknown tongue, says the Apostle, my spirit prays, but my
understanding is unfruitful. 1 Cor. c. 14. v. 14. And again, v. 16. how shall
he that occupies the room of the unlearned, say Amen. From whence it follows
plainly, that in this age especially, when the miraculous effusions of the
Spirit are in a manner wholly ceased, those Prayers are the best to which we
are best prepared to say, Amen; but those are manifestly Forms of Prayer;
because in those we go along with the Minister himself; nay, we understand
beforehand what it is he is about to ask, and so are the better prepared to
join with him, and to say, Amen, heartily, devoutly and preparedly to all his
Petitions.

And the same Chapter will likewise furnish us with another argument against
these extempore Effusions, when they are truly and properly, and not only
pretendedly so, which is but to put a cheat upon the People; namely, that they
are subject either to the heats of Enthusiasm on the one hand, or to the
coldness of Non plus and Drawling on the other; both of which expose Religion
to contempt in the opinion, or at least in the practice of those whose design
and interest it is to make it contemptible and cheap, and serves to alienate
the affections of much wiser men than ever they are like to gain over to
themselves.

If the whole Church be come together to speak with Tongues, and there come in
those that are unlearned and Unbelievers, will they not say that ye are mad?
and if the same or a like advantage may and will be taken from the indiscretion
of every extempore Pretender, there is the same reason why he should lay by his
pretenses, and give way to a sound and sober Form of words.

The truth is a premeditated and an extempore Prayer have each of them their
inconveniences, the latter cannot be without them; and the first, if it be not
done by a man of some judgment and experience, he does usually endeavor only
to show his parts, as if his design were to recommend himself to the good
opinion of God Almighty for a man of Eloquence and Wit: the premeditated man
does oftentimes talk so fulsomely as if his design were to cajole and cokes the
great God of Heaven and Earth; while the man of gifts and graces, as he thinks
himself, does by ridiculous or rash expressions, by mimical gestures and
affected alterations of his voice, by speaking sometimes so high as if he would
prevail with him by clamor, and sometimes so low as if he had a secret to
communicate to his Maker, openly affront and abuse him to his face and in the
face of a numerous Assembly.

But both these Inconveniences are happily avoided by the wise provision which
the Church has made.

If then the use of Forms of Prayer in the public Assemblies of Christians be
not only lawful in it self, and justified by the practice of all ages before
the Reformation, but also manifestly tending to Edification, and freed from
very many and very great inconveniences to which extempore Addresses are
exposed, and therefore necessary to be allowed.

And if though Forms of Prayer be necessary in the general, yet this or that
particular Form be not, otherwise the Liturgy of all Churches and all Ages must
be exactly the same.

Lastly, If no Formulary of Divine Service can be introduced into the common
use and practice of the Church but by the public Sanction, whether sacred, or
civil, or both, then we have here a plain instance of a lawful humane
Imposition in indifferent matters; for though a Form of Prayer be necessary,
yet this or that Form is not; from whence it follows, beyond all possibility of
contradiction, that an humane Imposition in indifferent matters, or a
Determination of those indifferent things by the authority of men to one part
of the indifference is not in it self unlawful, and whatsoever may be lawfully
commanded is of necessity to be obeyed, unless we will renounce all obedience
whatsoever.

However, thus much will certainly be granted by the most avowed Assertors of
the Separation, that we have every one of us a right and power of determining
our selves in those indifferent matters; for otherwise the nature of their
indifference is destroyed; and yet if thus much be but allowed, they will find
themselves driven to an absolute necessity, either to contradict themseves, and
to affirm contradictions in a breath, to say that the same things are and are
not indifferent at the same time, or else they must bid adieu to their beloved
Cause, and give submission to the Authority of the Church.

For whatever natural Liberty men have in themselves, when once they become
members of a Society, they are supposed to give it up to the legislative or
governing power of that Society so far as is necessary to the peace and quiet
of it; for otherwise a Society and no Society would be exactly the same, that
is, every man would still remain his own Master, and at liberty to do as much
as ever he could before.

For example, in that which Mr. Hobbs is pleased to call the State of Nature,
when a man is not a member of a Body politic, but a distinct and perfectly
independent person by himself, he is naturally invested with a right and power
of defending his person or his possession by force of Arms, he may lawfully
revenge his own injuries, and he is the only Judge when he is wronged or
injured; because without all this power he cannot live in the World, or
continue in that Being which God and Nature have given him.

But if having listed themselves by mutual covenant and agreement into a Body
politic or Commonwealth, for the mutual defense and preservation of every
particular person and of the whole Society, men shall notwithstanding after
this assume the same liberty to themselves of personal Revenges, and of being
their own Judges in controverted cases, without referring themselves to the
decision of the Law which is the civil Umpire betwixt man and man, it is
manifest this Society cannot be of long continuance, or rather so long as this
Liberty is taken it can never be a Society properly so called; from whence it
follows plainly, that it is necessary, if men will be members of a Society,
that they give up this private power into the hands of the public.

If therefore the Church be a Society truly and properly so called; if it be
that mystical Body of which Christ is the Head; if the members of this Body
cannot be knit and well compacted together without external rules of discipline
and order, in which the very nature of a Society consists; if the public
Orders of the Church and every man's prescribing rules to himself be
inconsistent together, and if the observing no rule or method at all either in
Divine Worship or civil conversation be rather like a man in Bedlam than a
Denison of a sober Corporation; if charity, good will and love; if mutual
helpfulness and reciprocal usefulness to one another; if peace with God, and
peace with men, and peace within our selves be the great design and business of
the Christian life; if a man cannot be at peace with God while he is at enmity
with his neighbor; if a man can neither love, nor fear, nor know, nor worship
God aright at the same time when his thoughts are taken up and filled with
envy, uncharitableness, detraction and revenge; if no man can be happy in
himself when he is displeased and angry with other men; if the controversies
raised about matters confessedly indifferent have been, when and wherever they
have happened, a perpetual bane and disquiet to the Church; if they always
heighten men's Passions against and alienate their affections from one another;
if they are always attended with a disturbance of the public peace, and have
de facto proceeded to the utter subversion both of Church and State; if all
these Animosities and Contensions would immediately cease by a quiet and
dutiful submission to the Authority of the Church; if by giving up this Power,
the Church, as a Body politic or Society of men is actually dissolved, a
Society or Aggregate of several persons, being no otherwise one, than as they
submit to the same Laws and are governed by the same external Rules of
discipline and obedience; if Place and Time, notwithstanding they be
indifferent in themselves as to this or that particular determination, yet is
it necessary in the general that they should be determined, otherwise there can
be no public Worship of God: lastly, when men are met together in a religious
Assembly; if every man shall follow his own particular fancy; if almost every
single person shall be seen in a different posture; and if this be more like to
make men look upon one another than to attend to the Minister or to mind
themselves; if it be more like to excite laughter than devotion; if it be a
natural obstruction to the solemnity and seriousness of religious Worship; if,
done by chance, it be a sign of too great negligence and remisness; and if,
done on set purpose, it be a sign of conceitedness and spiritual pride, while
every man prefers his own way, and despises that of another; if it be a ground
of censure, and may be a cause of uncharitableness, and, by degrees, of
separation; then is it plain, upon all these accounts which I have mentioned,
because it would be better if it were so, and because it is necessary that it
should be so; because the Church can neither preserve it self in reputation nor
so much as in being, because it is for its undoubted and its perpetual
interest, and because it is necessary to its preservation, that it should be
invested with an Authority of adjusting the most indifferent circumstances of
Divine Worship; without which the blessed ends of Unity and Peace can never be
obtained: I say, it is plain from all this, that the Church is actually
invested with this Power, and that Ecclesiastical Constitutions may for the
same reason determine indifferent matters, for which the Civil forbid Adultery
and Murder, namely, because it is necessary to the public Peace; which
reason, if it be not sufficient, the Civil Laws do all of them become
immediately null and void, as being founded upon no other basis but the
consideration of the public good; but if it be a solid and substantial reason,
I would fain know, if any of the Dissenters be at leisure to inform me, why it
may not equally extend to defend the necessity, and consequently justice of
Ecclesiastical whether Laws or Censures.

Especially if we consider that, as the case of the Christian world now stands,
the same persons, with the same interests, prejudices and passions are members
both of the Civil and Ecclesiastical State; so that it is as impossible there
should be a disturbance in the one, in which the other shall be unconcerned, as
that the same man should be divided from himself; and it is every whit as
clear, that either it is not lawful to use all necessary means for the
preservation of the Civil Peace, or it is lawful for the Church to concern her
self in the determination of indifferent matters, which Determinations and
Constitutions of hers may be lawfully confirmed and ratified by the State.

If men could differ without falling-out, something might be pretended in
behalf of an innocent, though unbecoming Liberty, but since the greatest feuds
and animosities do sometimes take their rise from the smallest beginnings,
since the religious differences are of all others the greatest, and the most
fatal to the public Peace, since there is nothing so infinitely scrupulous as
an unreasonably tender Conscience, and since there is no pretense so
inconsiderable, from whence either indigent or ambitious men will not take
occasions to advance their secular designs under the specious covert of a
Concern for Liberty, or a Zeal for Religion, it behooves those in public
Authority, as they tender the reputation of their own wisdom and justice, or
the quiet of the World, to cut off all occasions of disturbance, by seeing that
all things be done decently and in order, which rule of the Apostle's is
founded upon the same reason upon which all Laws whether humane or divine are
founded, and from whence alone they can and do receive their obligation,
namely, the common Interest of mankind and the particular Happiness of private
persons; it depends upon the same reason and the same necessity, for which
Injustice and Robbery are forbidden, or upon which Industry, Sobriety and
useful Arts are encouraged; which is nothing else but the consideration of the
public Good, which if it be as plainly concerned in this as in any other case,
this is sufficient to defend the Authority of the Church, and to make its
Sanctions in indifferent matters, so long as they are steered by principles of
undoubted Interest, to be of perpetual force and obligation.

Those actions are properly said to be indifferent, which may either be done or
let alone without inconvenience or advantage to the public, or to the interest
of any private person; but if any prejudice or advantage will accrue, then
there is a plain reason why they should be done or omitted, and consequently
they cease to be indifferent, and become necessary in proportion to the weight
of those reasons upon which their performance or omission is founded.

So, for example, we will suppose it for the present indifferent in what
posture we say our Prayers in a public Congregation; yet if we say them at
all, thus much is of absolute necessity, that we say them in some posture or
other; but now if the Civil or Ecclesiastical Magistrate, for the avoiding of
Confusion, and for the preventing of those Piques and Animosities which
frequently happen among men about things of little or no value in themselves,
especially when Religion is concerned, shall ordain that all men shall say
their Prayers in one and the same posture, and shall determine and assign what
that particular posture shall be; then here is a reason of Interest for the
good of the World, and for the quiet of that Society of which we are members,
why this posture should be used rather than any other; and consequently this
posture, though indifferent before, does now derive a necessity from that
reason of State and interest upon which it is imposition is founded.

To be sure men of common sense and understanding, if they have but common
honesty joined together with it, will take their measures of obligation as to
the lawfulness or unlawfulness of what is commanded, from it is design and
tendency to promote or obstruct the interest of the Public, and the happiness
of particular Persons; and if either the pretended or the real Scruples of any
might be sufficient to stop the course of Law against the common interest,
there could be no such thing as Order or Government in the World.

There are many Laws enacted by the sublime Wisdom of the King and his three
Estates in Parliament assembled, which though they be for the interest of the
whole Kingdom, all things considered; yet they manifestly tend to the
Prejudice of particular persons, but yet those very persons are as much obliged
by these Laws, as they who reap the benefit and advantage of them, because the
obligation of these Laws is to be taken from the fundamental Constitution of
all Societies, that a greater Interest be preferred before a less, and that
when the public advantage shall interfere with a private, the private must
give place, because otherwise the Society cannot be preserved; how much more
strictly therefore are we obliged by those Laws whose design and tendency being
nothing else, but to keep us all at unity and peace together, are so plainly
for the advantage of the Public and of every particular Person?

And if notwithstanding the manifest Conducibleness of such an Uniform way of
Worship to the public Peace, and the experience of those sad Effects which
our Religious Differences have produced, every private man shall yet after this
take upon him to Judge of the Reasonableness or Expedience of what is Enacted
by his Superiors, and shall from thence proceed upon I know not what
Pretenses, ridiculous in themselves and destructive of the public Welfare,
to withdraw his Obedience to their just Commands; he may as well take upon him
an infinite and boundless liberty of questioning the Reasonableness and Equity
of all Laws whatsoever, and either upon the same or more warrantable
Exceptions, for the expedience of no Law can be more evident than of that which
enjoins Uniformity in Divine Worship, he may withdraw his Obedience from all
kind of Government and Subjection whatsoever.

But here it is Objected, That if there were nothing but the Civil Interest, or
the Interest of this World to be considered, the experience of all Ages and
Nations will sufficiently demonstrate, that an Uniformity in Religious matters,
is the best Expedient that can be thought of to secure the public Peace. But
alas! we carry souls and Consciences about us, and these are precious things;
there is an immortal Interest lies at stake, which it would be great folly and
madness to part with upon any temporal consideration.

But to this I answer first in the general, That the main design of
Christianity being to promote Peace and Charity in this world, as well as to
procure us Eternal peace and happiness in the next; and indeed the one in order
to the other, it follows plainly that Uniformity in Religious Worship, as being
a necessary means to Peace, is in the general of Divine Institution, though
what the particular terms of that Uniformity shall be, the Scripture has no
where prescribed; as in truth it could not do, for a reason which I shall show
hereafter: it remains therefore, that the Church it self be in all Ages
furnished with a right and power of prescribing what those terms shall be, and
that all her members are obliged to a necessary Observance of them.

But here, because I have made so frequent mention of the Church, that I may
avoid Ambiguity, and leave as little room as may be for Exception, before I go
any further, I will explain what I mean by that term, and without descending to
too much nicety, the Church is one of these three things.

First, it is the congregation of Christian People dispersed over the whole
earth, and agreeing together in the fundamental Articles of the Christian
Faith, which are either expressly, or by direct and lawful consequence,
revealed in the Scriptures of the New Testament, to be of necessity to
Salvation. And in this sense it is not only unnecessary that there should be
every where the same Rites and Ceremonies observed in the Church, but it is in
the nature of the thing impossible that there should, because of necessity the
several manners, customs, and other circumstances of several Nations, will
introduce a diversity of external Formalitie into Religious Worship, which may
be done without any breach of Charity or Friendship among men, because there is
no interest to be served by promoting Feuds and Animosities between them; and
it will be all one to the peace and happiness of this Kingdom, what rites or
usages soever the Greek or Armenian Churches shall embrace.

We do not much trouble our heads, though by reason of their near Neighborhood
we have some reason to do it, about the French saying Mass, or adoring
Relics, or Images, or praying for Dead, or worshipping the Host: Nay, you
shall hardly ever see a man in a passion when he hears the Tragical stories of
those horrible persecutions against the professors of the Reformed Religion;
but though he may relieve and pity them, so far as a small temporary
Contribution will go, yet in truth and reality he is not much concerned;
whereas at home we can make a shift to fall out about much smaller matters; the
reason is, because we are not embarked in the same bottom with them, and so
being able to do neither good nor hurt by being angry or displeased, we scarce
ever trouble our selves. But at home the pretenses of Religion and Liberty,
which are always stirring when ever there is any prospect of public Disorders
likely to ensue upon them, will never fail to excite the ambitious, the
discontented, and the needy, to embroyle the State out of principles either of
Interest or Revenge, while the passions of men that daily converse together,
and are engaged by interest, or prejudice, or duty in the respective parties,
do but serve to blow the cole, and improve the sparks of Animosity into a flame
of War.

The consequence of all which is, That there may be differences in the
universal Church, consisting of many Kingdoms and Provinces without
dissension; and that all that whatever it is, which is requisite to the unity
of the Spirit in the bond of Peace, may be consistent enough with differences
in smaller matters, but that in the same Kingdom or Dominion this can never be.

But secondly, By the Church we may understand a National Congregation of
Christian People, divided into many partitions or particular assemblies united
together by an unity of Faith, and Discipline, and Ecclesiastical
Jurisdiction; and this is that which I affirm to be necessary in every Kingdom
or State that would avoid all occasions of public Tumults and Disorders, and
would be as happy either as themselves can wish, or as Christianity designs to
make them.

And therefore this is that unity which is by every Good Christian, good
Citizen, or good Subject, above all things which this world can afford, the
most earnestly to be desired: for the obtaining of which, he is to submit to
every thing that shall be required of him, and he is to abstain from every
thing which is forbidden him; if all things considered, it may lawfully be done
or avoided.

Thirdly, In compliance with those of the Congregationall way, I am content to
allow a third sense of the word Church to be a particular and independent
Congregation governed by Laws and measures of its own, and acknowledging no
Jurisdiction Foreign to it self; and this is a Form of Church Government,
which in a Christian Kingdom or Commonwealth, I affirm to be naturally
unlawful: And here there are two cases to be considered.

First, Either the whole body of the People is divided into such particular and
independent Congregations, or there is a national Establishment from which
these particular Congregations have separated themselves. The first of these is
Babel in Effigy, the very Emblem and Landscape of Confusion, subject to
inconveniences that cannot be thought of till they are felt, and capable of
such infinite sub-divisions as will at length reduce the comely Form of
Government by so many particular interests and factions into a State of public
Hostility and Rapine; for the reason why men separate from one another, is
always out of some real or some pretended dislike, which dislikes by actual
separation, are so far from being composed, that they are manifestly improved
and heightened by it; and from hence arise so many several Interests as there
are Sects or denominations of Parties in a Commonwealth.

For it is natural to all men to desire to gain Proselytes to their own
Opinion, for men to love themselves and those of their own way, and to think of
other men, who are not enrolled in the same list with themselves, if not with a
real hatred, yet with a less esteem and a comparative Aversation, which
whenever a Ball of Interest is thrown between them, will be improved into all
the sad effects of the most desperate Malice and Revenge.

But here to make all sure as I go along, I must repeat again, That by
Independent Congregations, I mean, such as own no Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction
external to themselves; from whence it is easy to perceive that every such
Congregation may be a new Sect and Party by it self; as it was in a manner in
the late Times, when the Sects were spawned in such incredible abundance, that
the Alphabet began to complain of want of Letters to furnish so many different
and disagreeing Parties with names.

Neither is it to be supposed that so many several Factions, notwithstanding
their differences in matters of Religion, shall yet conspire in an uniform
Obedience to the Civil Power, because to be uppermost is that which they all
desire; and since the very same persons are members of the Commonwealth, and of
a particular Sect or Party, it is ridiculous to hope that the State can ever be
quiet, till all these parties can agree together to be of the same mind; which
is, to make them cease to be what they are.

In the United Provinces, where the greatest Liberty is given and taken of any
other Territory in the Christian World, the peace of the public could not be
secured, if it were not for the Overballance of the Calvinisticall Party above
the rest; for the Calvinists, as Sir William Temple in his Observations upon
the United Provinces takes notice, p. 204. make up the body of the People, and
are possessed of all the public Churches in the Dominions of the State as well
as of the only Ministers or Pastors, who are maintained by the public, who
have no other Salaries than what they receive from the State, upon whom they
wholly depend; and for that reason they will be sure to preach obedience and
submission to the People.

But yet notwithstanding this, so great has the power and interest of the
Louvestane or Arminian Party always been, that it has been the occasion of
great revolutions among them; and as it was probably one of the main causes of
their so sudden fall from the height of envy into the lowest region of pity and
despair within the compass of a very few years, so it is to be feared that in
not many more (the animosities between a Calvinist and whoever differs from him
being irreconcilable and everlasting) it will prove the ruin of that once
powerful, but now declining State.

Neither was there any thing in the late unhappy times, next to the Title of an
incomparable Prince, to whom the Scepter of these Kingdoms did of right belong,
and the Affections of a loyal Party, which all the republican Cruelties were
not able to extinguish, that contributed so much to put a period to the
Usurpation, which was never established upon any certain bottom, as the
bandying of the several Factions against one another; which made it both
necessary for the Usurpers to support their power by the Sword, and that Sword
it self not being all of it of the same metal, and the Army that was to wield
it, being it self cantoned into Sects and Factions, they began at length not to
understand one another language, but were forced to leave working any longer,
and to desist from building that Babel of Religion, cemented with blood instead
of mortar, which is inconsistent with the quiet of the Earth, and by which men
in vain expect to climb to Heaven.

It is a prodigious thing for a man to consider what irreconcilable feuds the
smallest differences in Religion have created, and still the smaller those
differences are, the higher usually are those animosities that are produced by
them, as if it were the nature and genius of mankind to make up in passion what
they want in reason; as the Turks and Persians, though agreeing in all other
parts of the Mohammedan Superstition, yet about a very small Punctilio they are
at mortal jars with one another; and, being so near neighbors as they are,
they never want an opportunity of expressing their resentments by the frequent
and bloody Wars betwixt those two formidable Empires.

The Calvinists pursue the Lutherans and Arminians, who on their own parts are
not wanting to retaliate the kindness, with every whit as great if not greater
hatred than those who do toto coelo errare, the Popish, I mean, the Mohammedan
and the Pagan World; nay, so apt are men to fall out with one another, that the
most inconsiderable niceties of difference that can be conceived, when they are
used as marks of distinction, when men shall obstinately persist in such
discriminations, and when they shall place an opinion or affectation in them,
will produce in them a dislike and aversation for one another; and, let the
difference be never so small, yet it will always be true to the World's end
that, Birds of a feather will flock together; so many distinctions as there
are, bating those distinctions which Trade and Functions and the Necessities of
humane life have made for the mutual support and maintenance of each other, so
many several Parties and Factions you shall have in that Commonwealth or
Kingdom where those distinctions are found.

Though in this case it will always happen, that the smaller Fishes will
associate and unite together against the Leviathan or prevailing Party, that
overballances the rest, but when that King of the Waters is destroyed, they
will then begin to prey upon one another, and contend which of them shall
ingross the Dominion of the Seas, which is the case of all the Republican
Factions against the Church of England at this day; though as well reason as
former sad experience may instruct us, when they have obtained their end, if
ever they do obtain it, which God forbid, what miserable work they will make of
it among themselves.

It is to be confessed indeed that there are abroad very great heats and
contentions to be found, which are not of such dangerous consequence to the
public Peace, such as are those feuds, which will never be extinguished,
betwixt the Seculars and the Regulars, and betwixt the regular Fraternities
with one another; and, I believe, there are but very few monastic Societies
will be found that are at peace within themselves; of which, and of the causes
of it, which I have well considered, I could say more, if it would not be a
digression; but whether it be that common obedience which they pay their Holy
Father the Pope, which keeps them in somewhat better order, or, that being men
of a single life, not encumbred with any secular interest or concern, their
animosities cannot so easily embroile the State as those who have a greater
interest in it, and who may with a better countenance pursue secular designs
than they can do; or, whether it be that the Laiety think it not worth their
while, any further than it is matter of common entertainment and discourse, to
take any part in the quarrels of Beadesmen and of Beggars; or whether it be
that their contentions are not of such a popular nature as to have an influence
upon any but themselves who make them; or that the perpetual austerities of
their respective rules, which are a constant emploiment to them, hinder them
from being capable of prosecuting any dangorous design, with that address and
diligence which is requisite to its success; or that all the heat of these
contentions is spent, by men that know better how to use their tongues than
swords, in complaints to the Pope, and in writing against and censuring one
another; or, lastly, whether it be that their way of life in the retirement of
their cloisters, and in the little formalitie of their cells, and convents
renders them unexperienced in affairs, listless and unactive in business, and
unfit to do any great good or mischief in the World; or whatever the true
reason be, there is no question but they are found by long experience, by
giving an example of poverty and contentment, and by the reputation of their
sanctity and holiness of life to be rather an advantage than detriment to the
places where they are suffered, and they make sufficient amends for their
intestine divisions, by their being united together in the Papal Interest and
in the support of the Romish Tyranny over the Consciences of men.

But let the reason be what it will, it is certain that no reason can justify
the lawfullness of separate and independent Congregations in a Christian
Commonwealth or Kingdom, which are in their own nature, and have been found so
by experience, to be so destructive to the welfare and happiness of the World,
which are so big with inconveniences not to be foreseen till they are felt,
which are surrounded on every side with infinite and unspeakable dangers, to
which no possible remedy can be applied, but by the removal of their necessary
cause, and by destroying the Independencie it self, that I make no scruple to
pronounce it as a self-evident Maxim, that an aggregate of separate and
disunited Congregations, unaccountable to one another or to any superior
temporal Head invested with a power of Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction and Censure,
is contrary to the Law of Nature, destructive of the Peace of the World, and of
the design of Christianity it self, which is to engage men in closer
obligations of unity and friendship with one another, and therefore ought not
to be tolerated in a Christian State no more than Atheism or Infidelity
themselves; it being the extremity of Nonsense and religious Folly to allow
that Charity, Good will and Peace are the indispensable duties of a Christian;
nay, the characteristick indications of his being Christ's Disciple; that God
is Love, and that whosoever loves not his brother whom he has seen, cannot
possibly love God whom he has not seen; and yet, that that Form of Church
Government is, I will not say of divine Institution, but of divine Permission,
which is in its very nature and essential constitution so exactly fitted to
bring the World into Confusion and Disorder.

And so I have done with the first Case, which supposes the whole Body of a
People to be parcell'd out into many distinct and independent Congregations.
Give me leave now to speak a very little to the second, which presumes only a
Separation of one or more Congregations from the Body of the National Church,
setting up a new Authority of its own, and disowning the Jurisdiction of the
public: which second Case differs only in proportion from the first, and will
of necessity labor with all those ill consequences in its degree and measure
with which the first is encumbered; and, it being much easier for small things
to increase than to begin, the consequences at the long run will be exactly the
same, if the Government, by a wise temperament of Care and Courage, do not put
a timely stop to the progress of such ill boding beginnings.

Into such separate Assemblies as these all the ill humors of the Body politic
will naturally flow, thither the unfortunate, the discontented, the covetous
and the ambitious will betake themselves, to seek revenge against real or
imaginary wrongs, to repair the decaies and ruins of a broken fortune, to
satisfy the craving circumstances of poverty and want, and to fill up the wide
capacity of immodest, unreasonable and unjust desires at the expense of the
public welfare, security and quiet.

Neither are such Conventicles as these dangerous only to the Civil Peace, by
being the natural causes of embroilment and disturbance, the very sinks and
commonshores into which all bad humors disembogue themselves and find a welcome
entertainment, while the simplicity of some suffers it self, under the specious
pretenses of an extraordinary zeal, to be misled and carried away captive by
the designing Hypocrisy of others; but, which is still worse, they have a no
less pleasing aspect upon Religion it self, which either by the infinite
pretenses to greater purity, a most absurd and foolish cause of Separation,
which knows no Law, and will admit no bounds, they refine so long till they
have utterly lost it; or by a most impious and unreasonable claim to I know not
what Gospel Liberty, they get at last to be Libertines indeed, and are placed
as far above the reach of Ordinances as those Ordinances themselves, by their
design and use for the preservation of Love and Unity in the Church, by their
Divine institution and appointment, and by the supernatural Grace which is
exhibited and conveyed by a due and worthy participation of them, are placed
above the blasphemous contempt of such profane and dissolute Wretches.

But I would by no means be so far misunderstood, as if I were so uncharitable
as to think that all, or so much as the greatest part of those that separate,
do it out of any bad design; for I am not only morally certain of the
contrary, as to the much greater number of the People, but as to the Pastors
themselves, if that be any credit for them; I dare be confident, in very many
instances, that the blind lead the blind, and that they are not sensible of
those dismal inconveniences to which their Separation is naturally exposed; but
in what I have just now said I chiefly reflect upon the sad experience of
former times, which is sufficient to convince us, what the genuine tendencie of
these new models is; and I do no more question that the same causes, if
suffered to operate with the same freedom, will have the same effect, than I
do, whether humane nature and humane passions be the same now that they were
twenty or thirty years ago; which Consideration if all well-meaning, but
misguided Christians would seriously lay to heart, I cannot doubt but it would
soon have a very wonderful effect upon the Peace and Settlement of these
distracted Kingdoms, by persuading all that heartily wish the Prosperity of
Sion and pray for the Peace of this our spiritual Jerusalem, to leave their
separate Assemblies, and betake themselves into the bosom of the Church, which
cannot behold so much goodness and sincerity so miserably misled and gone astray
without all the concern that is natural to a distressed, forsaken Mother, and
stands always ready with her arms wide open, and with an entreating voice and
mind to receive them into her most tender and passionate embraces.

Some sort of Unity as to external Discipline is necessary to the consistence
even of those lesser bodies; nay, the Quakers themselves who are much the most
exorbitant of all Parties to be found among us, yet they differ from others,
and agree with one another in nothing more than in a certain Formality peculiar
to themselves: And how much more desirable would it be, that all Parties,
laying aside their respective heats and animosities which under such diversity
of outward forms they so dangerously foment and carry on against each other,
should unite together under one common rule in such a blessed band of Peace and
Love, as would remove all our Jealousies, and prevent all our Fears, and make
every man in the Streets in an unknown Face, to meet his Guide, his Companion,
and his own familiar Friend?

This is my first Answer to the Objection taken from the pretense of a Tender
Conscience, That an Uniformity of one sort or other, is of absolute necessity
to the peace of the Church; which Uniformity since it cannot be obtained,
unless men could all jump into the same mind of themselves, and continue in it
when they had done, it follows unavoidably that there is, and must always be in
the Church a standing Authority, from whence the Sanctions of Discipline and
Order shall receive their obligation.

I come now to give a more particular Answer to the Objection proposed, and in
that, I shall consider in the general what the terms of this Uniformity must
be, or rather what kind of terms they are to which all Christian People are
obliged to submit.

It must be granted therefore, That though an Uniformity in Religious Worship
be that which is above all things in this World the most passionately to be
desired, yet this being only in order to that great End, to which all our
endeavors and counsels ought to be directed, the Eternal happiness and
salvation of our Souls; no terms of Uniformity ought to be submitted to which
are inconsistent with Salvation. And that Church, whatever she is, let her
pretenses to Infallibility and Truth, be never so great, which imposes those
either Opinions or Practices, as the terms of Communion, which are directly
contrary to the word of God, or to the light of Nature and the impartial
dictates of right Reason is by no means to be communicated with any longer; but
we must immediately come out from Her and separate in our own defense, lest we
be made partakers of Her sins and of Her plagues; and in this case it is she
who is guilty of the Schism by necessitating a Separation, not we who separate
when we cannot avoid it.

As to matter of Doctrine, I presume there is no man who calls himself a
Protestant, of what Denomination or Party soever he be, who will charge our
Church with any damnable Error; but on the contrary, there are many of our
Dissenting Brethren, who, when they are taxed with the unpleasant imputation of
propagating very absurd and very unreasonable Opinions, are used to take
Sanctuary in the Articles of the Church of England; of whose Authority, as to
some points, they will pretend themselves to be the only Assertors, with what
Justice, I think I have in part discovered in some other Papers.

As to Ceremonies there are three Restrictions chiefly to be considered, which
if they be all carefully observed in the discipline of any Church, there is no
manner of pretense or ground for Separation upon a Ceremonial account; and
those three Restrictions are these which follow. First, They must not be too
cumbersome and heavy by their number. Secondly, They must not be Superstitious
in their use. Thirdly, They must not be Idolatrous in their direction.

First, They must not be too cumbersome and heavy by their number, for this is
that which eats out the very heart and root of Religion, and takes it off from
being a Devotional exercise of the mind, by turning it into outward Pomp and
Show, which can neither make us better men for the future, nor appease the
wrath of God, or apply to us the merit and satisfaction of Christ for what is
past.

This was that of which St. Austin in his time complained; but yet he did not
think it Lawful to make any breach or disturbance in the Church upon this
account, but rather to take this occasion for the exercise of those two
excellent virtues of Patience and Humility, and expect the good time when this
burden should be removed by the same regular Authoriy that had imposed it.

This was the case of the Mosaic Bondage, especially as that Bondage was
afterward increased by the Pharisaical (...), or by the traditionary Rites and
Usages of the Jewish Church; and this is at this day, and was at the time of
the Reformation, and for many Ages before, the case of the Roman Yoke; from
which the Wisdom and Piety of our Ancestors, has with no less Justice than
Necessity freed us, and placed us in that state of Christian Liberty, which
does not consist of such an exemption from all Ceremonies as some men seem to
desire; which is absurd and impossible in the nature of the thing it self, but
in the choice of such as are best fitted to the ends for which all Ceremonies
ought to be designed, and have the greatest tendency to Edification.

There were other causes upon account of the Ceremonies imposed by the Church
of Rome, which might be sufficient to justify a Separation, of which I shall
speak in the two following Heads.

And though a National or Provincial Church have a Right and Power within it
self of retrenching the superfluities of the Ceremonial part of their Divine
Service, which may very well be done without any Schism or Separation from the
body of the Church abroad, either on the one part or the other: Yet for private
men to separate from the National Establishment, upon pretense that the
Ceremonies are too burdensome or too many, is manifestly unlawful. The reason
is, because this will be liable to the same Inconveniences, to which a
separation upon pretense of greater Purity, is exposed; and in both cases, if
every private man shall be allowed to judge for himself, and to proceed to a
Separation in pursuance of that judgment, so infinite are the humors, the
fancies, the prejudices, the perversities of some men; so fond are they of
Novelty and Change, so apt to control Authority, and so desirous to be
governed only by their own Measures, that there can be no lasting Establishment
in the World, but the Discipline of the Church will be always reeling like a
Drunken Man, and driven to and fro like a Wave of the Sea, by every Capricious
wind of Innovation.

We will suppose for the present, in favor of the Dissenters, because they
cannot prove it, that there are too many Ceremonies in our Church, yet I
presume it will be granted that there are not above four or five, or half a
dozen too many; or if you will, to make it a plump number, and to put the
Objection into better shape, let them be half a score, which I believe upon an
exact computation, will go a great way in the Ceremonies of the Church of
England; and let all these be imposed as indispensable conditions of Communion:
It Is pretty severe I confess, to lay so great a stress upon Indifferent
Matters; but yet certainly no man in his wits will ever pretend that this is
such an intolerable burden, as that he must needs separate rather than
comply; but if there be any that are so hardy to do it, though I will not
discommend them for their courage, a virtue, of which in this contentious Age
we have a great deal of need; yet in my opinion they deserve rather to be
soundly Laughed at, than seriously Confuted.

What has been said of the Churches Power in retrenching the number of her
Ceremonies, the same is likewise true as to the Ceremonies themselves, that
they may from time to time be altered and changed for others in their stead by
the Authority of the Church, as shall seem most Expedient to that public
Wisdom for the great Purpose of Edification; but for every private person to
challenge this Right to himself, is unlawful, because liable to the same
inconveniences, with separating under color of Ceremonious Superfluities, or
of purer Ordinances and purer Worship, which are therefore justly to be
suspected to proceed out of a bad design, because they never can have any end.

Saint Paul, in several places of his Epistles, expresses great tenderness for
the infirmity of the weak Brother, but yet, if the Instances of such his
condescension be examined, they will be found to be of a quite different nature
from those which make up the pretenses of our days, as consisting, first, in
the eating of things sacrificed to Idols, which as looking like a participation
of the table of Devils, and as being expressly prohibited by a temporary Canon
of the Council of Jerusalem, must needs give very great offense and scandal to
the Christians of those days, who did not understand so well as Saint Paul did
that an Idol was nothing, and that the consideration of the Food might well
enough be prescinded from that of the Idol, and that therefore it was lawful
for one who was well grounded in the reason of things and might do it without
offense to any weaker than himself, to eat whatever was sold in the shambles.

From which last cited place of St. Paul we may observe a threefold difference
in the practice of those times as to this Affair. First, There were some, and
they the most perfect Christians, in which number St. Paul himself was, who
would make no scruple of eating the Idolothyta, though they knew them to be
such, so they might do it without scandal to others. Secondly, There were
others who could not justify to themselves the eating of such food; but yet,
by Saint Paul's permission, they would not be at the pains of a solicitous
enquiry, but suffering themselves to remain in ignorance would eat whatsoever
was sold in the shambles, asking no question for conscience sake. Lastly, There
were a third sort, more scrupulous than either of the former, who thought
themselves bound not to eat any manner of meat but what they were sure had not
been sacrificed to Idols, and it is to these especially that Saint Paul's
condescension is with abundance of equity and justice made, because their
scruple was founded not in a Circumstance or Ceremony only, but in a deep
sense of Devotion, and in a jealousy for the Honor of God and Religion.

The second Instance of this Tenderness of St. Paul's is taken from the Jewish
Abstinence from things strangled and from blood, which was not only strictly
enjoined by the Ceremonial law, but also continued and confirmed by the same
temporary Edict of the Jerusalem Synod; and what has been said of Abstaining
from Blood, the same was true likewise of Circumcision, which in some cases was
dispensed with even after Conversion to Christianity; this was the reason why
Paul circumcised Timothy, because of the Jews in the 16th. of the Acts, and it
is his advice in the first to the Corinthians, c. 7. v. 18. Is any man called
being circumcised? let him not become uncircumcised: is any called in
uncircumcision? let him not be circumcised. And then it follows, For
Circumcision is nothing, and uncircumcision is nothing, but the keeping of the
Commandments of God.

What is meant in this place by becoming uncircumcised is needless to my
purpose at present to examine and scarce consistent with Modesty to explain.

But that which is more pertinent to my design at present to take notice of is
this, that in both these instances of abstaining from Blood and of
Circumcision, the case is far different from the scruples of our days; since
it was not the squeamish aversation of a Ceremony, but an obstinate adherence
to the Ceremonial Law on which those scruples were founded, with which
notwithstanding Saint Paul, as it were on purpose to show how little an enemy
he was to Ceremonies was pleased for the time to dispense, although the
retaining of those two Ceremonies in the Church, pursued into those
consequencies of which they were not sensible, did in reality include in it a
Denial of Christ and his Gospel.

For Circumcision, what was it but the Seal of that particular Covenant which
God had entered into with Abraham and his Posterity? whereas now that enclosure
was laid open and that partition wall was broken down; the renting of the vail
in sunder at the instant of our Savior's Passion was to signify the final
abolition, antiquation and repealment of the Abrahamitical Covenant and Mosaic
Law, the Holy of Holies was at that instant laid open, whereinto not only the
High Priest with Sacrifices once a year, but all mankind by virtue of that
great propitiatory Sacrifice which was at that time offered up upon the Cross,
without any other Sacrifice of their own than that of a broken spirit and a
contrite heart might enter and be happy; and there was now ratified a New and
better Covenant, established upon better Promises, whereinto not the Jews
only, but all men that would accept of the conditions of the Gospel, of what
sort or quality or Nation soever they were, whether Jew or Gentile, bond or
free, Greek or Barbarian, had a free and welcome admittance; and it was in this
sense only that the Promise was literally fulfilled to Abraham that his seed
should be as the stars of heaven, and as the sands of the sea shore for number;
that is, not the carnal, but the spiritual seed, which was much larger than the
other; Romans 9. 6, 7, 8. For they are not all Israel which are of Israel:
Neither because they are the seed of Abraham, are they all children, but in
Isaac shall thy seed be called: That is, They which are the children of the
flesh, these are not the children of God: but the children of the promise are
counted for the seed: And again, Gal. 3. 29. If ye be Christ's, then are ye
Abraham's seed, and heirs according to the promise.

The Abstinence from Blood, though it be not so much a Jewish Institution, but
was as old as the Creation it self, and continued all along in force till our
Savior's time; yet then its obligation, together with its reason, was to
cease, the reason given in the Law, which was the same before it, being this;
that God had given it upon the Altar, to be an atonement for the souls of men:
it is manifest therefore, that when the Sacrifice and the Oblation ceased, as
they actually did upon the suffering of the Messiah, as to their efficacy and
virtue, and as the Prophet Daniel had long before expressly prophesied it should
do; I say, when the Sacrifices were no longer allowed in which this legal
Abstinence was founded, it is plain the Obligation to the Abstinence it self
must cease together with it, because, sublata causa tollitur effectus: that
Cause upon which this Abstinence was enjoined being now finally antiquated and
abolished, the Effect of that Cause, which was this Abstinence from Blood, must
of necessity be supposed to be abrogated likewise.

But yet, I know not how it came to pass, not only the converted Jews in the
Apostolical times, but the primitive Christians for many Ages together did
generally abstain from Blood, and this Abstinence has not wanted very learned
Assertors even in our days, Curcelleus has written a particular Diatriba or
Dissertation, De esu sanguinis, wherein he defends this practice, with what
success I leave others to determine, when they shall have considered what I have
here said; to which I will now add, to strengthen the Demonstration, that that
Text of Saint Paul's which I have already cited, whatsoever is sold in the
shambles, that eat, asking no question for conscience sake, may as well refer,
and does as necessarily do so, to a permission of Eating the (...), which we
Translate, things Strangled, and to the Repealment of the prohibition of Blood;
as to the Idolothyta, or things Offered up in Sacrifice upon the Table of
Idols. For they could not eat whatsoever was sold in the Shambles, without
eating many times such meat as was not killed with that exquisite Accuracy for
the draining of the Blood which was peculiar to the Jews, and derived
afterward to the Christians from them.

A particular Instance of this exceeding Care and Solicitude of theirs, we
have 1 Samuel 14. v. 32. And the people flew upon the Spoil, and took Sheep and
Oxen and Calves, and slew them on the ground; and the people did eat them with
the blood; that is, lying upon the ground the Blood could not so easily be
drained out of the Orifice that was made; and besides, the Blood flowing about
them, polluted the the ground where they lay, and defiled the Skins of the
Beasts that were killed, which put the whole Animal in a state of Levitical
Uncleanness; and that which made the touching of Blood to contract a
Defilement, was this, that by the Levitical Sanctions, the Blood was of an
Expiatory nature, and was always Offered up by the express Command of God
before the door of the Tabernacle, as long as the Israelites sojourned in the
Wilderness; and so being spilt by way of Expiation, it was supposed to be
Defiled with the Guilt of the Owner and his Family, who were afterward to
partake of the Flesh, and therefore was Unclean, as all Expiatory Sacrifices
were; as is manifest, not only from the reason of the thing, Expiation being a
Translation of Guilt, and Guilt the cause of Uncleanness, but also from the
Rites of the Sin, and the Trespass Offering; which in some cases were by reason
of their uncleanness to be burnt without the Camp, and the Skins of these
Sacrifices did not belong to the Priest as in some other cases, because they
were unclean.

Now though it is true that after the Children of Israel were settled in the
Land of Canaan, this Custom of bringing all Animals to be slain at the door of
the Tabernacle, was omitted, and indeed was utterly Impracticable by reason of
the great distance of many parts of Judea from the Temple and Tabernacle; yet
notwithstanding, God did not by this lose that Right which he had appropriated
to himself in the Blood, but it was in the nature of a tacit or supposed
Sacrifice in behalf of the Owner, and those that partook with him of the Flesh,
though it were not sprinkled by the Priest before the Lord, as the Law of
Moses, if by reason of Distance it had not been impossible, would have required.

By this it appears how the Beasts that were killed in this place of Samuel,
came to be defiled, and unlawful to be eaten.

Let us now see which was the thing I first intended, what care was taken by
Saul for the redress of this neglect, or at least to make some amends for it,
v. 33, 34. Then they told Saul, saying, Behold the people sin against the Lord
in that they eat with the blood. And he said, ye have transgressed, roll a
great stone unto me this day. And Saul said, disperse your selves among the
people, and say unto them, bring me hither every man his Ox, and every man his
Sheep, and slay them here, and eat; and sin not against the Lord in eating with
the Blood: And all the people brought every man his Ox with him that night, and
slew them there. Nay, it is probable that the Blood was also sprinkled from the
hands of the Priests; for it follows in the next Verse. And Saul built an Altar
unto the Lord, the same was the first Altar that he built unto the Lord.

Now the reason of that Command of his, of rouling a Stone to the place where
the Beasts were to be killed, was this, That they were to be laid athwart it
with their Necks hanging down, that so the blood might flow with the greater
freedom out of the Orifice which was made, and might fall upon the ground
without defiling the Bodies of the Animals themselves; as I have already taken
notice in another Discourse upon a very different Occasion from this, and in
another Language.

The Jews continue Obstinate to this day in a Religious abstinence from Blood,
notwithstanding their Temple be demolished, and they do not so much as pretend
to any thing of Sacrifice till it be rebuilt; and I know a Learned Jew, with
whom I had for some years a particular acquaintance, who was so scrupulous in
this point, that he would never eat any kind of Flesh which he had not killed
himself.

But before I pass any further, I will take notice of one cause of Saint Paul's
Condescension, as to the business of Abstinence from Blood, which I did not
think of before. And that is, That besides what I have said of its Levitical
Pollution, which it seems they that were the Patrons of this Opinion, did not
apprehend to be abolished by the fulfilling of all those legal Sacrifices in
and by the Sacrifice of Christ; they considered further, that God having
appropriated the Blood to himself; which Property and Right of his they did not
conceive him ever to have relinquisht, they looked upon it as a kind of
Sacrilege to seed upon Blood; and therefore abstained from it upon the same
Pious principle, upon which they would have abstained from Robbing of Hospitals
or Colleges, or from Pilfering the Ornaments of Churches, and seizing the
Revenues of the Ecclesiastical State; a sort of Piety so necessary to the
honor of God, and to the prosperity and happiness of the Church, that it ought
by no means to be discouraged, though in a mistaken Instance; much more if
Saint Paul himself foresaw, which we cannot tell but he might, that
Sacrilegious humor of the Saints which our times have experienced, when the
Church was swallowed up at one Morsel, and the Kingdom at another; when all
that was Sacred and Devoted to the service of Almighty God, was converted to
profane uses by Thieves and Robbers in the disguise of Saints; with as little
reason as that for which Dionysius of Syracuse divested Apollo of his Golden
Ornaments, upon Pretense that they were too heavy and too hot for Summer, and
that in Winter they would not keep him warm.

We see therefore that it was not a bare Infirmity without any color or
pretext of Reason that was dispensed with in these cases; for such
Dispensations if they be once allowed, there can be no end but Confusion and
the utter Subversion of all manner of Government and Order. We see upon what
reasons and prejudices these Scruples were founded, and how necessary it was at
that time to Comply with them: We see likewise that they were not matters of
small Weight and Moment, they were not things looked upon on both sides to be
of an indifferent nature, they were not Controversiae de Nugis Siculis and
Gerris Germanis, de foliis Farfari aut Naevii Butubatis, de umbra Asini, aut de
lana Caprina, they were not matters of mere Ceremony and Show, matters of
External Discipline and Form, that exercised the tenderness and infirmity of
those times. Those Babes in Christ that were but newly initiated into the
Christian Faith, and had as yet tasted only the sincere milk of the Word,
without adventuring upon stronger meats, were yet better fed and better taught,
than to quarrel about Indifferent Matters, or to Control their Governors in
things of Public Decency and Order. But the instances of their Scrupulosity,
were founded in such things as they looked upon to be in themselves Offenses of
the highest nature against the express Commands of God, against the honor of
his Name, against the entire and incommunicable respect which is due from all
Creatures both in Heaven and Earth to his Adorable Majesty and Greatness, and
against the indispensable duties of natural Reason and Religion; in which
though they were never so much mistaken, yet these were Scruples not of small
Concernment, but of the highest Consequence and Importance; and St. Paul did
therefore comply with the Infirmity and with the mistakes of those Good Men,
not barely to gratify a squeemish Fancy, which is out of love with things for
no reason and without any end; but lest by opposing Prejudices so deeply rooted
in matters of so extraordinary a nature as these were, they might be tempted to
an Apostasy from the Christian Faith, which did impose burdens upon them which
their Consciences, not being yet sufficiently informed of the true extent of
that liberty which Christ had purchased for them, could not possibly bear; for
this reason, it was Saint Paul's rule to become all things to all men, that he
might save the more; and he despensed with them in some cases out of mere
necessity, that his Brother, for whom Christ dyed, might not be destroyed, by
Relapsing to Judaism on the one hand, or Idolatry on the other: As our Learned
Mr. Thorndike, and out of him the Accurate and Industrious Doctor Falkner, have
observed. And this latter case of Idolatry was therefore the more tenderly to
be regarded, because the Author to the Hebrews speaking of this very business,
tells us, c. 6. v. 4, 5, 6. It is impossible for those who were once
enlightened, and have tasted of the heavenly Gift, and were made partakers of
the Holy Ghost, and have tasted the good word of God, and the powers of the
World to come, if they shall fall away to renew them again unto repentance,
seeing they Crucify to themselves the Son of God afresh, and put him to an open
shame. And St. John in his first Epistle c. 5. v. 16. tells us there is a sin
unto death: I do not say that he, that is our Brother, shall pray for it; that
is, there is great danger that his Prayers will never be heard in behalf of
such a person; and what that Sin is he afterward explains v. 21. Little
Children keep your selves from Idols. And this is likewise very suitable to the
practice of the Church in the Primitive times, who upon any such Relapse to
Idolatry, were not used to receive the Apostate, though giving all imaginable
demonstrations of Repentance, into the bosom of that Church, which he had
forsaken, by Sacramental Absolution, sometimes at the very instant of Death,
and sometimes not till then; as is manifest from the case of Serapio, and
others.

However, since Peace is the thing above all others, the most to be prized and
valued, and with the greatest passion and earnestness to be desired; since no
kind of discipline or external Form is any further necessary or so much as
lawful than it shall be found to Contribute to this blessed end, since Rites
and Ceremonies established in the Church, are in themselves of a changeable
nature, and since our Church her self has openly and expressly declared, that
she is no longer desirous to retain all or any of them than they shall be found
expedient for Edification; I should not be against closing with any
Proposition, let it be almost what it will, by which a lasting Peace and
Settlement might be obtained.

And because I think there are but three ways to be thought of in order to this
end. The first of which is a Toleration of those that differ from us in their
several differences and distinctions. The second, an Alteration of those
Customs and Usages which are excepted against for others in their stead. And
the third, an Abatement or Abolition of those Ceremonies which are scrupled
without any Reparation by the Substitution of others in their room: Therefore I
shall speak very briefly to each of these particulars.

And first, A Toleration as it is commonly understood, is a Liberty from the
Government for every man to say and do as he pleases in Religious matters for
Conscience sake; or upon account of a tender Conscience which cannot submit it
self to the public Rule; and such a Toleration as this is, I affirm to be
directly and positively unlawful, because it cuts the sinews of Government in
pieces, and lets the Rains loose to all manner of misrule and disorder: For the
truth of which I need only appeal to the Experience of former times, when by
such an unbounded Toleration, the Kingdom was put into such a floating and
uncertain Posture, that we had almost as many alterations in Government, as
there were Sects and Parties that were to obey.

The Presbyterians, when time was, having shaken off the Episcopal Yoke, as
they were pleased, if not to think, yet at least to pretend it to be; were as
much for Uniformity as other men, and urged the very same Arguments with great
Judgment and Reason, against the Independency, which may now with irresistible
Force be retorted upon themselves; as the Most Reverend and Incomparably
Learned, the Excellent Dean of Saint Paul's, a singular Ornament and strong
Support of the English Church and State against their Enemies of both kinds,
has very Wisely, and like himself, Observed.

Nay, to what excess of Riot a Toleration in its utmost Latitude will proceed,
the extravagancies either in Opinion or Practice, or both, of the Antinomians,
the Seekers, the Quakers, the Ranters, the Sweet-Singers, and the Family of
Love, are a sufficient witness; most of whose Opinions as they proceed only
from Ignorance, or Melancholy, or a worse cause, a Life ill spent, or a desire
to spend it amiss for the future; so the Debaucheries and the Obscenities of
some of these Sects which I have named, under a pretense of I know not what
Liberty, are so great and so horrid, that I should not have believed it, if I
had received it from any other information than that of some who pretended with
abundance of asseveration, and in a Company not easily to be imposed upon to
speak their own certain knowledge, and who, I have great reason to believe,
would not go about to deceive either me or any other man whatsoever.

Or if it be thought too grating to reflect with so great, and, which is still
worse, so just and so deserved a Severity upon the Miscarriages of our own Age,
upon Religious Pretenses; you may then consult the Annals of Antiquity; and
then Epiphanius and Irenaeus will tell you, if you consult them, that there was
no Crime so horrid, nor any unnatural Beastliness so detestable to humane
Nature, not yet corrupted and depraved by vicious habits, which the Gnostics,
the Basilidians, and the Valentinians did not practice; the instances of their
execrable turpitude being so horrid and so filthy, that I remember when I first
read them, which I did in the laborious Annals of the most learned Cardinal and
Jesuit, Caesar Baronius, I could not believe he had quoted his Authors
aright; and when upon a more narrow search into the business I found he had not
deceived me, I was amazed, and could scarce believe my own eyes, and to this
day am very loath to believe, for the respect I bear to Mankind, that they are
true.

But if such Exorbitances in our Age, or any other, be the effects of Liberty,
whether tolerated by others, or assumed upon what Pretenses soever to our
selves, then certainly, since humane Nature is always the same, and being
allowed the same scope, will always be guilty of the same or like Enormities,
which, by the prevalence of bad example, and by the addition of impunity to
temptation will always increase, instead of taking up within a dutiful
compass of Sobriety and Moderation, such an unbounded Liberty as this ought
always, by the utmost Severity of public Justice, to be repressed, and
punished, and restrained.

Neither must we be so vain to pretend, because such Enormities are not now
usually practiced among those that pretend to an higher degree of Saintship
than their Neighbors, that therefore they never will; for we must not take our
measures from the present state of things, but we are to consider what would
follow upon the Dissolution of the Government, to which these separate
Congregations have a clear and a natural tendency in themselves, and then we
will suppose, if you please, that such Libertines as these, if upon such
infinite Pretenses they do not separate themselves, shall be expelled the
respective Congregations to which they belong; but there being no public
Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, who shall hinder them from associating into a
Confederacy with one another? to which all that live as if there were no God,
or have a desire to live as if there were no Government in the World will
immediately unite themselves, and betake themselves thither for Protection, as
to a Sanctuary of Liberty and Riot.

To say that such things will never happen is as much as to say they never did;
for whatever has been may be again, when humane Nature which is always the
same shall be joined to the same unhappy circumstances of Affairs.

To say that these things, though they should happen, will never be of any
dangerous consequence to the public, because the common Interest of Mankind
will always keep a prevailing Party in better order, is to set bounds to a bad
example, and to the corruption of manners which is impossible; and besides, to
proceed upon this presumption, without taking that course which is in its own
nature the best fitted to prevent any such public mischief, which can only be
done by a regular and orderly Discipline, is to lean so much upon humane
probabilities and upon our selves, that it is an high provocation to Almighty
God to withdraw his Grace, without which it is impossible for any of us to
persevere in a constant and steady course of Virtue.

But we will suppose for once, let what Toleration will be granted, that things
will never proceed to this extretremity; but it is still to be considered that
all these separate Congregations are Imperium in Imperio, there being in a
manner so many several Societies as there are several and independent
Congregations, without any foreign Appeal, or Judge in Ecclesiastical matters;
for at this rate it shall be at the Liberty of every private Pastor to preach
what Doctrine he pleases, be it never so much to the disturbance of the
Government of the public, as some of them do at this time take a most
unpardonable liberty in their Sermons: But if it be lawful for the Government
to assume to it self a Judgment of what Doctrines tend most to the
Establishment of its peace and safety, it is much more lawful for it to
concern it self in matters of Discipline, which are not in themselves of so
great moment, and which notwithstanding being left undetermined will have the
same effects; which it is for the interest of the World they should be adjusted
after an uniform manner, and in which the Gospel has left no rule, whereby we
are to manage and govern our selves.

If the Government where we live shall impose such things upon our Belief and
Practice as are inconsistent with Salvation, contrary to the duties of natural
and revealed Religion, and repugnant to such Propositions of Belief as are
expressly revealed in the Scriptures of the New Testament; then all we have to
do is, to suffer patiently, as our glorious Predecessors, the Apostles and the
primitive Christians did, and we shall certainly have our reward in Heaven for
so doing; but if we suffer only for breaking the Rules of decency and order,
which have been found by experience to be so necessary to the public Peace,
and which have no other tendencie, meaning or design, but in order to this end,
unless we can allege reasonably what I shall by and by insist upon, that there
is Superstition or Idolatry involved in our obedience, this is not Persecution
but Punishment, we suffer either like Fools or Madmen, or, what is worse than
either of these, like Boutefeus, Incendiaries and Disturbers of the quiet of
mankind, and must not expect either the Title or the Reward of Confessors or
Martyrs.

I reckon there are three Causes especially of the present Nonconformity from
the established Discipline of the Church of England.

The First is, The Ambition, or Necessity, or Discontent of some bad men who
know very well what Advantages may be made for the promotion of any ill Designs
by a Separation; neither is it any matter whether such persons be all of them
actually listed in some separate Assembly, so they do but abet and favor those
that are; but rather by paying a personal obedience to the Authority of the
Church, which they would have not destroyed, but enlarged, by breaking down
that Wall of partition to which we have no right, because the Dissenters have
built it upon their own ground, by endeavoring to let in the Trojan Horse of
Fanaticism through the Breaches of the Church, by very specious, but very
destructive and pernicious Pretenses of moderation and comprehension, and such
other hard names, which can only be understood by being felt; by a pretended
tenderness of dis-uniting Protestants, and yet at the same time uncharitably
representing the best Defenders of the Reformation under the odious and
invidious Characters of Papists or Popishly affected; by questioning the
Jurisdiction of the Bishops in temporal causes, that by that means they may
weaken their Ecclesiastical Power, by striking at the King through the sides of
his loyal and well-affected Clergy; and by doing all this and a great deal more
out of a dissembled Zeal for Unity and Peace, and out of a passionate Concern
for the Honor and Safety of the King and Church, they do abundantly more
mischief than either the Dissenters themselves, or they who are the most
unmanageable and indiscreet in the expressions of a bitter and unchristian
Animosity against them; because these, as being prejudiced and professed
Parties, will not be heard so equally on both sides.

Secondly, a second Cause, though indeed in the order of causality it may well
enough deserve the first place, of the Continuance of such an unnatural
Separation among us, notwithstanding there is so little or rather nothing at
all to be said in justification of so prejudicial and so unwarrantable a
Practice, is the Necessity or Revenge of those who at the happy revolution of
his Majesty's return, like the rising of the Sun, with healing in his wings to
heal the Sores of three divided Kingdoms, being ejected in great numbers out of
those Livings and Benefices of which they were then possessed, being unable to
digg, unless it were in the Vineyard, and being ashamed to beg; being desirous
to reak their Revenge upon the Government, which had ejected them only for
that reason, because it could not trust them, and because they would not obey
it; being tainted with the Leaven of the good old Cause; being soundly seasoned
with Democratical and Demagogical Principles of which it is very hard for a
thorough Commonwealth's man, especially when he is no Philosopher, to rid
himself; being in some small hopes, as drowning men are when they catch at a
Reed, of reaping a new Harvest out of the Church Lands and out of the Spoils of
the Crown; being encouraged and abetted by men of like Principles and Practices
and Circumstances with themselves, by good old Officers that had been in
Commission, by Proprietours that had lost those Tenements and Hereditaments
that never were their own, by inconsiderate Women that are naturally fond of
Saintship and Persecution, by Men that were Bigots to a Party, or Dependents
upon an Interest, that wanted a Wife, or would oblige a Chapman, or insinuate
themselves into a Last Will and Testament; by the Women's caressing their
Husbands, and the Husbands persuading their Wives; by causes that cannot be
justified, and causes that must not be named, the black Fraternity of the short
robe were at length so far emboldened, as, notwithstanding the Severity of
those wholesome Laws, whose edge was rebated by the fatal Clemency of a too
Gracious Prince, toward men that ought not to be trusted, and cannot be
obliged, to own and justify a Separation, which is now grown to that excessive
height, that the Contention is no longer about Liberty, but Dominion; they
break the Laws openly, without regard to Justice or to Shame, and to propagate
a Succession of Law-breakers like themselves, they have ordained an Under-wood
of Nonconforming Shrubs, who will in time grow up to be Cedars of Rebellion,
and come by the Priesthood much by the same right and title that Oliver came by
the Protectourship, or Trincalo by his Dukedom: So that it is now with the
Dissenters as it was with the Israelites in Jeroboam's time, they have their
separate Assemblies and their distinct Altars, their Priests, not of the
Levitical or Aaronical Tribe, much less of the more perfect Melchisedecian
Order, but of the dreggs and refuse of the People, and Calves in abundance, the
Idols of the Faction, as far as from Dan to Bethel.

But Thirdly, a third Cause of that dangerous Nonconformity which prevails
among us is, a certain sort of Opiniatrity, or Affectation, or Newfangleness
which in all Ages usually possesses the ordinary sort of People, by which they
are always apt to quarrel an find fault with the present Establishment, let it
be never so wholesome; and if it were not for this Cause, the other two Causes
which I have mentioned would want a subject upon which to work: but certainly,
if men would seriously consider with themselves how dangerous all Innovations
in the general are, and how destructive oftentimes to the public Peace; how
little most of them are like to get by Innovation, and how much they may lose;
how small and inconsiderable, how unreasonable and unwarrantable the present
Differences are; how necessary it is there should be some Establishment, and
how impossible that any should please all; and that this is but to perpetuate
quarrels by the nicety of some and the design of others, from one generation to
another without any measure, moderation or end, to the inexpressible and
unconceivable disturbance of the World; they would not then think it worth
their while to lose the Quiet of their own minds, their Charity for others, and
the good opinion of others for them, to crumble into Sects and Parties, to
embroil us in infinite and inextricable Difficulties at home, and to expose us
to the unavoidable Dangers of a foreign yoke, and a foreign Religion from
abroad; only to gratify the Designs of proud, or discontented, or necessitous
men; to feed Contempt and Ignorance themselves, and to cloth Want of loyalty,
learning, good nature and good manners.

It is true indeed, that the Wisdom of this World is Foolishness with God, and
that the Wisdom of God is Foolishness with this World, and that they are
opposite the one to the other; but then by the Wisdom of this World, is meant,
that Carnal Mind that has a greater consideration for a Temporal Interest,
than for the Interest of Truth and Virtue; for the Commands of God, or the
precepts of the Gospel; but that men that have little or no Learning of their
own, and yet are unassisted by those extraordinary helps of Utterance and
Supernatural Illumination with which the Apostolical times were furnished; men
that are so far from understanding what Reason is, that they decry it; men that
are steered wholly by considerations of Interest, by impulses of Passion, by an
habit of Prejudice and a principle of Revenge; that these of all others should
be thought the fittest to Instruct the People, and to have the care and conduct
of such precious things as are the Souls of men committed to their Charge; that
these should be thought worthy to be the instruments of our Confusion, who have
neither the wit nor the honesty to make us Happy, who design us no Good, and
can do us none if they did design it; is a thing which I am very confident,
will find no manner of countenance from Scripture, and is utterly unable to
plead the least shadow of a Grant or Commission from above.

An unlimitted Toleration must of necessity be unlawful, if any thing be;
because it contradicts the design for which all Laws are made, and that is
nothing else but to secure the Peace and Quiet of the World; which must needs
be very inconsistent with an unlimitted Toleration, by which nothing else is or
can be meant, but a Liberty for every man to do or say as he pleases, so he
do it upon a Religious account, or out of a Principle of Conscience, of which
himself is the only judge in this case: to say otherwise, being to constitute
such a foreign Appeal, is altogether incompetible with such a toleration.

Now if it can be proved that the allowance of separate and independent
Congregations, without any Jurisdiction in Ecclesiastical affairs, Foreign to
themselves, is such an unlimitted Toleration in it self, and will prove so in
its Effects; then I suppose it will be granted, that all such Separate
Assemblies are unlawful; and consequently, that a Toleration of them cannot be
allowed by the Chief Magistrate, or by the Legislative Power, without a
Dissolution of the Government, and a betraying of that Trust which is reposed
in them for the preservation of the public Peace.

What if an Holder-forth in a Separate Assembly, shall teach his Auditors that
they owe no subjection to any Earthly Prince, that Rebellion is expressly
dispensed with in the Charter of the Saints; that Adultery, and Sacrilege, and
Theft, and Murder, themselves; though in the Wicked and the Unregenerate, they
be horrid crimes; yet they are a part of the privilege of the Elect, that all
sorts of swearing are in the Reprobate unlawful; but that Perjury it self, in
such as are sanctified and made Partakers of that new Birth by which so many
Monsters are brought into the World, may be not only Lawful, but Pious and
Commendable, and in some cases an indispensable Duty?

Shall the Government in this Case, Shall Civil or Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction
be allowed to Interpose, by punishing such Profligate and such Insolent
Wretches, and by forbidding under severe Penalties the venting of any such
Doctrines for the future, which tend so manifestly to withdraw his Majesty's
liege People from their Obedience, and to the unspeakable peril and hazard of
their immortal Souls? If thus much be not allowed, then all things must run to
Confusion; and if it be, then if the regulalation of Discipline be found by
experience to be as necessary to the public Welfare, to the peace of the
Kingdom, and to the preservation of Charity and Friendship among men; without
which it is hardly possible there should be any such thing as true and
acceptable Religion: then certainly it does as much belong to, and is as
necessary a part of Civil and Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, as the other.

I know but two things that can possibly be urged against the irresistible
force of so plain a Demonstration: I call it a Demonstration, because it will
prove so when those Objections are considered. First, It may be pretended that
there is no danger, such Doctrines will ever be preached. And secondly, That a
Difference grounded merely upon matters of Discipline, will never produce those
bad Effects that are pretended.

In answer to the first, there are but two things to be said, the first is an
Argument from Reason, the second from Experience. Reason tells us, and so does
Experience too, for they cannot well be separated in this case, that men are
naturally subject to seek excuses first to palliate, and then arguments to
defend those Vices to which they find themselves addicted, and of which they
are known to be scandalously guilty, or which they would practice for the
future without control.

The Drunkard, he puts his excess to the account of his friendship and good
nature; the Lustful plead a perpetual inclination as a natural call to
enjoyment; the Covetous man is desirous of the character of Provident and
Frugal; and the Ambitious would be thought a man of a lofty and heroique mind;
but nothing is so great a plea for Libertinism and Licentiousness of all sorts
whatsoever, as when it is made an Instance of Christian Liberty, and a Freedom
from the Yoke of Ordinances; to which none but Jews and Formalists, and the
tame Vassals of the dead Letter are subject.

There is no question to be made, but there are very bad People to be found in
all Parties, let the Pretenses to Religion be what they will; but it is not my
business at present to upbraid any with their sinful practices, so they do not
own the Principles from whence those practices proceed.

But what shall we think of the Gnostics of old time, that made adulterous and
incestuous mixtures, and promiscuous coitions a part of their Religion? or, of
the Family of Love, that do the same? or, of the Sweet singers, that drink Ale
and puff Tobacco to excess in their very religious Assemblies? or, of the
Reformers of this last Age, that thought they did God good service by robbing
his Church and persecuting his Servants to death, and banishment, and
confiscation of goods? or, of the received Maxim of those blessed times,
Dominium fundatur in gratia, that is, The longest Sword has the best Title? or,
of the Fifth monarchists of England? of the incredible Impudence and Villainy
of the religious Incendiaries in Scotland? of the Zealots among the Jews, the
exact Patterns of the Zealots of our days, of whom Josephus relates such
prodigious Stories? of Theudas or Theodosius and his Followers, and of Judas of
Galilee or Judas Gaulonites and his Accomplices, in the Acts of the Apostles?
all which, under several religious Pretenses, have in time past, or do at
present endeavor to set up for themselves, and shake off the Yoke of obedience
to their lawful Superiors, to their liege Lords and rightful Masters. What
sort of People in the World are so arbitrary as these, who yet are the loudest
Declamours not only against Arbitrary Power, but against all Power but their
own? The Papists themselves are not more bloody than they, nor any of the
persecuting Emperors more powerfully acted and possessed by a Spirit of
bitterness and persecution. To conclude; Did not the Levellers preach Community
of goods, according to the primitive example, (though the reason of that
practice be now utterly ceased) and to reduce the natural state of things, when
all things lay in common, before either Industry or Arts began? and what is
this but a more religious method of Picking of Pockets and Breaking open Houses
and Robbing upon the Highway? What was it but a new Invention of those
pilfering Saints, to give Thieves and Robbers, like themselves, a right to the
glorious Title and Reward of Martyrdom?

Now if all these Mischiefs and Inconveniences are owing perfectly to separate
Congregations, and to men's embodying themselves into particular Ecclesiastical
Societies distinct from the public Discipline and Rule; if such Opinions and
Practices cannot better be promoted than by independent methods, nor otherwise
or at least better be prevented than by an uniform and regular Discipline of
the Church; then is it abundantly manifest that such separate Congregations, as
tending plainly to the disturbance of the World, are unlawful; that they may,
and that they ought to be suppressed; and that all the Favorers and Abettors
of such unlawful Assemblies, are Promoters, Aiders, Comforters and Assisters
of Rebellion and Disobedience both against God and Man.

Neither is it at all material in this case, that many of those who frequent
these separate Assemblies, nay, to give them their due, the infinitely greatest
part of them, are not conscious to themselves of any such bad Design, but they
do it only out of a religious prejudice which they have conceived against the
Establishment of the Church of England, and out of an opinion which they have
of the greater Sanctity of their Teachers, and Purity of those Ordinances of
which they are made partakers by their ministration, out of a real and an
hearty zeal for God, although that zeal be not according to knowledge, yet we
are not to consider so much what it is they design, as what the natural
tendencie of all Separation is, which, because by experience it is found to
bring so great and so horrid inconveniences and mischiefs upon the World,
unless it be timely restrained, it may, and it must of necessity have very bad
effects; and this is enough to make men guilty of the consequences of their
Separation, though at first they did not intend them. He that commits a fault
through want of consideration is not altogether so guilty as he that knowing it
to be a fault, does yet notwithstanding commit it on set purpose; but yet he is
guilty in his proportion and degree as well as the other, because it was his
duty to consider better, and still the more easy it is too for a man to inform
himself: (and what is or can be more manifest than the Prejudice arising from
men's embodying themselves into particular and independent Societies?) So much
the greater is the guilt arising from the want of due heed and consideration,
because a very little attention would have served the turn, when there is so
much reason in the thing, and so much experience to improve that reason into
all the certainty of demonstration.

But secondly, It will be said, That a bare difference in the externals of
Religion, in matters of mere Discipline and Ceremony, will not produce those
bad effects that are pretended; and I wish with all my heart, that there were
as much truth in this Exception as they that make it would have it seem to
have; but, by Experience, which is the great Judge in this Controversy, to
which we must apply our selves for the discovery of the truth, the contrary
does but too manifestly appear. For what is it that has been the true source
and fountain of all our public Calamities, that has made so dreadful and so
terrible Convulsions both in Church and State, but an overheated zeal against
Ceremonies and public Order, which sort of zeal, if it be tolerated, the
strength and beauty of the Church is lost, by every man's pursuing fancies of
his own, or siding with a new model of a particular Party instead of joining
in the regular and uniform Worship of the public, which is at once an instance
of our Obedience to the Divine and Humane Laws, and a certain expedient of
Unity and Peace with one another; but if this zeal, instead of being tolerated,
shall be restrained and opposed, then it immediately complains of Persecution,
and would have its sufferings thought as meritorious for raising unreasonable,
insatiable and eternal Scruples, as if the Cause of Christianity it self were
at stake, as if it were the being of a God or the immortality of the Souls of
men that were denied by us, and asserted only by the Dissenters from the
public Order and Rule.

So that either way the inconvenience is in a manner equal, a Toleration has a
manifest tendencie to the subversion of the Government both in Church and
State, and in that, there is no question to be made, but it will certainly end,
when once it has been suffered to have its full scope and swinge; and yet a
vigorous Prosecution of the Laws against the Disturbers of the Peace is branded
with the odious name of Persecution, and they that suffer by it, for being
Incendiaries, are termed Saints; and because it is natural for a distressed
Cause to find a friendship and pity from the common People whether it be
reasonable or no, Suffering being a very sensible and a very affecting thing
when the Causes of those Sufferings are not so plain and obvious to every
common understanding, especially when blinded by prejudice or concern for the
persons of those that suffer; from hence it comes to pass that a just and
necessary Prosecution of the Laws, if it be not managed with abundance of
temper and prudence, so as it may appear it is not done out of hatred to a
Party, but out of a real tenderness to the common good, may sometimes prove the
occasion of great and fatal disorders in a State, and may in its consequence be
attended with all those confusions to which a boundless Toleration is exposed.

This was the great reason of the revolt of the United Provinces from under the
Spanish Yoke; who, if they had been treated with less severity, might probably
by gentler methods have been reduced to Obedience; but by the Cruelty of the
Spanish Governors and Soldiery who pursued them, especially under the
Government of the Duke D' Alva, with all the symptoms of the most mortal
hatred, they were so far alienated in their affections from a Government that
used them so ill, they had such a dread of those unheard of Cruelties and such
a deserved aversation for that Religion that delights to propagate it self by
Blood, that, being assisted by the Hugonots from France, whose interest it was
to stand by the Reformation, and by Supplies from England, which was glad at
that time to find an opportunity to reduce the Spanish greatness to a juster
balance with the rest of the European Princes, they were at length perfectly
severed from the body of the Spanish Empire, and united in a common Alliance
among themselves, for the mutual support and maintenance of each other; which,
though it gave beginning to the most powerful Republic that has ever appeared
since the Roman, yet, as a Republic in its nature and constitution is more
exposed to the ambition or animositie of bad men than a Kingdom or Monarchy is
or can well be, so in the midst of its greatness, it always carried in its
bowels the undoubted symptoms and causes of its ruin, which it is to be
feared, what with the Factions at home, and the daily increasing Power of its
enemies from abroad, is not far off at this time.

But yet though Cruelty be that for which all mankind, but they that exercise
it upon others, have a just and mortal aversation, yet a Prosecution of all
Penal Laws cannot be called Cruelty, unless it be Cruelty to govern, or to use
the necessary and the only means to keep the World in order; all Punishment is
Cruelty, or at least Injustice, which is inflicted in defense of a bad cause or
a bad religion, but when the Penalties themseves are not so severe as to
deserve the name of Cruel, and when they are inflicted for the Preservation of
a sound and orthodox Religion, which I persuade my self most of the Dissenters
will acknowledge that of the Church of England to be; when they are inflicted
for the preservation of Unity and Friendship among men, when this is the only
Expedient by which an universal Friendship and Charity can be maintained, by
which the Government can be rendered safe in it self and easy to those that are
to obey, by which we can be rendered quiet and secure at home, or considerable
abroad, by which we can be put in the best capacity to resist an Enemy or to
succor an Ally, or to transmit the Profession of the Gospel in its native
purity and beauty down to our own Children and to their posterity through all
generations as long as time shall endure, whereas without this course we shall
be subject to infinite changes and vicissitudes in our Secular and in our
Ecclesiastical Concerns, and shall be more dangerously exposed, when our
strength by a Toleration is disunited and broken in pieces, to the incursions
of Idolatry, Superstition, Infidelity, Debauchery, Profaneness, and of all
manner of Evil whatsoever it be; this is sufficient to justify a lawful Power
in the use of the only means by which these Inconveniences may be avoided, and
if it shall so happen, through the evil disposition of men, that a Prosecution
of the Laws, which is the only possible expedient of Peace and Safety, shall
yet notwithstanding produce the same mischiefs and disorders which a Toleration
would have done, yet in this case the Magistrate will have the satisfaction in
his own Conscience and before God of having discharged his duty, and of not
having betrayed that trust which is reposed in him; which in the other, as
being a natural means to bring us all to confusion, I do not see how he can
ever have or expect.

The Contentions about matters of Discipline are therefore manifestly of the
highest importance, because they occasion a Separation, which is the fruitful
mother of all those fatal mischiefs both to Church and Kingdom that have been
mentioned already, and can never be too often repeated, or too seriously
reflected upon.

I would very willingly know of our Dissenters what they think themselves, upon
supposition that the whole Nation were divided and parcell'd out into separate
and independent Congregations, which is that which an unlimited Toleration
would produce, whether or no its strength would be so firm and so compacted as
it is now? To say it would, is to say that a divided interest can be as strong
as that whose parts are never so well compacted and knit to one another; and it
is, besides this absurdity in the reason of the thing, to contradict the
experience of our own Age and of all that have gone before it; to maintain the
lawfulness of such separate Congregations, notwithstanding those many and
dismal inconveniences to which they are exposed, is to affirm, that it is
lawful to endeavor the subversion of the Government, which in this case will
never be able to maintain it self without a standing Army, no more than in the
times of usurpation; and it will be very hard, if not impossible; besides other
incommodities and pressures to which this way of administration is exposed:
that instead of desending the Laws, they shall not at some time or other
subvert them, instead of making the Prince happy and his People secure, they
shall not make both miserable, obnoxious and dependent; instead of agreeing
together for the maintenance of the common peace and safety, they shall not
fall out among themselves, partaking of the epidemical giddiness of the People
whom they pretend to serve, but are in reality their absolute Lords and
Masters, and burn up all the fences of Property and Right in the unnatural
flames of an intestine War.

I demand farther, whether they can or do suppose, though God be thanked we are
not yet brought to the utmost perfection of Tumult and Disorder, that the
separating of so many particular Congregations is not a weakening of the
Government, as well as the dividing the whole Nation into such independent
Assemblies would be a subvertion of it? Certainly this depends in its
proportion upon the same reason with the other, and therefore cannot be denied;
besides, that the present posture of affairs does sufficiently prove it to be
true, when our Heats and Dissentions about indifferent matters, as men are
pleased to call them, have made us, from a Nation that was used to be the
Umpire and the Arbiter of Europe, to become so inconsiderable as we are abroad,
and so uneasy and unsafe at home; besides, that by our Divisions we increase
those dangers of Popery which we pretend to dread; while by an universal, but
deserved cry against so detestable a Superstition, we are heaping coals of fire
upon our own heads against the day of wrath and persecution if ever it prevail
among us, and we provoke our Enemies with more zeal than prudence, unless we
would join together, as we ought to do, in a common League to resist them: so
that it still appears more and more evident, upon all considerations, that
Uniformity is necessary to the public safety; it is necessary to the honor
and seemly appearance of the Government as well as to the happiness of it: it
appears likewise that separate and independent Congregations are therefore
unlawful, because where there is no common jurisdiction there can be no common
rule of discipline and order: it appears that a Toleration of such independent
Assemblies, is a Toleration of uncharitableness and strise among men, and
therefore as being directly and diametrically opposite to the very nature and
temper of Christianity, it must of necessity be unlawful: lastly it appears
that humane impositions are lawful, because this Uniformity, which is so
necessary to the quiet of the World and to the making Christianity useful to
so good an end cannot possibly be obtained without them.

Separation, let it be for what cause or upon what pretense soever, does, as I
have said already, imply a dislike, and does create an alienation of affection
in the parties separating from one another, and therefore since a quarrel is
much more easily fomented than begun; since it is hard in many cases for the
best tempers to be reconciled to one another, but very easy by new
provocations to add new fuel to the fire of discord, till it grow masterless
without any hopes of quenching, therefore no such Separation ought ever to be
made without necessary causes; and such as make Communion in its own nature
unlawful, because all other pretenses are infinite, and at that rate there can
be no end of Dissension among men; especially if we consider farther, what is
not perhaps so usually regarded, or at least not mentioned among the reasons
which prove a Separation unlawful; men do not only by this means divide from
one another as to their religious concerns, but even in their temporal affairs
they care not to deal or have to do with one another; and thus they trade, and
marry, and converse generally with the men of their own way, and are almost to
all intents and purposes as many distinct Societies as there are parties or
factions in that unhappy Church whose misfortune it is to be so miserably
divided: the consideration of which cannot choose but affright every man who has
any regard either of his own peace, or to that of his Country, by presenting
him with a dismal Scene of a Church divided and mangled into several
disagreeing bodies, separated in all respects from one another, and as it were,
drawn up in Battalia, and expecting only the Signal of opportunity or
advantage on any side to begin a bloody encounter; which they that complain so
heavily of Persecution themselves (when they have so little reason, and when
they at the same time persecute the Government and all that favor it with
calumny and detraction, which is a very grievous sort of persecution) will
certainly do whenever it shall lie in their power. They having not only given
us a sufficient spice of their temper in the late times, to teach us not to
trust them any more or any farther than needs must; but it is scarce longer ago
than yesterday, that the tender Consciences were indulged so long till they
grew too hard for the Government, and it is but too evident, by their words and
actions in that critical juncture, that if they had gained their point, which
was the subversion of the present establishment disguised under specious
pretenses of uniting Protestants, who cannot be united by any thing but a
public Form and Ritual of Divine Service; they would soon have shown us what
opinion they have of their pretended Diana Toleration, a Goddess never worshipped
in the public Temples, and a word that never sounds pleasantly, but to those
that want the thing.

So that an universal Toleration of all parties and opinions being manifestly
proved to be naturally unlawful, to be attended with infinite inconvenience
and mischief both to the public and particular persons, of which the body
politic it self is made up, as the whole is but an aggregate of several parts
considered as one, and summed up together, there remains now nothing farther to
be considered under the topic of concession, but that either we alter some
ceremonies which have afforded matter or pretense of scruple for others in
their stead, or that we do totally abolish whatever is excepted against,
without any supplement or reparation: For the first of these, it is granted by
such as shall desire it, that an imposition in the general is lawful,
otherwise it would be ridiculous to talk of substituting other Ceremonies in
the stead of those that are abolished, when the very substitution it self is
made an exception against them, it behooves those persons therefore who are
desirous of such an alteration, since by the desire it self they do imply an
acknowledgment, that a substitution, that is, a new imposition may lawfully be
made, and by consequence that an imposition in the general considered is not
unlawful; I say, it concerns them to show some particular reason, besides the
imposition, of their dislike of the Ceremonies which are already in use; for
otherwise if we must alter them for no reason, we can have no certainty that
this innovating humor will ever have an end, neither is it possible to make
any other construction of it, but that it proceeds out of a design to give an
endless disturbance to the public peace, notwithstanding it pretends to
establish and secure it. And as for those, in the second place, that are for
abolishing without a reparation, the case will be the same again; for either
they are against those Ceremonies, which they would have abolished, merely for
that reason because they are imposed, and then it is manifest they ought not to
be heard, because this, like Sampson, with an honest perhaps, but yet a blind
fury, and a mistaken zeal pulls up the very Pillars of Government from their
natural basis, and destroys the only expedient under Heaven of public safety,
security and peace; it makes the very worship of God it self precarious and
uncertain, and exposes it at every turn to the design of Knaves, the
destructive zeal of Madmen and Enthusiasts, the libertinism of Epicures and
voluptuary persons, to the scorn of Atheists, and the contempt of all wise,
considerate and sober men; there must therefore still be another reason
assigned why the Ceremonies that are boggled at should be abolished, and those
reasons can be none but one of those three that have been mentioned already,
either they are too cumbersome by reason of their number, or they are
superstitious in their use, or they are idolatrous in their direction.

The first of these particulars has been already considered; and as to the
second, a Ceremony may be said to be superstitiously used, when we ascribe to
it some Physical virtue or efficacy, or some supernatural effect which it has
not, or when we say that by or together with it, grace is conferred, as in the
two Sacraments of Baptism and the Lord's Supper; but we do not affirm this of
any of our Ceremonies, and our Church has expressly declared that she intends
nothing by them but only peace, and decency, and edification; and for the use
of the Cross in Baptism, which is the great thing scrupled under this head of
Superstition, she does expressly declare that it does not at all belong to the
Essence of it, that the Baptism is complete without and before it, that it is
only a declarative rite of the persons being listed under Christ's Banner, of
our being dedicated to his service, who for our sakes underwent so painful and
so ignominious a death, of our not being ashamed of that Cross which the Son of
God himself underwent, and of our willingness, if occasion be, to take up our
Cross and follow him through much tribulation and sufferings into the glory of
the Father. So that here there are but two things to be considered, either this
Rite is unlawful because it has been superstitiously abused by those in the
Romish Communion, and then upon the same account kneeling at our Prayers will
be unlawful, because the Papists kneel to the host, which yet, I presume, none
of the Dissenters will be so hardy to say; or else, secondly, it will be said,
as some of them do, that it is therefore unlawful because it is a Ceremony of
a symbolical or significative nature, which is very strange, as if a Ceremony
could be unlawful, only for that reason, because it tends to edification, as
it is the nature of a significant Ceremony to do. And here indeed is a great
and common mistake concerning indifferent things, as we do usually, but falsely
call them; for though we do not say, that any one Ceremony has any
superstitious efficacy or virtue in it, or that it can never upon any
consideration be changed or omitted, or that it is of absolute necessity in
order to salvation, yet this must be confessed at the last, that many things
are not so indifferent, as they are usually esteemed.

It is very fit and consequently a duty, that the Clergy should go attired in
black rather than in colors, that they should wear long robes rather than
short, and rather short hair than long, because it will always be, that the
latter of these will in the minds of all men create a sense of levity, a
disposition to contempt, an opinion of luxury and esseminate softness, whereas
the former in the common interpretation of Mankind will always have a grave and
a majestic appearance, they will reflect authority, credit, and an opinion of
sobriety and staidness upon him that wears them; and if the person be unlike
what he appears, his habit which was designed among other things for a mark of
distinction, will be the greater and the more deserved reproach to him. The
Nonconformists themselves are so sensible of this, that they themselves wear
black, for no good reason but what is symbolical, though they condemn that
account of any thing we do in us, and they wear long cloaks too, though Gowns
and Cassocks they have nothing to do with, and therefore they do still remain
in a state of superstition and uncleanness, only for that reason because they
are longer, that is, more grave, more becoming, more authoritative, because
they preach better and persuade more effectually than short ones.

The Surplice, a thing so much decryed and talked against by some, what is it
to the Layety? or how come they so deeply to scruple it in others, who are not
obliged to wear it themselves? if they scruple it for no reason but only
because they are not, that is, they will not be satisfied, a man can as little
tell where such an unaccountable scrupulosity will end, as from whence it
begins or upon what reason it is founded, when it is confessed to be founded
upon no reason at all, besides that it is intolerable, that they that talk so
much of liberty themselves, should not leave us at our liberty to act as our
Oaths and as the Laws oblige us, when they can assign no reason why we should
not, and when the dispute is about a matter in which they are not personally
concerned: if there be any reason why it is scrupled it is only because it is
a symbolical thing which has been already answered, besides that it stands
perfectly upon the same bottom with their own putting on clean clothes and
change of raiment on a Sunday, which that that day of the week is chose above
all the rest to do it in, it must be confessed to be done upon a religious
account and a symbolical reason, out of respect to that day, and to intimate
that purity and innocence of mind which is expected from them in the worship of
God. For the Communion Tables being railed in, and separated in that manner
which it is from the rest of the Church, it is declared in the Canons of 1640.
Article 7. that it is only to avoid that irreverence and profanation, which
would otherwise bring a contempt upon all holy things, and upon the consecrated
Elements themselves.

It is rather necessary than otherwise that I should be uncovered at Church, as
being at that time more especially in the presence of God, and that I should
kneel or stand rather than sit at my Prayers, because these are Natural
postures of humility and reverence, and have been esteemed so in all Ages and
Nations, whereas sitting, or leaning, or lying along do betoken a comparative
carelessness and disregard of God and of his worship, and will without question
produce that bad effect upon the minds of men wherever they are put to
practice; as on the contrary, a devout and submissive gesture and deportment of
our selves at the times and ^^aces of religious worship is of real benefit and
advantage to our selves, and is of good example to others, and for the
edification of all; which things are so plain and so undoubted a justification
of all significant Ceremonies, that I need say no more concerning them.

Lastly, there is no Ceremony in our Church, which is or is pretended to be
Idolatrous in its direction, for as to the bowing toward the Altar or
Communion Table placed at the East end of the Church, it is left to every man's
liberty by the Canons of 1640. to behave himself in that matter as he pleases,
so that here is nothing imposed, and yet because this has been formerly so
highly censured, and perhaps with some more tolerable pretense, than any of the
other exceptions that are made, I should not use it, since I am not enjoined,
where it may give offense or be an occasion of scandal to the weak, but in
Cathedral or Collegiate Churches, where the Congregations usually are better
informed, there is no reason why it may not be done, for it is not pretended
that we bow to any carved Image, or to the likeness of any living Creature
whether in Heaven or Earth, which was the thing expressly forbidden by the
second Commandment, that we worship the Railes or the Table it self, or at any
time the consecrated Elements upon it, which is likewise included in the
meaning of that Commandment, all which our Church does expressly declare
against, in as plain Language as words are capable of speaking: And in the
second place it is to be considered, that the Israelites long before
Christianity was thought of, did always worship toward Jerusalem, that is,
toward a certain quarter of the Heavens without any the least suspicion of
Idolatry, and that for ought appears, only by humane institution lastly, I
hope it will not be denied that God is in all times and places a very true and
proper object of adoration, and that there is no quarter of the Heavens,
besides the symbolical reasons upon which this practice depends, toward which
we may not worship him without Idolatry.

As for our kneeling at the Sacrament our Church has sufficiently declared her
self in this point, that she intends no worship but to God only, to God the
Father, who sent his only begotten Son into the World to die for our sins; to
God the Son, who is then spiritually received, and dies afresh for us in the
merit, and virtue, and efficacy of his passion as often as we do worthily
partake of those holy mysteries, and to God the Holy Ghost, whose Grace is then
implored and received by us.

Because the Papists worship their Breaden God, shall it therefore be unlawful
for us to kneel at our Prayers, to behave our selves humbly in the presence of
the true and only God, to acknowledge our offenses, and repent us of our sins,
and give thanks to God for his mercy, to pray that the Body and Blood of our
Lord Jesus Christ may preserve our Body and Soul to everlasting life, and to
take that holy Sacrament to our unspeakable and eternal comfort, meekly
kneeling upon our knees?

But it would be infinite to say all that might be said upon so copious a
subject, in which I have all the way so plainly concurring with me, the voice
of reason, of experience, and of the wisest and best men of these and all times
ever since the Reformation, therefore I shall sum up all, as I began, with the
words of the Apostle, Let all things be done decently and in order.

THE END.

