AN ESSAY TOWARD AN HISTORY Of all the Remarkable Providence Which have
happened in This Present Age. As also of what is Curious in the Works of Nature
and Art. With Parallel INSTANCES from former Ages. By William Turner, M. A. and
Vicar of Walberton in Sussex. To be Published by way of Subscription.
A Work of this Nature was set on foot about 30 years ago, by the Learned Mr.
Pool, Author of the Synopsis Criticorum; but, for what Reasons we know not, it
was laid aside, and nothing has since appeared on that Subject but a small
Essay, to invite some others to go on with the Work. The Reverend Mr. Turner
(whose late History of all Religions has met with good acceptance) having
made Collections proper for such an Undertaking, during the Course of his
Reading, and Ministry, for near 30 years, and finding; that it is not attempted
by any other Hand, is resolved to go on with it, as being fully satisfied, That
a Work of this kind, must needs be of Great Use; especially to such pious minds
as delight to observe the manifestations which God does give of himself, Both
in his works of Creation and Providence; the former are sufficient to render
those who have no other Instructers inexcusable, as we are taught by the
Apostle, Romans 1.20. and the excellency of the latter consists in this, that
they are the Real accomplishments of his written word, so that to Record
Providence, seems to be one of the best methods that can be pursued against
the abounding Atheism of this Age, for by works of providence, the Confession
of a God, and the truth of his word have been extorted from those very persons
who have boldly denied it; Memorable is that passage of AEschyles the Persian
in Traged: who relating his Countrymens discomfiture by the Greeks, gives us
this observation that when the Grecians pursued them furiously over the great
River Strymon, which was then frozen, but began to thaw, he did with his own
Eyes see many of those Gallants whom he had heard before, maintain so boldly
that there was no God; every one upon their knees, with eyes and hands Lifted
up, begging for mercy; and that the Ice might not break till they got over.

The Scepticks of this age, may possibly call such a passage in Question, but
what can the most Obdurate Atheist say to those providence about the Jews;
which were so clearly foretold in the Scriptures, and part of 'em are visible
to their own Eyes. Is not this sufficient to convince them of the being of an
Omniscient God, that the sacred Scriptures are his Revealed Will; and that
Christianity is the only true Religion. We doubt not but those men who are able
to hold out against such a convinceing demonstration, will flout at this
undertaking; and expose it all they can, but they may Remember the conquest
which truth made over their great Champions, Mr. Hobbs, My Lord Rochester, and
Sir Alan Broderick, providence which merit their thoughts, and may serve to
stop their mouths. But to come to the design in hand: It being certainly an
incumbent duty according to the Psalmist, for one Generation to praise the
Works of the Lord to Another, and to declare his mighty Acts; Psalm. 145.4.

I. We have consulted many, and design to peruse all Authors that we can meet
with, Ancient or Modern, who have writ on this Subject (as The Treasury of
Ancient and Modern Times, Camerarius, Beard, Clark, Wanly, etc. and others
lately published); and make a Collection of the Choicest passages, in order to
the Parallel betwixt ancient and modern instances, which cannot but be very
serviceable considering that many of those Authors are now become Scarce, who
recorded the providence of former ages; and that there are multitudes of
remarkable passages, relating to the present age, scattered in so many Books,
which its hardly possible for any one man to have all of 'em by him.

II. We our selves have already collected, and received from Credible Hands,
many remarkable Passages which were never yet printed; and design to collect as
many more as we can, relating to this Present Age.

III. We do hereby invite all men, especially Divines, to impart unto us any
such Remarkable Providence as they have recorded, or remember to have befallen
themselves, or others, either in Mercy or Judgment.

IV. We desire, for the Improvement of the Collections which we have already
made, that such as have any by them, would send to us their Observations -- of
Extraordinary Deliverances by Sea or Land, -- Earthquakes, -- unusual Thunders,
etc. Inundations, -- strange Apparitions, (but let these be well attested) --
Witchcrafts, -- Diabolical Possessions, -- Appearances in the Regions of the
Air, -- remarkable Meteors, -- exhalations issuing out of the earth, or
Prodigies of any sort, -- Strange Beasts, Sheep, Horse, -- of any unusual
Quality, or mixed Generation, or wonderful Bigness, or any other Animal
attended with any unusual Circumstances -- You are also desired to send us
accounts of any strange accidents that have befallen men or women, --
remarkable Discoveries of Murder, -- any prodigious Births, -- Numerous
Offsprings, -- Persons of extraordinary stature, remarkable either for Excess
or Defect, -- of prodigious Memorys, -- any that have strange Antipathies to
Meats, Drinks, Animals, parts of Animals, -- of unusual Sleep or Watchings, --
Night-Walkers (in their sleep, we mean), -- Predictions that have strangely
come to pass, -- of men of extreme age, -- of sudden Deaths (extraordinarily
Circumstantiated), -- of any reputed dead that have strangely come to Life
again, -- any thing remarkable that attends a Family, or single person in their
Lives or Deaths, as Lights or Noises, etc. -- Dwarfs, with their age, and place
of abode, -- any Improvement in any of the Liberal or Mechanic Arts, -- any
Valuable Manuscripts, -- or what else you have remarkable, of any kind, the
publishing whereof may be either a Service to the public, or to particular
persons; which if sent, shall not fail to be inserted in its proper place.

These are the Heads we desire the ingenious Reader, wherever they may come
maturely to consider, and to send us accounts of as many of them as fall under
his own proper Experience and Knowledge, directed to John Dunton, at the Raven
in Jewen-street; whence, with all convenient speed, they shall be transmitted
to the Press, in the manner already described, with such Improvements on the
different Heads, as the Reverend Author (who is to compile this work) can make,
either from his own Experience, or the best Writers. But always remember, that
what you send be circumstantiated with the Name of the County, Town, and Place,
you fend it from, and of the particular persons concerned, when the case
requires it (for we shall not take notice of any thing that is trifling, or
uncertain); and that you pay the Postage of all Letters (relating to this
Work), that so the Undertaker may not be imposed upon, nor discouraged in this
useful attempt, which we have now a fair opportunity to accomplish, having
received promises of assistance from persons of Great Learning and Curiosity;
(We have also the promise of a Folio Manuscript, written by the Fathers, that
will be so kind as to impart their Observations to us, that they shall be
received with all Candor and Gratitude imaginable, and the Names of the Authors
published, if permitted, that the public may know to whom they are indebted
for the promoting of such an useful Work.

As the Mercies and Judgments of God are not confined to any particular party,
therefore, as we have already collected, we design also to embrace all well
attested Relations, from Christians of what Denomination soever, provided they
have not a Tendency to reflect upon any Subdivisions of Protestants; for we
will not insert any thing that savours of Faction or Animosity amongst
Brethren, but will endeavor to make the Work as unexceptionable as may be, to
all moderate and pious men.

Seeing it has pleased God to manifest much of his Glory in the Works of
Creation, and much of his Goodness to men by inspiring them with useful and
delightful Inventions, we desire, that such as have made any Choice
Collections, or Observations, relating either to Nature or Art, would be
pleased to send them to us, and particularly any thing, that may contribute to
the Natural History of the Three Kingdoms, or advance the Reputation of their
Inhabitants, by publishing what useful Arts or Things they have either invented
or improved (as any rare or curious Engine, etc.) By means whereof the World
will be made acquainted with the Persons eminently curious in any Handicraft,
and wherein their Excellency lies.

We do also invite all Divines, and others, to communicate to us any Remarkable
Epi^aphs in Churchyards, etc. because many of them contain a short History of
the persons upon whom they are made; which is not to be found elsewhere, as we
are fully satisfied by such Collections of that sort as we have made already.

Moreover, That nothing might be wanting to render our Work perfect, we have
been at the charges to purchase what we found for our purpose in Mr. William
Miller's Catalogue, lately published (which being a curious Collection of
Papers and Pamphlets of all sorts, from the year 1600 down to this day) we have
been there accommodated with several Relations from diverse parts of the Three
Kingdoms, as well as from Foreign Parts, as also with Modern Instances upon
Atheism, Murder, Adultery, Theft, Drunkenness, and other Subjects, no where
else to be found, which will be no small Entertainment to the Reader to find
them here collected into One Volume, under proper Heads.

We design also to consult the Prerogative Office in London, etc. for Wills of
such Atheistical Wits as Hobbs and others, who being at last overcome by the
Truth, were forced to give solemn Attestations thereunto.

The Method proposed to be followed, is to rank every thing under its proper
Head, with some little Introduction to each, and to cite our Authorities in the
Margin, as in the following Specimen; only we shall be more particular in our
Collections than any that have preceeded us, as to the Female Sex, who are
generally too much slighted in Works of this Nature, tho there have been as
remarkable Instances of the Virtues and Vices of that Sex as of our own, as
well as of some curious Pieces of Art performed by them of which the Queens Now
to be seen in Green Court in the Old Jury.
Effigies, and other Curiosities, lately done in Wax by Mrs. Goldsmith, is an
undeniable Argument. -- So that this History of Providence. etc, will not only
be of singular use to Ministers, in furnishing Topics of Reproof and
Exhortation, but may serve as a Monitor to persons of all Ranks and Qualities,
in their Closets, and Families. And this particular advantage may be reapt by
this Undertaking, That those who have observed any remarkable Providence,
either as to themselves or others, or have by 'em in writing, the Dying Words
of their Friends, -- or the account of their Conversions (if very remarkable,)
may have them recorded in this Work; So that their own Posterity, and
succeeding Generations, may have the advantage of them; whereas they would have
otherwise been utterly lost.

In the Last Piace, we think fit to acquaint the public, That in order to the
preventing of all Cavils and Exceptions, and preventing all Causes of Offense,
we design that the whole Work shall be perused by some Eminent Divines, before
it be put to the Press, whose Sentiments thereof under their Hands, shall be
published at the Beginning of the Work.

* That the public may be able to form the better Idea of our Design, we have
thought fit to subjoyn the following Specimen.

Proposals and Specimens are to be had of the Undertaker, John Dunton, at the
Raven in Jewen-street, as also of Edm. Richardson, near the Poultrey Church,
and of most Booksellers in London and the Country.

PROPOSALS.
I. THAT this Work, as near as we can judge, will contain about Three Hundred
Sheets, Printed in large Folio, with the same Letter, (and not upon that small
Letter the following Specimen is printed on) and on Paper of the same goodness
with these Proposals. II. For the Encouragement of those that Subscribe, it is
proposed at 30 s. a Book in Quires, 15 s. to be paid in hand, and 15 s. at
Delivery; and if it happens to make above Three Hundred Sheets, the Subscribers
shall have it, paying only one Penny for every such additional sheet. III. For
a further Encouragement to those that Promote it, any Gentleman who will
Subscribe for six Books, shall have a seventh Gratis, which will reduce the
Three hundred Sheets to 1 l. 5 s. 8 d. per Book in Quires, which, considering,
the vast Expense for Materials requisite for carrying on, and completing so
great a Work, and the extraordinary fineness of the Paper, cannot but be
thought very reasonable. IV. To those that do not subscribe by the first of
September next, the said 300 sheets shall not be sold under 35 s. in Quires. V.
All Gentlemen who subscribe, shall have their Names and Titles, etc. (if
permitted) annexed when the whole i^ completed. VI. The first Volume shall be
ready to be delivered to Subscribers next Hillary Term, and the Second with all
possible Expedition. VII. Those that desire the Publication of this useful
Work, and expect the benefit of these Proposals, are requested to send their
first payment with what speed they can to the Undertaker (who will give a
receipt for the same); for nothing but the backwardness of the Subscribers can
hinder the completing of it at the time prefixed.
The Specimen.
Attestations to the Truth of the Christian Religion, from Atheistical Wits,
who had formerly denied the Being of God, and disputed with the greatest
strength of their Carnal Reason against all Religion.
THE Concessions of Adversaries is always Reckoned a good Argument for the
Confirmation of a Controverted Truth, nor does Omnipotence ever manifest it
self with greater Majesty, then when it extorts a Confession of Gods overuling
providence from Wicked men and Devils; what Emphasis is there in
Nebuchadnezzars Acknowledgement, that the most high does according to his will
in the Army of Heaven, and among the Inhabitants of the Earth, and none can
stay his hand; or say unto him what do thou? Dan. 6.35. And tho our blessed
Savior disdained such a Testimony, yet the Power and Majesty of God was
mightily seen in that Confession, which we find so often extorted from the
Devils in the Gospel, that he was the Holy one of God, and the Son of the most
High, and when we Consider those passages, and that Divine Air, which sounds in
the declaration of the false prophet Balaam, Number. 24. I shall see him but not
now, I shall behold him but not nigh, there shall come a Star out of Jacob, and
a Scepter shall rise out of Israel. We have no reason to doubt but that the
Lofty Rapture of the Oracle of Delphos may be true.

-- (...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
Which I find thus Ingeniously translated into Latin and English.

Me puer Hebraeus, Divos Deus ipse Gubernans,
Cedere sede jubet triftemque redire sub orcum
Aris ergo dehinc tacitis abscedito nostris.
An Hebrew Child whom the blessed Gods adore,
Has bid me leave these shrines and pack to Hell,
So that of Oracles, I can no more:
In silence leave our Altar, and farewell.
Upon the return of which Answer from that Oracle, the Emperor Augustus caused
an Altar to be Erected in the Capitol with this Inscription, haec est ara
primogeniti Dei. And the famous Acknowledgment of Julian the Apostate when
mortally wounded by an Arrow, Julian the Apostate dies, acknowledging the Truth
of the Christian Religion.
Vicisti tandem Galilee, is another remarkable instance of the power of God in
extorting a Confession of the Truth of Christianity from one of its most
implacable Enemies.

This we think sufficient as a Taste of what may be produced, as to Confessions
of God and Christ, which have been extorted by Remarkable Providence in
preceding Ages; and we have reason to bless his Holy Name, that he has not
left us without Observable Attestations of the same Nature in this present Age.

The first we shall mention are the Earl of Marlbourgh's Letters from on Board
the Fleet. April 24. 1665.

The Earl of Marlbourgh, whose two most Devout and Penitential Letters are
herewith Published, was a person of great understanding and wit: The Scene of
his Life lay chiefly in Voyages and expeditions by Sea, whereby he made many
laborious attempts to repair the Collapsed Estate of his Ancestors; but it
pleased not God to give him the Success he hoped for therein.

It is wholly unfit for any Writer to touch upon any irreligious principles or
practices, that were as stains in his Life, since he has, by his own Noble Pen
in the following Letters, acknowledged them, and by his most exemplary
Repentance washed them off.

Mr. Roger Coke in the second Volume of his Detection, p. 142, mentions, That
the Fight wherein the Duke of York beat the Dutch, and Opdam was blown up, was
the 3d of June, 1665. and that in this Fight the English lost the Renowned Earl
of Marlbourgh, who, tho Admiral in K. Charles the firsts time, died here a
private Captain.

But it pleased God, in that Naval Expedition, to work in him such a sense of
his Sins, as did infinitely make amends for the former disappointments he met
with by Sea or Land.

The Date of his first Letter being the 24th of April, and that of the Second,
the 23d of May following, will satisfy any candid Reader, that the New Birth in
him was accompanied with may pangs and efforts of great consideration during
the firmness of his bodily Health, and much transcending the low Nature of poor
Deathbed Repentances, which are so justly suspected by our Practical Divines
of all persuasions.

And here it is necessary to acquaint the Reader that these two Letters of
distant Dates were sent by his Lordship from the Royal Navy, enclosed in other
Letters to Mr. Tredewy, his Lordship's Agent in London; with a particular
Instruction, both as to that to Sir Hugh Pollard, and that to Mr. Glascock,
that each of them was to be delivered when Mr. Tredewy was credibly informed of
his Lordships Death. His design being, that his Pen should Preach Repentance to
the World, in case he lived not to be a personal Adviser thereof himself.

The Publisher hereof assures the Reader, that both the Letters had a happy
influence on the Lives of the two persons, to whom they were directed, and that
Sir Hugh Pollard having lent the Original Letter which was sent to him, to Sir
W. Davenant, to show it to whom he pleased; Sir William showed it to the
Publisher among many others: And that Mr. Glascock permitted the Publisher to
take a Copy of that Letter directed to him. The Reader may then awaken his most
serious Thoughts to consider the two following Letters.

A Letter from the right Honorable James Earl of Marlbourgh, a little before
his Death, in the Battle at Sea on the Coast of Holland, 1665, -- To the right
Honorable Sir Hugh Pollard, Comptroller of His Majesty's Household.
Sir,
See Dr. Lloyd's fair warning to a careless world, for a Copy of this Letter of
the Earl of Marlebourgh to Sir Hugh Pollard.
I Believe the goodness of your Nature, and the Friendship you have always born
me, will receive with kindness this last Office of your Friend; I am in Health
enough of Body, and through the mercy of God, in Jesus Christ, well disposed in
mind: This I premise that you may be satisfied, that what I write proceeds not
from any Fantastic Terror of mind, but from a sober Resolution of what
concerns my self, and earnest desire to do you more good after my Death, than
mine Example (God of his mercy pardon the badness of it) in my Lifetime, may
have done you harm. I will not speak ought of the Vanity of this World; your
own Age and Experience will save that Labor; but there is a certain thing that
goes up and down in the World, called Religion, Dressed and Presented
Phantastically, and to purposes bad enough, which yet by such evil Dealing,
loses not its Being. The great and good God has not left it without a Witness
more or lefs, sooner or later in every man's bosom, to direct us in the pursuit
of it; and for the avoiding of those Inextricable difficulties and
intanglements our own frail Reason would perplex us withal; God in his infinite
mercy has given us his Holy word, in which, as there are many things hard to be
Understood, so there is enough plain and easy to be understood, to quiet our
minds, and direct us concerning our future being: I confess to God and you, I
have been a great neglecter, and I fear, despiser of it. God of his infinite
mercy pardon me that dreadful Fault; but when I retired my self from the noise
and deceitful Vanities of the world, I found no true comfort in any other
Resolution, than what I had from thence: I commend the same from the bottom of
my Heart, to your (I hope happy) use. Dear, Sir Hugh, let us be more generous
than to believe we Die like Beasts that perish, but with a Christian, Manly,
brave Ambition, let us look to what is Eternal. I will not trouble you farther,
the only Great and Holy God, Father, Son and Holy Ghost, direct you to an happy
end of your Life, and send us a joyful Resurrection. So prays your dear Friend,

Marlbourgh.
Old James, near the Coast of Holland, 24th of April, 1665. I beseech you
commend my love to all my Acquaintance: particularly, I pray you that my Cozen
Glassock may have a sight of this Letter, and as many of my Friends beside, as
you will, or any else that desires it: I pray grant this my Request.




To William Glascock, Esquire
Dear Cozen, May the 23. 1665.
This Letter to Mr. Glascock was never printed before, but is attested to be
genuine in the following Specimen.
IN case I be called away by God in this present Employment, I have recommended
these few Lines to you, first earnestly begging God Almighty his most merciful
Pardon, and yours, for the very bad example, and many provocations to sin I
have given you. Next, I do most heartily desire you to make use of your
Remaining Time, in bestowing it upon his Service, who only can be your Comfort
at your latter end, when all the former Pleasures of your Life shall only leave
Anguish and Remorse. If God had spared me Life instead of this Paper, I would,
through his Grace, have endeavored to have been as assistful to you in minding
you of true Piety, as the care of mine own life could have enabled me; do not
think that melancholy Vapors cause this; it is Gods great mercy that by this
Employment has made me know my self, for which his Name be for ever Praised.

Lastly, I Pray show these few Lines to my Lord of Portland, by which I in like
manner, and for the same cause, crave his pardon, wishing you both the blessed
peace and content of a good Conscience toward God, and a happy end of your
Lives.

Your truly Loving Cozen. Marlbourgh.


My Lord Marlbourgh's Letter to Sir Hugh Pollard having been dispersed
throughout the Kingdom, this Remarkable Penetence of his Lordship was the
Subject of general Discourse for a long time after, and it is not doubted but
that his Lordship's Letter to Mr. Glascock (which was never printed but in this
Specimen) will be as well received; and it is hoped, may have the same good
Effect as the former had.

The Gentleman who has communicated to us these Letters sent by the Earl of
Marlbourgh to Sir Hugh Pollard and Mr. Glascock; is a Person of Quality, now
living in London, and if any one has the curiosity to be satisfied from his
own mouth about the perfect certainty of the matters therein Related, if he
repairs to Mr. Darker in Bull-head-Court, near Cripplegate, he will be always
ready to bring any Gentleman to speak with him for further confirmation.

It must needs be obvious to every considering Reader, that the same holy
spirit who breathed from the mouth of Solomon, the wiseft of men, That all
things in this World are Vanity and Vexation of Spirit, did make this Great Man
sensible of the Truth thereof by his own Experience, and to express it
accordingly; and how observable is it, that that very Truth which he so
ingenuously confesses himself to have neglected and despised, did at last make
an entire Conquest over him, and force him to submit, as if God would thereby
let us see, that though not many Noble, and not many Wise are called, yet he
does not leave the Gospel without a Testimony, even from such, but obliges them
to confess, That the Wisdom of this World is mere Foolishness with God, which
will appear yet more by the following Instances.

It Is taken notice of that Sir In Sir Alan Brodericks Funeral Sermon by Nathan.
Resbury, Minister of Wandsworth, December. 3. 1680.
Alan Broderick, who was a Gentleman of Extraordinary Learning and
Accomplishments, did own with much Contrition, that a Long Scene of his Life
had been acted in the Sports and Follies of Sin, that he had sometime pursued a
Pagan and abandoned way, Septicism it self not excepted, wherein the poinancy
of his Wit, and the strength of his Reasoning, even in that very Argument, the
using of which proclaims a man in the Language of the Holy Scriptures, a Fool,
may have been the occasion of a great deal of mischief toward some that are
already gone to their Accounts.

Yet some years before his Death, the bent and tendency of his Life and Actions
was Devout and Religious, and in his Private Conversation with his Minister, he
would always be Discoursing some Cases of Conscience about Retired
Closet-prayer, or the Nature and Necessity of True Religion -- and in his last
Sickness he thought himself under a mighty Incumbency to Pray, but was much
harassed and anxious what to do, because of his fear of not performing it, with
all becoming Reverence and Seriousness.

For look you, says he, my Conscience is now as tender as wet Paper, torn upon
every apprehension of the least guilt before God -- And as he had much studied
the Nature of Repentance, he would frequently complain, That he had a great
jealousy upon himself, lest he had not yet conceived an horror answerable to
his past Exorbitancies of Life, and had not made those smart and pungent
Reflections upon himself, that might become one that had so long, and in such
Exalted Degrees violated the Laws of his Maker, and made himself so Obnoxious
to the Vengeance of his Judgment, and that if the cutting off one of his hands
with the other, were but a proper or likely way through the anguish of such a
wound to give him a just horror for his sins, he would do that as willingly as
he ever did any one Action that had given him the greatest pleasure of Life. --
He also said that by the grace of God, he had such a sense of the Conviction
and folly and unreasonableness of Sin, that no Argument, no Tentation should
prevail upon him to do the like again. -- Having taken notice that all my Lord
Rochesters Religious breathings were accounted by some, the Raves and
Delirancies of a sick Brain, he did resolve to have given the World a public
Account of the sentiments he had of Religion, both as to the Faith and Practice
of it, but was prevented.

Mr. Hobbs, who was so much noted in the World for his Atheistical Writings;
insomuch that his Book, entitled, The Leviathan, was condemned by the
Parliament in their Bill against Atheism and Profaneness, October. 1666. and both
that and his book de Cive, by the Convocation, July 21. 1683. Yet the E. of
Devon's Ath. Oxon. part 2. p. 483.
Chaplain has left it on Record concerning him, That he received the Communion
from his hands, with much seeming Devotion, about two years before his death,
than which there cannot be a more express acknowledgment of the truth of
Christianity. And this methinks should daunt the confidence of his Followers,
the Hobbists, who, because he was born on Goodfriday, are not ashamed
blasphemously to say, That as our Savior Christ went out of the world on that
day to save the men of the world, so another Savior came into the world on
that day to save them.

But the next instance of the E. of Rochester, is still more convincing, who as
it appears by his Funeral Sermon, did with very much abhorrence exclaim against
that absurd and foolish Philosophy, which the World so much admired, and was
propagated by the late Mr. Hobbs, and others, which had undone him and many
more of the best parts of the Nation.

My Lord Rochester being awakt from his Spiritual Slumber by a pungent
Sickness, as appears by his Funeral See my Ld. Rochester's Funeral Sermon,
Preached by Mr. Parsons Aug. 9. 1680.
Sermon, Preached by Mr. Parsons, Aug. 9. 1680. -- Upon the Preachers first
Visit to him, May 26. my Lord thankt God, who had in Mercy and good Providence,
sent him to him, who so much needed his Prayers and Counsels, acknowledging how
unworthily heretofore he had treated that Order of men, reproaching them that
they were proud, and Prophesied only for Rewards, but now he had learnt how to
value them, that he esteemed them the Servants of the most high God, who were
to show to him the way to everlasting Life.

He commanded me, (continues our Author,) to Preach abroad, and let all men
know, if they knew it not already, how severely God had disciplined him for his
sins, by his Afflicting Hand, that his sufferings were most Just, tho he had
laid ten Thousand times more upon him, how he had laid one stripe upon another,
because of his grievous Provocation, till he had brought him home to himself,
that in his former Visitation, he had not that blessed Effect he was now
sensible of, he had formerly some loose thoughts, and slight Resolutions of
reforming, and designed to be better, because even the present consequences of
sin were still pestering him, and were so troublesome and inconvenient to him,
but now he had other sentiments of things, and a^^^d upon other principles. He
was willing to die, if it pleased God, resigning himself always to the Divine
Disposal; but if God should spare him yet a longer time here, he hoped to bring
Glory to the Name of God in the whole course of his Life, and particularly by
his Endeavors to convince others, and to assure them of the Danger of their
Conditions, if they continued Impenitent, and how graciously God has dealt
with him. -- The time of his Sickness and Repentance was just nine Weeks, in
all which time, thirty hours about the middle of it excepted, wherein he was
delirous; he was so much Master of his Reason, and had so clear an
understanding, that he never dictated, or spoke more composed in his Life.
Three or four days before his Death, he had Comfortable Persuasions of God's
accepting him to his mercy, saying, I shall Die, but Oh, what unspeakable
Glories; do I see? What Joys beyond Thought or Expression am I sensible of? I
am assured of God's mercy to me, through Jesus Christ. O! how I long to die,
and to be with my Savior.

His Dying Remonstrance.
For the benefit of all those whom I may have drawn into sin by my Example and
Encouragement, I leave to the World this my last Declaration, which I deliv^r
in the presence of the great God, who knows the Secrets of all Hearts, and
before whom I am now appearing to be Judged.

The Lord Rochester's dying Remonstrance.
That from the bottom of my Soul I detest and abhor the whole Course of my
former wicked Life, that I think I can never sufficiently admire the Goodness
of God who has given me a lively sense of my pernicious Opinions and vile
practices by which I have hitherto Lived without hope, and without God in the
World; have been an open Enemy to Jesus Christ, doing the Utmost despire to the
holy Spirit of Grace, and that the greatest Testimony of my Charity to such is
to warn them in the name of God, and as they regard the welfare of their
immortal Souls, no more to deny his being, or his providence, or despise his
Goodness, no more to make a mock of sin, or contemn the pure and excellent
Religion of my ever Blessed Redemer, through whose Merits alone I, one of the
Greatest of Sinners, do yet hope for Mercy and Forgivenness. Amen.

Declared in the presence of Anne Rochester Rob. Parsons. J. Rochester.



We had prepared a larger account of this remarkable penitence of the E. of
Rochester, but for want of room must reserve it for that further Specimen of
this work which is to be annexed to a New Piece of Mr. Turner's now in the
Press, entitled, [ An Essay upon the Works of Creation and Providence, etc.]
which will be published in few days, being designed as an Introductory Discourse
to this History of Providence. -- To this further Specimen will be added a
Penitential Letter writ by a Person of Quality in Glostershire (lately
deceased) with other Remarkable Instances of that Nature, never yet in Print
which for want of room could not be inserted here. -- But though this Specimen
will not allow of instances under every head. (for if it would, we had added
Specimens upon the Works of Nature and Art, as we have done here upon
Providence, having prepared materials for that end); yet by what is here
exhibited, the ingenious Reader may easily perceive the usefulness of our
design; and as a further Evidence thereof, we shall only add, That under the
Head of [Attestations given to Religion by dying Princes,] who acknowledged the
same to be preferable to all things else: We shall (from the best Authorities)
Record the last sayings of our never enough Lamented Sovereign, the late Q.
Mary as a Noble Testimony to Religion, from one whose Parts and Endowments were
as high as her Dignity, as if Providence would not leave the profane Age room
to say that Religion was only pretended to by the mean and ignorant, but
convince them by the dying Breath of a Princess every way so Glorious and Great.

Under the Head of [Signal Deliverances] we doubt not but the Reader will
easily be convinced that the Relation of the Miraculous Deliverance of the
Protestants in Ireland, from the Crueltys of Q. Mary I. As also the Account of
Sir Henry Wyat's wonderful Preservation in the Tower, will deserve a place; the
First, being Attested by Bishop Usher, and delivered to the Publisher by a
Person of Quality, now living in London; (and is wholly omitted by Mr. Fox in
his Acts and Monuments,) and the other being drawn up by a Learned Gentleman,
and never Printed before. -- Of these things we shall treat more at large in
the Body of the Work, but think this sufficient to whet the Reader's Curiosity,
and to give him a taste of what Entertainment he is to expect under other
Heads, as well as these mentioned. -- [When our further Specimen is ready for
Publication, there will be notice given.]


