REFLECTIONS upon the French Kings Declaration, For the Restoration of the
Late King JAMES, to the Kingdom of England
By JOHN TUTCHIN.
HOW far the Court of France has influenced this of England since the
Restoration of Charles II. is too well known, and the Effects thereof too
apparent at this time, the whole management of Affairs here being carried on by
a French Interest during the late Reigns, had certainly ere this time brought
us to pay homage to the Crown of France, had not the Providence of God
prevented it by the late glorious Revolution. Without doubt King Lewis is
deeply concerned at the present Condition of the English Nation, and the
Misfortunes of its Abdicated King, whom he designed to trick out of his
Dominions; Therefore, like a resolute Hero, he is resolved to make the best of
a bad Market, and since he is defeated in his Intrigues, he is resolved to
rally again and improve every opportunity for the advancement of his Interest.
In persuance of which he has disembarqued some of his Troops at two several
times on Ireland, to assist the late King to maintain a Rebellion against Their
present Majesty's, and having provided a third Embarquement to make a Descent
either upon England or Ireland, he has published an insiuating Declaration
dated at Versailles the 14th of this Instant May, which he has caused to be
printed in the English Tongue, thereby ^o debauch our Army and People at their
first Landing, which Declaration is the Subject of these Reflections.

He begins his Declaration with a Formal Harangue of the good Affection and
Intention he bears the English Nation, etc. His love to England we do not
question certainly believing, he loves it so well, that he would have made it
his own ere this time, if it had lay'n in his power; and his sincere Intentions
we doubt not of, when we remember how sincerely he added Lorrain and other
Countries to his Dominions. And when we consider that the restless Endeavor of
this Tyrant has ever been the Agrandisement of his own Power, and the
Enlargement of his Territories, we cannot but imagine that he will stretch his
Empire to the utmost Limits of these fertile Kingdoms, if ever he should have
the power, and God, for our sins, should suffer us to be such Cowards as to be
overcome by him.

And he farther Insinuates, That he is not at all desirous to bring or continue
on the English Nation the Calamities of War, etc. I suppose he writes this
Declaration only for the Jacobites of the Kingdom, I hope he is persuaded that
the other Party are men of more sense, than to be misled by so specious a
Wheedle; The Inhabitants upon the Rhine, of Savoy, Piedmont, the Vaudois* and
many others can testify how much he desires the Peace and Tranquillity of
Protestants; and his own Subjects can tell us how far we are to believe his
Word or Declaration, though it were as irrevocable as the Edict of Nantz.

Next he goes on to declare, That in Case the Subjects of Great Britain will
return to their Allegiance, and restore the late King James to his Throne
before or at the 24th of June next, That he will cause to cease all hostile
Actions; That he will restore all the Merchants Ships and Effects taken since
the Rupture; And pay all the Taxes we have been at in 18 months at three
payments.

In the first place, As to the Restoration of the late King James. This is a
bitter Pill indeed, and will hardly be swallowed by the English Nation without
great Reluctance; the late King was very bad before he abdicated the
Government, and we suppose he is not much bettered by the Conversation he has
had with King Lewis: But his most Christian Majesty would have acted more like
a Politician, to have given the People of England a longer time to have
restored their Monarch, than the 24th of next Month; for I confidently presume
it will not be in the power of Lewis himself, together with the assistance of
the dear Joys of Teaga^land in conjunction with his forward Villains in
Lancashire, and other Parts, to accomplish this mighty Work so soon. Yet, though
the Restoration of the late King be the pretense, we very well know that he is
out the Tool by which King Lewis works his own Interest. He is out the Head of
his Army, and such a Head too as is placed upon the top of a Fiddle, only to
make a Show, and nothing at all concerned in the Music. Indeed the French King
has lent him an Army of his Men in Ireland, but as a Gratification of so
singular a Kindness, he has the whole strength of the Kingdom put into his
hands as Cautionary Towns. And the Insolences of the French are already so
great, that the miserable Irish Papists themselves would willingly enjoy an
opportunity to revolt from their Government. And should we be as foolish as the
French King persuades us to be, and restore the abdicated King again, should we
not take a Serpent into our Bosoms, that would certainly sting us to death? We
are very well acquainted with the Nature of that Man, and the Mercy and Favor
he shows a conquered Enemy; a Specimen of which he gave in the West, where he
ingloriously murdered, in cold Blood; so many hundreds of the Duke of
Monmouth's Men, nor can we expect any better usage upon his Return, without
doubt he has now learnt an effectual way how to Dragoon us into wooden Shoes,
and Bread and Water. But, as I hinted before, the Question is not about the
Restoration of the late King, but the establishing of the French King in these
Dominions, and who, but one as void of Sense as a Jacobite, can think any
otherwise? And if we come under a French Power, what can we expect but the
Devastation, Hostility and Bloodshed that those Countries have suffered that
have had the misfortune to be added to the French King's Dominions? It is a
good old French Rule, Avez le Francois pour ton amy, non pas pour ton voison.
The French may make good Friends, but never good Neighbors. So that it is no
small Benefit to our Land, that it is surrounded with the Ocean, and fortified
with Rocks from the Incursions of so encroaching an Enemy. But before we admit
of the French King's Proposals in this Case, we must not only lay aside all
regard to present Interest, as well as the future safety of Posterity; but we
must also shake off all the Principles of Honor, Justice, Loyalty, and
Humanity: For we cannot restore the late King, without deposing King WILLIAM.
And how barbarous an Act would this seem, not only to Foreign Nations, but to
Posterity also? It is certainly inconsistent with the Native-Bravery of the
People of this Kingdom, to depose a Prince that has passed the devouring
Billows of the wild Ocean, and ventured his Person and Troops to redeem us from
Slavery of Mind and Body. Let not such horrid Ingratitude be imagined to
lurk-in the Breast of any one that bears the honorable Name of an English man!
And yet we see that some are weary of their Redeemer, and, like the
discontented Israelites, murmur at their Moses, for the Bread and Water of
Arbi^rary Power, and Absolute Government, and such too, whom his present
Majesty of the abundance of his mercy, has skreen'd from the Justice of the
Law, and maintained by his Bounty.

In the next place he endeavors by fair Promises to persuade us to take the
abdicated King again, and tells us, That he will restore us our Ships and
Effects, and Reimburse the Charge of the War. Here he promises the English
Subjects what he cannot perform without prejudice to his own; For most of the
English Ships taken since the Rupture, were seized by the French Privateers,
and not one Moiety of the Effects at his dispose. Besides, it is impossible for
him to restore the Effects as he found them, most of the Tobacco being shipped
off f^r Ireland. And if our Merchants trust to his Account of the Sale of their
Goods, I am afraid their Factor will take so much per Cent. for his Commission,
that the poor Merchants will make but a losing Voyage of it; and so powerful a
Factor as he, is not to be sued for an Account at any one's pleasure. But I
must needs acknowledge his kindness in the promise of reimbursing our Expense in
the War, and yet he is partly obliged to it, being the principal Cause thereof,
therefore I do not like his Payment at three several times.

This makes me think, that if we should comply with his Proposals, that he
would serve us as our cheating Traders do here, get a Letter of License for
time to pay their Debts, when their only design is to gain time to get their
Effects into their hands, and then take up their Quarters in White-Fryars, or
the King's Bench; were I to Treat with the French King upon this Head, (knowing
him to be a Shuffling Dealer,) I should desire, that Dunkirk, Calais, Breast,
Rochfort, Thoulon, and Sherrant, might in the first place be put into our
Hands, as Cautionary Towns, and as Security for his performance of Articles,
and payment of our Money; for who can Imagine, that the French Tyrant can ever
be able to make satisfaction to the English Nation for so many Millions Expense
in this War, who was forced the first Summer after the Rupture to melt down his
plate to pay his Army, and the Lead of his his Churches to make Bullets.

But to conclude all, he threatens upon our Noncompliance with his Proposals,
to heap the Misery and Calamity of War upon us, the case is much the same, we
are sure if we do comply, or no, if ever we come under his Jurisdiction, to
suffer all the Calamities of War possible to be felt by a Miserable People,
from a Conquering Enemy. Those amongst us, that have either read of, or seen
those Countries that have unfortunately been the Seat of the French War, are
thoroughly convinced of what we must expect from a French Army, should it get
possession of any part of this Kingdom; how many goodly Towns and Villages have
the French Troops laid waste upon the Rhine, where the fruitful Lands lie
Untilled, and the Grass grows where the Towns formerly stood; I could give a
Thousand Instances of the French Barbarity, where they have had the Fortune to
Conquer. A Volume might be filled with their Cruelties in the Low Countries,
when our Nation suffered them to make a descent upon the States General of the
United Provinces in the Year 1673, some of which I shall Transcribe in a Letter
written from Vtrecht, 11th of January, 1673.

Worthy Friend,
I Cannot, out of the abundance of my heart, forbear to send these Lines unto
you, containing an Account of the Cruelties and Murders committed by the French
in that last Encounter at Boodegrave and Swammerdam, according as I have had it
from the mouths of the French, and confirmed by many of them, yea, some of
their Officers, who have been in the Turkish War, do testify that they never
saw or heard of such Cruelties, as for Instance in two Gentlewomen, who were
first stripped naked by the Soldiers, and then by many of them deflowred; which a
French Officer seeing rescued them, and threw his Cloak, with what other
Covering he could find, over their naked Bodies. This Officer being commanded
to his post, was forced to leave these Ladies, whom he recommended to another:
But this shameless Villain presently ravished them again, and let them in the
like manner be abused by the Soldiers who having satiated their filthy Lust
with them, thrust the Rammers of their Guns into their Bodies, and so torn them
up, and most miserably murdered them. The Gentleman that declares he saw these
things, you know very well, as also him who first saved and covered them, but
afterward, to his great grief, beheld them lying dead on the way.

The same person relates, that hearing a dreadful screeching in a certain
house, he went in, and found there a young Gentlewoman, who was violated by
some Soldiers; whereupon he took his pistol, intending to have shot one of
those Villains through the head, but it missing fire, he struck it in pieces on
one of their heads.

He said also, that in the same Chamber lay two old people abed, being Man and
Wife, above 80 years old, the Father and Mother of this young Gentlewoman, who,
embracing each the other in their arms, lay shaking and trembling for fear of
being murdered.

These should with House and all, have been burnt, had not he saved them: For
in like manner they most lamentably murdered a Woman, together with her four
Children, who, for Fear and Distress, flew about her, and crept under her
Clothes to save themselves.

Amongst those that fled into the Church, some they most miserably ravished,
afterward hung them up by the hair, and shot them to death.

Others, they cut off their Breasts, and then burned them.

Yea, the French themselves declare, that they saw several young Maids run into
the Fire themselves, to escape the Tyranous Cruelty of those Bloodhounds.

The Gentleman that says he saw these things, lies sick abed, merely, as he
says, from alteration at the sight of these dreadful Massacres and Abuses
which he was forced to behold acted upon the poor people.

A certain Officer (who lies here on the New Graft) declares, that in one house
were seven persons whom he endeavored to protect, but being commanded to look
after his post, was forced to leave them, and coming again found them all
murdered: And it is not to be expressed what we* out of their own mouths, hear
daily of their Cruelty.

But some of the Officers were more compassionate, who have brought several
Children with them hit her, whom they say, they snatched out of the Fire; of
which my Lord Peterson has took one, a Girl of Seven Years Old, to himself,
whose parents are also burnt; and it is evident it is Born of good Reformed
parents, for of her self she will Mornings and Evenings fall on her Knees and
say all sorts of Prayers, and can also say the Belief and Ten Commandments. A
certain Capuchin Monk said to the Duke of Luxemburgh, Will you give* that Soul
to the Devil, which we have fetched out of the Fire? It ought not to be.
Nevertheless my Lord keeps the Child. They have also brought with them another
pretty Lud, about whom has been no small difference amongst them, because some
of them out of their Cruelty would still Burn him, or dash him against the
Wall; but they have carried him upwards along with them, so can Write no more
about him.

These are but some Samples of their Barbarous Cruelty, for should I relate all
those Filthinesses and Murders whereof they boast, I should too far exceed the
Limits of a Letter.

Your Affectionate Friend, N. N.


This and much more must we expect, if ever a French Army should land upon us:
But I hope the Commemoration of our mighty Conquests in France under Edward
III. where we slew in the Battle of Cressy II great princes, above 1000 Barons
and Knights, and above 30 thousand of the Commons of France, not one Man of
Honor or Note being slain on our side.

And many other Conquests I could mention, I hope (I say) the thoughts of this
will so animate all that have but the least spark of true English Valor left,
that we shall never be mastered by those that were the Slaves of our
Forefathers, but shall bravely stand up in the defense of our natural Rights,
our Religion and Liberties, against all Opposers. In doing of which, we may
expect the blessing of the Almighty, who, with one gentle touch of his Almighty
Hand, can disperse all our Enemies were they never so many.

Advertisements.
The Privileges of the Citizens of London, contained in the Charters granted
them by several Kings of this Realm, and confirmed by sundry Parliaments.
Formerly published for general Information, upon the occasion of the Quo
Warranto brought against the said City, and now Reprinted, upon the account of
Reversing that Judgment, and Restoring the Charter, with all its ancient Rights
and Privileges, under our Gracious Sovereign Lord and Lady King William and
Queen Mary. Printed for Langley Curtiss.

These are to give Notice to all Persons, for the Benefit of the Public, That
Mr. Elmy, Professor of Physic, and Operator, of known Integrity, and above 25
Years practice, Lives at the Blue Ball in Whale-Bone Court, at the Lower End
of Bartholomew-lane by the Royal Exchange, who most safely and expeditiously
Cures Deafness and Noise in the Ears in any of what Age soever, (if Curable)
and at first Sight, by Inspection, Resolves the Patient if so or not, as most
Eminent Persons of Quality in this City can Testify.

London Printed, for Langley Curtiss at the Sign of Sir Edmondbury Godfrey's
Head near Fleet-Bridge. 1690.


