A LETTER OF RESOLUTION TO A FRIEND, Concerning the MARRIAGE OF Cousin Germans;
By JOHN TVRNERlate Fellow of Christs-Colledge in Cambridge.

Cum opulenti loquuntur pariter atque ignobiles, eadem dicta, eademque or atio
aequa non aeque valet. LONDON, Printed by H. H. for Walter Kettilby, at the
Bishops Head in St. Paul's Churchyard. 1682.

To the Reader.
I Am very sorry if the late Discourse which I have published concerning the
Laws of Nature, and the Reasons of their Obligation have given offense to any
good or learned Man; but that Sorrow is not a Sorrow of Repentance, but of real
trouble and concern for them that suffer themselves to be so far carried away
by prejudice and preconceived Opinion, that they will not give Entertainment to
those Principles that are the Eternal Pillars upon which Nature stands, and the
only true grounds of Duty and Obligation, to which all particular Instances
being brought for trial, it will be impossible, that either Popery, Enthusiasm,
or Atheism should obtain, but where those Principles are not believed, and he
that substitutes any other crabbed, Scholastic, and unintelligible words,
instead of things and notions, in their place, does but give a manifest
Advantage to all three, let him pretend to never so great Learning, Piety, or
Zeal.

Yet notwithstanding the clearness and irrefragable Demonstration of what I
have written, that I may give the World all possible satisfaction, I shall send
another Discourse upon the same Subject, to the Press, by which the same thing
will be still more fully, though I cannot say more evidently, made out, that
Interest understood in that Latitude in which I have explained it, is the only
true Principle, and the only intelligible ground of Obligation, and that all
men may be satisfied, that I am no Changling, and that these are not thoughts
taken up of a sudden, or as may be suspected by some, designed only to serve a
present turn, I must let them know, that the much greater part of this same
second Discourse, for so it is in the Order of Publication, was written full
two years ago, and as much as since August last, and it was then written with
the same Design to prove the unlawfulness of the Marriage of Cousin Germans, as
will appear by the Discourse it self, and as is well known to some of my
Friends both in the College, and out of it.

Neither indeed is this notion so new, as some may think it, it is as old as
David's time; and he that was a Prophet, as well as a King, a man after Gods
own heart, as he is called in Scripture, and a man that by great variety of
Fortune and Events, could not choose but have a deep insight into humane
affairs, he lays down this as a never-failing Rule, Psalm. 49. 18. Men will
praise thee when thou do well to thy self; which I think is only to say in
other words as I do, that Self-Interest in its true latitude, and most
Philosophical sense, is the root of Obligation. And we may add to what the
Psalmist has said, that men will not only praise him, but he shall have praise
of God, as well as men, and that God will not only praise, but save him into
the bargain; for Salvation is not annexed to intellectual Systems, and vain
Imaginations of Platonic Haughtiness, and Metaphysical Pride, but to a
judicious and prudent Conversation; for so the same Prince of Prophets and of
Poets tells us in the very next Psalm, where it is God himself speaks by a
Poetical (...) very frequently to be met with in that admirable Book, Psalm. 50.
23. Whosoever offers me praise, glorifieth me, and to him that orders his
Conversation aright, will I show the Salvation of God.

And now having done so great a Service to Loyalty and Religion, to this Age,
and to all that are hereafter to come, by settling the Principles of Human Life,
and Practice upon their true Foundation, for the perpetual Encouragement and
Support of Truth and Justice, and to the indelible Reproach and shame of
Schism, and Heresy, and Hypocrisy, and Lewdness, and every evil Work; a
Service which Envy cannot blast, nor Time destroy; I could be glad to dye with
all my heart, and to go the next way out of a troublesome and vexatious World;
and I would sing as I was going, with Reverence be it spoken, though in another
Sense then that in which old Simeon understood it; I say, I would sing as I was
mounting to the milky way, where the Spirits of Just men have their Eternal
Rest: Lord, Luke 2. 29, 30, 31, 32,
now let thou thy Servant depart in Peace, according to thy word, for mine
Eyes have seen thy Salvation which thou have prepared before the face of all
People, to be a Light to lighten the Gentiles, and to be the Glory of thy
People Israel.

And as Peter Ramus, who by Popish Cruelty, had an unfortunate end, did in his
Life time wish, that it might be written upon his Tomb, That there lay the
Author of that Excellent Logic, that goes under his Name; so when I dye, I
make it my Request, if I be not in a Condition to be at the the Charge of a
Monument for my self, that by the Kindness of some Friend or other, these
following Lines may be graven upon the Tomb of an unfortunate man.

Hic jacet Humani Divinique juris,
Interpres, Vindex, Assertor, Propugnator,
Vis nomen hominis? nomen illi quondam Joanni Turnero fuit,
Nunc umbra vocatur and cinis,
Et quicquid est uspiam recrementitiae rei.
Valebis and molliter, molliter calcabis,
Et humanae misertus, hoc est, tuae sortis,
Arentem temperabis lachryma favillam.
But enough of this Melancholy, this dying talk, but you will say, parturiunt
Montes, nascitur Mus. You told us of a Book, and now you think to put us off
with a Letter; but, pray good Reader, have a little Patience, and you shall
have the Book too; but why a Letter? you will say: to which I answer, and plead
the benefit of the Clergy, whose custom it has been for these twenty years
last past, when ever they are big with notion, to disburden and deliver
themselves of the Theological Minerva in a Letter to a Friend; besides, that
being so small a thing, it would not have looked decently in any other shape,
than that of an Epistle; and I designed only in this short Essay, to apply with
all the clearness and brevity I could, my Notion of the Laws of Nature to the
particular Case of Cousin Germans, and I hope I have done it so as to satisfy
all scruples, and to leave no ground for any the least inconveniency by
preventing such Marriages for the future, which does not at all affect or
prejudice what is past already; nay, I have stated the whole case with so much
clearness, and by so uniform a Principle running through all the particular
instances that concern it, that I desire no Favor or allowance from any, only
let him ask himself the Question as he reads along, whether the Marriage of
Cousin Germans in ordinary cases, and that is in all cases, but where there is
a public Interest that it should be allowed, be not against the Interest of
Mankind? Let him likewise demand of himself, whether it be not highly
reasonable, nay, necessary to the public Peace, that all such Marriages
already consummate by the Copula Carnalis, should be good and valid, nay, and
looked upon with as favorable and kind an aspect as any other Marriages
whatsoever. Lastly, let him seriously examine what his own Thoughts would
answer, if the question were proposed, whether it were not highly for the
Interest of the Public, that a Prince in either of the two Cases I have
mentioned, should be allowed to Marry a Cousin German? I say, let every man ask
himself these Questions, and I doubt not, but the Answer he will give himself,
will be very propitious and favorable to me; and he will acknowledge of his
own accord, that I have not strained my Principle further than it will go, he
will see plainly, that it will go so far, whether I will or no; and that
neither he, nor I can drive it any farther.

If you still urge me further, to whom is this wonderful business of a Letter?
Though I am not obliged to answer all the Questions that all the World shall
ask me, yet, Reader, because I have heard a good Character of you for a civil
Person, and you are said to go in the Country where you live, for a very
Candid, Christian, Courteous and Gentle Thing; therefore I will tell you under
the Seal of Confession, that it was for your self the Letter was intended, but
I did not know your Name; and they say, as honest as you are, you have a great
many; therefore I was forced to Print my Letter, that it might be sure to come
to your hands.

But this is not the Dish it self which I intend you, it is at best no more
than a Sop in the Pan, which has the relish and savor of the Meat, and by
which you may give no very uncertain guess, what sort of Entertainment you are
hereafter to expect, for I have already lying by me a great many Sheets of
Paper to which I shall add a great deal more, chiefly upon the Subject of the
Levitical Degrees, which cannot be published soon enough to satisfy the
Impatience of the public Expectation; and when it does come out, yet by reason
of much Antiquity, and many laborious, though very clear Consequences that will
be in it, it will not be fitted to the Capacity of ordinary Readers, and
therefore I chose rather to say in short, as much as was sufficient to make out
the point, (for one Demonstration is as good as a Thousand) and to do it with
that plainness both of Expression and Thought, that every man might be his own
Judge in a Case wherein almost every man may possibly be concerned.

Besides that great alterations can no more be made of a sudden in the Minds of
Men, than they can in the Customs or Manners of a Nation; and if it were so
hard a matter to persuade the Irish not to draw the Plough by the tails of
their Horses, much more will it be difficult to conquer the received Opinion of
the Lawfulness of the Marriage of Cousin Germans, wherein so powerful an
Interest is engaged, and which being once unsettled and overthrown, puts a new
Bar to the Concupiscence of men, which of all other Passions is the hardest to
be restrained.

Therefore I intend to contrive the matter, so that the World may swallow it by
degrees, and that it may make its Impressions by as gentle Motions as those by
which the Prayers of the Devout are sometimes found to leave the Marks of their
Knees upon the Stone or Marble, a sort of Impression, which, though it be made
but slowly, yet it lasts for ever; and when it is once made, it improves and
grows deeper every day than other, melted and entreated into softness by
Devotion, but never decays, and much less fills up any more. However, though my
chief Design in this Paper with which I now present you, was to remove the
Prejudices that lie against my undertaking, and to apply the general Notion of
the Laws of Nature to this Particular Case; yet because it will be expected, to
show that such Marriages come within the Statute, that I should demonstrate
their unlawfulness by the Levitical Measures; therefore this I have taken care
very briefly to do, by considering the Case of the Daughters of Zelophehad, to
which, though in my other Papers, I have spoken very largely, yet I have said
enough in these to prove by unanswerable force of Scripture and of Reason, that
all such Marriages were Levitically unlawful; and this, if it may be allowed to
pass the Pikes of prejudice and private Interest that will be sure to oppose
it, it will give me encouragement very speedily to publish what remains, but at
present my Engagements are so deep, and of so many Kinds, there being another
Piece now in the Press, which is very importunate with me to let it go abroad,
that I must be forced for a fortnight or thereabouts to give my Attendance upon
it, and I suppose in that time it will be as perfect as any thing can be
expected from so imperfect an hand; and I do the rather divert my self to that,
because it is upon an Argument very nighly related to this, the thorough
understanding of which, will afford great strength, as well as light and
clearness to it.

I shall conclude with a repeated Profession of my acting in this whole affair,
upon a Principle of Conscience, which, whatever personal failings I may have
been guilty of, has always been the measure of my Behavior with respect to
others, to the truth of which as my whole life which affords many great
Examples, in a small Fortune, of no small Justice, Integrity and Honor, is one
continual Witness, so the reflecting upon the constancy and steadiness of my
Temper in the midst of dangers on the one side, and Temptations on the other,
has frequently afforded me no small matter of Comfort, and given me mighty
encouragements from the Satisfaction which it self affords, to persevere to the
end in a constant Adherence to Loyalty, Justice and Truth, let my Condition in
the outward view of those that judge by appearances, be never so calamitous or
unfortunate.

For I always considered, that the seat of Happiness or Misery is in the mind,
and therefore if that be well, all is right, let things appear how they will;
and as I have honestly endeavored many a time, when I have wounded my
Conscience by transgressing the Rules of Virtue or good manners to lick my self
whole by Repentance, and arm my self with greater Vigilance and Resolution for
the Future, so I shall seriously and earnestly persuade you, my Reader, of
whom, though I tell you I have heard a good Character, yet good News proves
oftener to be false, than true, that if you are a bad man, you would reflect
considerately and coolly with your self upon the Folly and Unreasonableness of
sin, and set upon a speedy and effectual Reformation; but if you are that good
man I take you to be, continue as you are, you will find the Comfort of it in
all your concerns; God will bless, and men will praise you, your Affairs will
be prosperous, and your Bones fat, and your Heart merry, you will not be afraid
of the Terrors by night, nor of the Arrows that fly abroad by day; you will
have a perpetual Calm of Joy and Peace attending upon your Person, and a
Seeurity which no Fears can shake, will entrench and encamp it self round about
your Habitation; it will be the best Comforter in your Sickness, the best
Preparation for Death, and the best Advocate at the day of Judgment; therefore
in the Name of God, and for the sake of our selves, let us lay aside all
Personal and all Political Vices, and let us heartily repent us of our sins,
and be in perfect Charity with one another.

Farewell.
A Letter of Resolution to a Friend concerning the Marriage of Cousin Germans.
SIR,
I Have received so many Testimonies of Kindness from you, that I cannot
believe otherwise, but the Advice you give me, not to trouble the World with
the Discourse I have promised of the Marriage of Cousin Germans, with which you
are pleased to say, I have threatened the Nation, and am like to make a
Disturbance in it, proceeds from the same cause likewise, your continued
Goodness and Affection to me; but I assure you, I am so far from having any
turbulent or unquiet Projects in my Head, that a natural Inclination to all the
greatest Instances of Peace and Friendship, is a thing so essential to my
Constitution, that I cannot take so much as a just and necessary Revenge
without a great deal of real Trouble and Affliction to my self, much less would
I give any the least Occasion of Displeasure to those from whom I never
received the least Disobligation; and you cannot but imagine, that I am a
Cousin German my self to some body or other, and therefore have no reason to be
angry with the Name, unless I have a mind to write Books against my self, as
Mr. Baxter does; but yet after all, I see no Reason to desist from my
undertaking, and that it may not be thought that what I do, is the effect only
of an obstinate and wayward humor without Reason; therefore I hold my self
obliged to give you all the Satisfaction which the narrow bounds of a Letter
will allow.

I am very sensible what a mighty torrent of prejudice I am to stemm, and that
not only from the Displeasure of those, who are themselves engaged in Marriages
of this Nature, or are descended from such as have been so, but also from this,
that all the Learned men that have written, do generally determine contrary to
me, insomuch, that even the Lutheran Churches themselves, which to avoid
scandal, do not allow the Practice of it, yet it is the received Opinion of all
their Divines, that all such Marriages are lawful; but, Sir, if a man must
never stand up in the defense of Truth, when there is an Interest engaged
against it; and if this had always been the Practice of the World, then no
vulgar Error could ever have been corrected, nor any fashionable or customary
Vice reproved. If this were a Rule universally to be observed, then our Savior
should not have come into the World, whose whole life after he entered upon the
Administration of his Prophetical Office, which he did about four Years before
his Crucifixion, was a perpetual Combat with the Prejudices, and the Passions,
and the false Notions of men. And, Sir, the Vindication of that Truth which I
pretend to maintain, being, as I think, of so manifest and undeniable
Consequence to the Peace of the World, which was the great Design of our
Saviors appearance upon Earth, and of all the Doctrines which he delivered,
there is some Analogy, with all humble Reverence and Duty, be it spoken,
betwixt the Case of my great Lord and Master (the Author and Finisher of our
common Faith) and mine; for I am sent on his Errant by the Appointment of the
Church, which has thought fit to impress the Priestly Character upon me, as he
was on the Fathers; and the same Message is common to us both, to exhort people
to love and be helpful to one another, and to persuade to the constant Practice
of those Duties, which make both for Temporal and Eternal Peace.

If Prejudices, which will always be strong against every Undertaking that is
but new and bold, were a sufficient Argument why men should not attempt them,
then the Reformation should never have been begun, the Copernican Hypothesis,
and the Cartesian Philosophy should never have been communicated to the World;
the Antipodes to this day would have remained as great an Heresy, as it was in
those times of Ignorance and Darkness, when a Bishop was removed from his
Office and Dignity for asserting it; the Circulation of the Blood would have
been as great a Secret now, as it was before Solomon's time, whom one Learned
Author more Ingenious than Wise, would have to have been the Inventor of it; or
as it has been ever since till our late Famous Doctor Harvey discovered it; if
this Principle were always to be followed, Columbus had left a new World
undescryed; nay, if this Principle were the general measure of Action, that a
man must never speak, but in the common Road, and as the Prejudices or the
present Interests of particular persons would have him, then no man should dare
to oppose a Faction, though in defense of his King, his Country, or the
Church; and still the more dangerous that Faction is, the more pressing is this
Argument which is drawn from the Prejudices or the Passions of men upon us, to
let them alone. But, Sir, we are not to be pleasers of men, but of God; and we
are to tread in the steps of the Captain of our Salvation, who through much
Tribulation, and through Death it self, the most painful and ignominious Death
that Human Nature was capable of enduring, led us the way to Heaven; and who
has commanded us to do our Duty with Cheerfulness and Courage, without either
Fear or Favor, whatever the Event and Consequence of it be; The Disciple, said
he, Matthew. 10. 24, 25, 26, 27.
is not above his Master, nor the Servant above his Lord: It is enough for the
Disciple that he be as his Master, and the Servant as his Lord: Fear them not
therefore: but what I tell you in Darkness, that speak ye in Light: and what ye
hear in the Ear, that preach ye upon the House-tops. And if this were our
Saviors Injunction to his Disciples, Twelve Poor and Inconsiderable men of no
Interest or Reputation in the World, and against whom the Interest of the whole
World was engaged, if they notwithstanding all the Discouragements, and all the
Dangers they met with, did yet, for all that, persist in the defense of that
Cause which they had undertaken; and did not only fight the good Fight of
Faith, but after having received many heavy Strokes and grievous Wounds, died
manfully upon the Spot, and in the Field, as became true Soldiers of that
heavenly Warfare; how much more are we obliged, when we have not such
Difficulties, or such Dangers to encounter with, to imitate so brave, and so
blessed an Example? And what a shame would it be, when they have shown us the
way through so many Tribulations into the Joys and Glories of the other World,
if we should be afraid, when it is for the Public Good, and for the Peace of
Mankind, that Cousin Germans should not Marry, to oppose so small an Interest
as will be found upon Examination to be engaged for it?

But yet after all, it is very strange, that there should be any Prejudices
upon this account, because so many are engaged to one another in the Band of
Matrimony, who stand related in the Degree of Cousin Germans, or at least, that
they should be so prejudiced, as that this Prejudice of theirs should be
incurable, when the Principles I have laid down are such, that they serve every
whit as well to confirm the Marriages already consummate by bodily Knowledge,
as to prevent those which are not yet entered into, or those which being
solemnized in the face of the Church, have not yet received their final
Consummation; the Reason is this. It is for the Interest of Mankind, that
Friendships should be spread as far as may be, and that the Concerns and
Interests of many men should be as much as may be, perplexed and entangled into
one another, that so the same common Hopes, and Fears, and Ends, and Desires,
may produce an Harmony in Affection, and a common Band of Unity and Peace; and
I shall make it appear evidently to the World in a very little time, that the
Amorites were not only destroyed by a Supernatural Judgment, but by this
natural Cause and Reason also, that being so guilty as they were of incestuous
Copulations, their Friendships and their Interests were consined within so
small a compass, and they were so divided among themselves, that they became an
easy Prey to the Conqueror, and were divided into so many petty
Principalities, each of which was no better than one pretty large Family; that
what was said of the Britains, when Caesar made a descent upon this Island with
his victorious Legions, was true, of them; Dum singuli pugnant, universi
vincuntur; and I desire it may be considered, if, as the Amorites were used
always to Marry within so narrow a compass, which was the true reason of all
those petty Principalities in ancient times, when Abraham with his one Family
was not only called a Confederate of four Kings, but as appears by the event of
the story, was in power and strength superior to Five, and yet could not muster
above three hundred men; I say, if as the Amorites and other ancient Nations
were used to Marry within these narrow limits, so now it should be the
universal Practice for all men to Marry no farther of^ than Cousin Germans, or
second Cousins, it is very easy to perceive how this would untie the straitest
Bands of Human Society, which begin in Generation, and are propagated first by
Consanguinity, and then by Marriage; neither are there any Friendships so
trusty, nor any Interests in the common Practice of the World that may so
safely be relied upon, as those which depend by Consanguinity upon Obligations
of Nature, or by Affinity upon the Matrimonial Contract; and if we should
suppose all Families to marry within themselves, he must be blind that cannot
see, that there would be almost so many divided and disagreeing Interests in
the World, and that there would be no end of Eternal Feuds and Quarrels between
one Clan or Head of a Family and his Dependants, and another; whereas, if you
mix these Families together, so as suppose there be twenty Persons allied to
one another in the Degree of Cousin Germans belonging to two several Families,
Ten of each, they shall marry the Ten Males into Ten new Families with which
they had no Consanguinity or Affinity before, and the Ten Females likewise into
Ten others, and if you take in the external Dependances by Trade, or
Friendship, or Obligation of all these two and twenty Families, it is manifest,
that here must needs be a very great, nay, an almost incredible Advantage given
to Friendship and Society among men, whereas on the contrary, if these Twenty
persons shall intermarry with one another, being supposed to be Cousin Germans,
they acquire no new Interest or Dependence by this Marriage; and as being
Cousin Germans, being removed only by their immediate respective Parents from
the common head of the Family, this is a joining the very first partings of
Nature, and a return into the common Parent by those who are so nearly related
by Consanguinity to him, that all that can be truly affirmed of their distance,
is, that they are not immediately descended from his Loins.

And this, instead of begetting Love in the World, does in reality produce
Hatred; for when there is so good Reason why they should Marry farther off, and
so plain a natural Demonstration, that it is exceedingly to the Prejudice of
Mankind for them to intermarry with one another, if after this they shall yet
notwithstanding do it, this looks exactly as if it were some Grudge or aversion
which they have taken inwardly against all other Kindreds or Families, but
their own; and whoever will give himself the leisure of revolving in his mind,
not only the strength of this Demonstration, which is unanswerable, but also
the Proportion in which the Marriage of Cousin Germans is prejudicial to
Mankind, will manifestly discern, that it is naturally unlawful, if that be the
true measure of the Laws of Nature, which I have assigned, that they are all
founded in the Interest of Mankind; and at least thus much must of necessity be
granted, that it has the same Reason of being forbidden, for which all Human
Laws do forbid any thing in the World; for these Laws in all their
Prohibitions, as well as in whatsoever they command, do consider nothing but
the Interest of Human Society, and the Welfare of those people that are to obey.

Philo Judaeus in his Excellent Treatise de Legibus specialibus founds all the
Prohibitions of the Law of Moses upon the Interest of Human Society; and so
does the Civil Law of Rome, as may be seen in the Institutes of Justinian, and
in the Digests themselves under the Title de Ritu Nuptiarum, as I could prove
more largely, if brevity were not the thing at which I now aim; and for this
Reason, as well by the Jewish, as the Roman Law, the latter of which I can
evidently prove, as to these Cases, was borrowed from the former, as has
already been taken notice by Mr. Seldom and other Learned men, and as it might
easily be proved by a particular induction; I say, as well by the Jewish, as
the Roman Law, Affinities were forbidden to the same Degrees, that
Consanguinities were, and the Roman Laws were so tender, which I believe was
likewise borrowed from the Jews, for they had likewise such a thing as Adoption
among them, that an adoptive Child was looked upon as a real one, and a man
could no more Marry his adoptive Daughter than his own; the Reason was, because
by Adoption and Affinity men were taken into that Family into which they were
adopted, or to which they were allied by Marriage, and so they were all looked
upon as Confederates one with another, and therefore for the Interest of Human
Society, and for the enlarging of Friendships among men; it was more reasonable
that they should seek abroad for new Dependances and new Relations, than that
they should intermarry at home with one another; and by that means shut up
their Interest in a more narrow compass, when it was capable of being farther
spread to the great Benefit and Advantage of Human Life.

It is likewise further to be observed in this case, that the Egyptians, though
otherwise a people hated by God, or at least forsaken and abandoned by him,
though the Divine Nature be in it self impassible, are no where charged with
any incestuous Crime, no more are the Philistines or Moabites, or the Sons of
Ammon, or of Amalek, the Tyrians, or the Sidonians; and it is well known, that
all these were potent and formidable Nations, whereas the Amorites by confining
their Interests within so small a compass, were a Prey to their Enemies, and to
one another; and I can further make it unquestionably appear out of Aeschylus
his (...), That the Marriage of Cousin Germans was generally held to be
unlawful and detestable all over the East.

If you demand further of me, how far these Prohibitions extended? I answer,
that as it was for the Interest of Mankind, that new Friendships should be made
by Marriage, so likewise both Gratitude and Interest would require, that the
old ones should not be forgotten, and that this was the Practice of the ancient
Mortals, appears from a Passage of St Austine in his de Civitate Dei: L 15 c. 16
Fuit antiquis patribus religiosae curae, ne ipsa propinquitas se paulatim
propaginum ordinibus dirimens, longius abiret, ac propinquitas esse desisteret,
eam nondum long positam rursus Matrimonii vinculo colligare and quodammodo
revocare fugientem. And if you shall still further continue to demand, what the
true Barrier and Boundary of these Prohibitions was? I answer, That it was
Second Cousins, who were called by the ^atines, Sobrini quasi Sororini or
Sororum filii, to intimate, that so far they were looked upon as Brothers and
Sisters, and were prohibited to Marry with one another, as I shall make it in
due time undeniably to appear, by comparing the Capitulars of Charlemagne which
are now Eight Hundred years old, with the Laws of the Ancient Wisigoths, and
with the Practice of the Jews and Romans.

But though the Prohibition were extended generally thus far over all the East,
yet it was more obligatory to the Jews than to any other Nations, because being
forbidden Commerce with any of the idolatrous Nations, and being always at
enmity with them they had the more need of a strict Friendship and good
Understanding between themselves; and if the Obligation were so strict to the
Jews, it is still more so to all Christian people, because the Design of the
Gospel is Peace, and the Improvement of Charity and good Nature among men; but
it is still of the greatest and most indispensable Obligation of all to this
part of Christendom, and to these unhappy times into which we are fallen,
wherein almost every man is at Enmity with his Neighbor; that for the
composing men's minds, and for the allaying their Animosities by the Caresses of
Love, men should Marry at a good Distance from themselves into a new Interest,
and a new Dependence, and that the several Parties and Factions should
intermarry with one another, which added to a vigorous Execution of the Laws
with a constant and impartial Justice by the Civil Power, is probably the only
way to allay our Heats and Divisions, and to bring us all to a more charitable
Sense and Understanding of one another. And I am humbly of Opinion, that among
all the wise Laws by which the Roman State was governed, and was by degrees
brought to that height of Greatness and of Power, there was none that
contributed so largely to that effect, as that Law which was passed by the
great Wisdom and Policy of one of the Tribunes, de Maritandis Ordinibus,
whereby the Patricii and the Plebeii, who were before at Mortal Jarrs, were
made intermarriageable with one another, which was a very natural Expedient of
calming and composing the Disturbances, which the Animosities and mutual
Resentments of the two Factions had created. And I do further propose it to
your most serious and impartial Consideration, that it would have been
impossible the Roman Empire should ever have arrived at that greatness, that it
should ever have been so strong, and so compacted at home, or so formidable
abroad, had not these Matrimonial Prohibitions been established by their Laws
and Customs, to make the Cement of Society more strong and lasting; so that
since I have already laid it down as a certain Truth, that the Prohibitions
among the Jews and Romans were the same, all the Question is, Whether Cousin
Germans were included in the Roman Prohibition, which I will prove they were,
out of a Passage in Plutarch in his Questiones Romanae, and out of a Fragment
of Vlpian published by Pythaeus, in the Author of the Collations of the Mosaic
and Roman Laws, and out of the Digests of Justinian, under the Title de Ritu
Nuptiarum, and that this Prohibition extended still further to Second Cousins,
I will make it very highly probable from a Passage in Athenaeus.

There are other natural Reasons, which may be assigned why the Marriage of
Cousin Germans is unlawful, and which I do now purposely omit, that I may not
detain you too long from your Occasions; but yet however since the main Reason,
and since all the Reasons that can be assigned, are founded in the Interest of
Human Society, it is as much for that Interest, that all the Marriages of this
Nature already consummate by carnal Knowledge, should stand good and
indissoluble, as that all such Marriages should, de futuro, be hindered; nay,
rather more, because the Inconveniency which the Dissolution of such Marriages
would produce, would be so sudden and so present, as well as so great, by
branding so many Families or their Descendents with ignominious Names, and by
punishing them with other legal Inconveniences to the infinite Detriment and
Confusion of the Civil State; whereas, as to the time to come, these Marriages
having had their ultimate and final Consummation in the Bed, are valid upon the
same Reasons for which they were naturally prohibited before, which natural
Inconveniency not having been computed by the Parties concerned; nay more, they
having been told by all the Lawyers and Divines, That it was Lawful, certainly
men that have not leisure to make a particular enquiry themselves, may very
well be excused; and they are so far from having any need to blush, that they
have done nothing, but what any honest and good man in the same Circumstances
would have done; neither do I so much blame the Divines, nor the Lawyers
neither, who in such Cases are used to follow one another; and the opinion of
one great man, as, humanum est errare, is usually the measure by which they all
proceed; besides that, they are therefore also the more to be excused, because
what they have determined in this Case, was out of Charity and good Will, that
they might not create Disturbance (though that according to these Principles
they need not have done) in the Commonwealth, and because they went upon that
Principle, of C. Tit. de Reg. jur. 56. t. and 122.
Gajus in the Civil Law, semper in dubiis benigniora praeferenda sunt, and of
Ib. 179.
Paulus l. 16. ad Plautium, Libertas omnibus rebus favorabilior est; and of Ib.
192.
Marcellus l. 29. Digestorum. In re dubia benigniorem interpretationem sequi
non minus justius est quam tutius; who likewise tells us in another place, in
obscura voluntate manumittentis favendum est Libertati Ib. 183.
. The meaning of all which, is plainly this, That the Nature and Design of all
Laws, being to put a restraint upon human Liberty, they are constantly to be
expounded in the most favorable sense, because to do otherwise, would be to
put a greater Restraint upon those, to whom the Law was given, then was perhaps
intended by the Lawgiver himself; and if men from the plain and unavoidable
Signification of Words, will have recourse to what they may possibly signify,
or to the possible intention of the Lawmakers in them; this possibility of
Intention or Interpretation, is a thing of so great Latitude, as makes the
Signification of every Law uncertain, and consequently under pretense of laying
a greater Obligation upon men, it leaves them under none at all.

But I do humbly conceive, that in this case these Rules are not concerned:
First, because it is by no means a doubtful Case, for I offer to demonstrate as
plainly as Demonstration it self, That Cousin Germans were included within the
Levitical Degrees; and only to mention that Case now, because I cannot stay to
insist so long upon it, as I intend to do hereafter, I affirm that the Instance
of the Daughters of Zelophehad does sufficiently prove it.

For that being a Dispensation in a particular Case it is manifest, that no
particular Dispensation ought in its Consequence to be extended further, than
the reason for which it was procured, which being only for the better
Preservation of the Mosaical Partition of Inheritances in the same Family and
Line, it cannot be lawful in those places where the same sort of Partition,
together with a Design to preserve it to Posterity, does not obtain; and this
is a Rule of Vlpian, quae propter necessitatem recepta sunt, non debent in
argumentum trahi; and it is likewise another common saying among the Lawyers,
exceptio firmat regulam in non exceptis; so that this being a Dispensation in a
particular Case, it is manifest, that it ought not to be extended further than
that particular exigence for which it was procured.

Besides that had it been Lawful before, being so expedient as it was for the
Preservation of the Mosaical Partition, which was the Design of so many Laws,
that against Usury especially, and that about the Return of the Land, in case
of Mortgage, at the year of Jubilee, upon which Laws I cannot now stay to
insist; and yet for all this, Moses and the Elders not daring to determine this
Case without applying themselves immediately to God himself, nor presuming to
act otherwise, than by Divine Inspiration, this is a Demonstration that it was
a new case, and that it was not lawful before; for that which was not only
lawful in it self, but also expedient, nay, necessary to the great end of so
many of the Jewish Laws, which was to preserve the Inheritances in their proper
House and Line, might certainly have been done either by the private choice of
the Parties without consulting Moses, and much more by the Authority of Moses
and the Elders themselves, without consulting the voice of God; which, since
they did not do, this is the most Emphatical, and the most remarkable way that
could have been contrived to show us the Unlawfulness of the Marriage of Cousin
Germans in all ordinary Cases, but only in this which was peculiar to the
Jewish State, unless you will except the Laws of Athens, which took their Copy
from thence; and where the same Laws were observed, and for the same Reason, as
I have proved more largely in some other Papers which are now in the Press.

Further, the play of Aeschylus, which I have mentioned, I will prove to all
the World to have taken its Plot from this Story of Zelophehad and his
Daughters, and there the Poet making only a Fiction of the case, and supposing
the Father to be alive, who in the Writings of Moses, and in the truth of the
Story, was dead, has contrived the Business so, that his whole Tragedy is but
one continued Declamation against the Marriage of Cousin Germans, (...),
because the Father was not yet deceased, as the Scholiast upon that Author does
expressly say.

Lastly, when it is made lawful by the Law of Moses, for the Brother to raise
up Seed unto the Brother, nay, not only lawful but a Duty, in case the elder
Brother died without Issue, shall we from thence infer, that it was lawful in
all other cases besides, notwithstanding it is expressly prohibited in the
Eighteenth of Leviticus? And if a particular Dispensation must not be extended
in one case beyond the reason for which it was procured, why should it in
another? when, besides that such Marriages are forbidden in Leviticus, the
general reason why it ought not to be extended to any other case, is this, that
a particular Dispensation is in its own nature distinguished from a general
License, and to extend any Grant further than the reason for which it was
obtained, is to say, in effect, That it was obtained for such a reason, and it
was not obtained for such a reason at the same time, which is a Contradiction.
And this, besides the reason of the thing, and the Opinions of the greatest
Lawyers among the Romans, which have been already produced, is still further
confirmed by the Authority of St. Ambrose in his Epistle to Paternus, where
speaking of Theodosius his Prohibition of the Marriage of Cousin Germans, who
yet reserved to himself a Power of dispensing in particular Cases, as Theodoric
did afterward, as may be seen by the Form of the Imperial Dispensation in
Cassiodorus, he has these words: Sed dicis alicui relaxatum, verum hoc Legi
non praejudicat, quod enim in commune statuitur, ei tantum proficit cui
relaxatum videtur.

But I foresee you will object, that the Prohibition of Cousin Germans is not
expressly set down in the Eighteenth of Leviticus, as that of the Brothers
Marrying the Brothers Wife, in any but the case excepted, is; to which I answer,

First, that whether this Prohibition were positively set down in Leviticus or
no, yet this hinders not, but the Lawyers Rule concerning Dispensations, quae
propter necessitatem recepta sunt, non debent in Argumentum trahi, may, and
ought to take place in this, as well as in any other Instance whatsoever. But
secondly, I do humbly propose it as an undeniable Truth, That the Marriage of
Cousin Germans is expressly prohibited in Leviticus it self; but if, when I say
expressly, men will needs understand it of some one word that does, without a
Periphrasis, signify a Cousin German; this is not to be expected, because
there is no such word in Hebrew, neither does (...) signify in its first
notion properly a Cousin German, but in general, any, whom by reason of too
near Consanguinity, it is not lawful to Marry, as I can, and will, in my larger
Papers, prove; but to insist upon this matter now so fully as I ought to do,
would spin out my Discourse to too great a length; therefore I pass on in the
second place to observe, that this Rule of the Lawyers, that all doubtful
things are to be interpreted in the most favorable sense, though it should be
applied to the Case of Cousin Germans, yet it would do it no good; for where a
private and a public Interest interfere with one another, that is always to be
interpreted the most favorable Sense, which is most favorable to the Interest
of the Public, it being very unreasonable, that any private Member of a
Commonwealth should live upon the Spoils, and by the Damage of it, as it has
been demonstrated, that it would be in this Case, not only in its self, but
likewise in its example.

Again, because it may be objected, that the Damage accruing to the public,
not being much, discernable nor, from the Marriage of Cousin Germans, it would
be unreasonable to call such Marriages in question, when the Damage is so
little of letting them alone; and the Inconveniency that would happen from
disturbing them, would be so great; to this I answer: First, that we cannot
easily compute what Detriment has already been sustained by the Marriages of
Cousin Germans, unless we would tell where they would have Married, had they
not Married one another, nor consequently what Friendships might have been
made, nor what Quarrels prevented or reconciled; only of this in General, we
are certain, that the odds is great as to point of public Interest, and for
the Promoting of Friendship and Interest among men, between the Marriage of
Cousin Germans, and those that are at a further distance from one another; and
if you shall consider with your self what a mighty influence the Discontent or
Animosity of one single man may sometimes have upon the public Peace;
certainly no means ought to be neglected, by which so many Quarrels may be
prevented, so many Friendships made, and so many Piques and Enmities reconciled.

Secondly, we are not so much to consider what real Inconveniency has actually
happened, as what would happen, if the Marriage of Cousin Germans were
universally practiced, by dividing Mankind into so many petty Societies and
independent Cabals, as a man for robbing upon the Highway is apprehended and
hanged, not because he himself has done so great a Damage to the Public, but
because if this were universally practiced and permitted, we should be actually
in a state of War, and there would be no face of a Commonwealth any longer; and
the same reason holds in Proportion in Cousin Germans, if it be true, as I have
said, that the universal practice of it would destroy the State; and therefore
it ought not to be allowed in a particular instance, though it had not been
forbidden by the Law of God, as it is manifest it is.

But for those Marriages of this Nature that are already consummated by the
Copula Carnalis, I am so far from disturbing them, that I wish them all much
joy with all my heart, and I should never count it a Disparagement, but an
Honor, if they were otherwise virtuous and good People, to be descended of
such Parents; for they proceeded upon the best grounds they could, they did not
understand the inconveniency that such Marriages bring to the Public; and they
had the Concurrence of many great Lawyers and Divines for what they did, so
that upon all accounts they are excused, they ought to persist in what they
have done for the very same Reason for which, if they had been further
informed, they should have avoided it before; and what they have done, is so
far from having any thing of heinous in it, that it is not so much as an object
of Repentance; and so as I have said already, I wish them all with all the
Reason and Justice in the World, much Joy and Comfort in their Conjugal
Embraces, neither ought it to derive any Envy upon me, that I have thus
elaborately made it my Endeavor to hinder all such Matches for the Future; for
if they be manifestly against the Interest of Mankind, no man ought to be
displeased at me for doing that, which is of so manifest tendency to the
Public Good, and indeed ought rather to thank me, that I have thus adventured
at a Critical and dangerous time to stemm the Torrent of Prejudice and received
Opinion, of which there are but few men that would not have been afraid, and if
besides its being prohibited by the Laws of Nature, it be likewise forbidden by
the Scripture it self, certainly every man that has not a mind to proclaim a
Waragainst Heaven, must at the same time of necessity be at peace with me.

But whatever the case of Private Persons may be, I do allow, that it is a part
of the natural Prerogative of Princes and Persons nighly related to the Crown,
to Marry a Cousin German, and this I speak without any Court Flattery or
Parasitical Design, as a thing following evidently from the Principles I have
laid down, and of the Naturalness and Easiness of the Consequence I will make
my Adversaries themselves the Judges.

For in the first place it is so much for the interest of the Public, that the
mind of a Prince should not be discomposed, and his Counsels rendered by the
disturbance of his mind, less judicious and steady, it is so great a Prejudice
to the Civil State, that the Passions of a Prince should be enflamed beyond the
Bounds of Discretion, that upon the same Principle of Public Interest, it is
allowable to him to Marry a Cousin German, for which it is forbidden to others;
and this seems to have been the case of Rehoboam, who Married a Cousin German.

Another Reason which may make it not only lawful, but necessary for a Prince
or any that have a probable Relation to the Crown, to be dispensed with, is for
the peace and safety of Mankind, for the uniting of two great Interests
together, which might otherwise be a mutual Nuisance and Detriment to each
other; and this justifies the Marriage of his Highness the Prince of Orange,
with the most Illustrious Princess the Lady Mary, a Daughter of England,
neither is this only my Opinion, but it is allowed likewise by Hemingius in his
Opuscula, and by Zepperus in his Excellent Treatise of the Mosaic Laws in the
Case of Maximilian the Second, Emperor of Germany, who likewise took a Cousin
German to Wife, at which, notwithstanding the Lutherans do acknowledge it to be
lawful, yet many were offended at it, as a thing of bad Example, and such as
afforded matter of Scandal to the Adversaries of Religion, and to the weak
Religionists themselves, from which case of Maximilians, the Inference is
easy, that if the Lutherans were offended at it, notwithstanding they did
acknowledge it to be barely lawful; then much less ought it to be allowed in
any private Person, where it can be proved so plainly to be prohibited and
unlawful; and so much for this time. I desire you seriously to consider of what
I have written, and to expect what remains with Patience, as well as to judge
of this with Ingenuity and Candor.

I am, Sir, Yours.

FINIS.
Books Printed for Walter Kettilby at the Bishops Head in St. Paul 's Church
Yard.
PRosecution no Persecution, or the Difference between Suffering for
Disobedience and Faction, upon Phil. 1. 29. Preached a^t St. Edmonds-Bury in
Suffolk on the 29. of March 1681. by Nath. Bisby, D. D. 4to.

A Sermon Preached before the Lord Mayor at Bow-Church, on the 29th of May
1682. by Benjamin Calamy, D. D. 4to.

The Harmony of Natural and Positive Divine Laws: by Walter Charleton, M. D.
8vo.

Two Discourses Introductory to a Disquisition, demonstrating the Unlawfulness
of Marriage of Cousin Germans, from Law, Reason, Scripture and Antiquity: by
John Turner, late Fellow of Christs-Colledge in Cambridge. 8 vo.

Constantius the Apostate, being a short Account of his Life, and the Sense of
the Primitive Church about his Succession, and their Behavior toward him,
wherein is shown the Unlawfulness of excluding the next Heir upon the Account
of Religion, and the necessity of Passive Obedience, as well to unlawful
Oppressors, as legal Persecutors, being a full Answer to a late Pamphlet
entitled Julian the Apostate.

Mr. Richardson's Sermon before the Lord Mayor. 4to.

-- Evans his Sermon before the Lord Mayor. 4to.

Wray's Sermons on the 2d of September, The Rebellious City destroyed. 4to.

M. Amyraldus his Discourse of Divine Dreams, translated out of French by Mr.
Loud, together with his Preface concerning the use of Reason in matters of
Religion. 8vo.

H. Mori Opera Theologica, and Philosophica. Fol. Three Vol.

D. More's Reply to the Answer to his Antidote against Idolatry. With his
Appendix. 8vo.

-- Remarks on Judge Hales, of fluid Bodies, etc. 8vo.

-- Exposition on the Apocalypse. 4to.

-- Exposition on Daniel. 4to.

-- Confutation of Astrology, against Butler.

Dr. Sherlocks Discourse of the Knowledge of Jesus Christ. With his Defense.
8vo.

-- Answer to Danson. 4to.

-- Account of Ferguson's Commonplace Book. 4to.

Dr. Falkener's Libertas Ecclesiastica. 8vo

-- Christian Loy^ty. 8vo.

-- Vindication of Liturgies. 8vo.

-- Fowler's Libertas Evangelica. 8vo.

Mr. Scot's Christian Life. 8vo. 2d. Edit.

Dr. Worthington's great Duty of Self-Resignation. 8vo.

Smith's Pourtract of Old Age. 8vo.

Mr. Kidder's Discourse of Christian Fortitude. 8vo.

Allen's Discourse of Divine Assistance 8vo.

-- Christian Justification stated. 8vo.

-- Against Ferguson, of Justification. 8v^

-- Persuasive to Peace and Unity. With ^ large Preface. 8vo.

-- Preface to the Persuasive. Alone. 8vo.

-- Against the Quakers. 8vo.

-- Mystery of Iniquity unfolded against the Papists. 8vo.

-- Serious and Friendly Address to the Nonconformists. 8vo.

-- Practical Discourse of Humility. 8vo.


