AN ARGUMENT IN DEFENSE OF THE HOSPITALLER OF St. THOMAS SOUTHWARK AND OF His
Fellow Servants and Friends in the same House.

LONDON, Printed in the Year, MDCLXXXIX.

To the Right Honorable The LORD MAYOR of the City of London. and to the
Honorable the Court of Aldermen.
Right Honorable,
I Confess it was a great surprise to me to see an Order of Court made for my
Ejectment out of this House, in behalf of Mr. Hughes the old Illegal
Incumbent, without being first heard what I had to say for my self, but an
after game being better then no Game at all, I have here made the best I can of
a bad Market, and have endeavored to lay before you a true state of the Case,
humbly Entreating you to consider a little further before you determine finally
and Peremtorily in the matter, against the only Son of a Citizen like your
selves, who has upon that account an equitable pretense to your favor, to say
nothing of that Justice which every Foreign Petitioner may claim.

I am satisfied by the wording of your said Order that you have been
misinformed in the nature of the Controversy betwixt Mr. Hughes and me, as if
he had a legal night accruing to him upon the restitution of the Charter,
which I am well assured he has not, and I must appeal to all indifferent
persons whether I have not sufficiently proved it.

This is one plain misapprehension, which seems to me to evacuate the said
Order, because it is Founded upon it, and if it had not been for that, it
appears to me by the express tenor of it, that no such Order had ever been
made.

Another is, that the very Order it self in whatsoever words it be conceived,
supposes the Cognizance of this matter to ly immediately and properly before
you, which I humbly conceive it does not, but before the King, till he shall be
pleased to remit it ba^k to you, which I shall be so far from being
dissatisfied at, that I repose a perfect confidence in your goodness and
justice to me, and I attribute it to nothing but a misunderstanding that any
prejudice has been done me in this affayr. You ought not, my Lord and
Gentlemen, to think your selves depretiated or undervalu'd in that I say, the
King is your Superior in those things which belong properly and legally to his
inspection, when ever he pleases to concern himself about them, and which he
has actually taken into his immediate care; King Charles the Second, of
Glorious and Blessed memory, having made a Royal regulation in this House,
which cannot be altered, as I am humbly of opinion, by any lesser power without
the Royal assent. Neither is it or can it be thought any diminuition to your
Honorable Court, that you should reverse the sentence you have past, when even
the greatest Lawyers do frequently alter their minds, and the decrees of
Chancery reversing one another are a plain indication that even they are not
infallible, whose business and employment it is to understand these matters
better then others; I leave it to your Lordship and the Court to consider among
many other things that appear to be foul against him, whether the King if it
were referred to his Majesty to determine, would think it fit to feed with his
own proper bread, or to bestow the rewards of Virtue and Obedience upon the
Patron and Encomiast of his Grandsire's Murder. I wish your Lordship and the
Honorable Court all Happyness and prosperity, and I pray as for the Peace of
the Land of Canaan in general, this Land of our Nativity that flows with Milk
and Honey, so more especially for that of your Jerusalem, and that they may
prosper that love it. I am, may it please your Lordship and the Honorable
Court,

Your Honor's most humble, Obedient and obliged Servant John Turner.

THE CASE Between Mr. Hughes, the late pretended Hospitaller of St. Thomas
Southwark, and Mr. Turner the present Lawful Incumbent of the same, truly
Stated.
Qui aliquid Statuerit part inaudita altera
Aequum licet Statuerit, haut aequus fuerit.
Ad orbilium Hugonem
Carpere vel noli nostra, vel Ede tua.
BEcause Mr Hughes the late pretended Hospitaller of St Thomas Southwark,
renews his pretensions upon the Restitution of the Charter, as if there were
such a necessary Connection betwixt old Men and old Franchises, that both must
unavoidably be restored together, therefore I am obliged in my own just and
necessary defense, in opposition to the false and unjust insinuations of an
Illegal pretender, to State the whole matter as it is in it self, and to
suggest such considerations as do naturally arise from it, to keep the Legal
possession I am in, and to preserve my self from his intended intrusions and
usurpations upon it.

Mr Hughes was ejected at the same time or within a very little while after,
that Judgment was had and Entered upon the Quo Warranto against the Charter of
this Famous City, and therefore this is all which he urges in his defense, the
Charer is restored, and so am I: For we are more nearly related then the two
Tyndaridae, (Mr Hughes, who is a Schoolmaster knows who I mean) that use to
live and dye by Turns, and like Hippocrates his twins, we both of us share in
the same common Fate, we laugh in consort, and we weep together.

Now to answer the more effectually this shrewd and Pestilent objection raised
against me, by a man, that I hope, understands Grammar a little better then he
seems to do Sense, I beg leave in the first place to lay down Mr Seymours Case,
as it was ingeniously and truly Stated by himself, together with the opinions
of three of the best Lawyers and persons of the most unquestionable Honor and
Integrity, as well as Skill in their Profession, that this Nation affords upon
it, and then to raise such observations from the whole, as affect my Case as
well as his, and to make such other animadversions and remarks upon the
Circumstances peculiar to Mr Hughes or me, as the occasion calls for, which I
will do with all the Clearness and brevity I am able, without giving my self
that Latitude either for anger or wit, which Mr Hughes his provocations would
incite me to, or which his untoward History would afford me, and in a word,
without any other reflection, then what the matters of Fact essential to my
defense do of necessity constrain me to, reserving his life to be written by
some other hand, if there be any that think it worth their while, or if there
be any that can take a pleasure, which I find to be very unnatural to me, in
exposing the Faults or Follies or in upbraiding the complexionall misfortunes
of little or imprudent men.

The Case as it was Stated by Mr S. and was resolved by those Learned
Gentlemen, is as follows.
The Case.
KIng Edward the 6th. having Founded and Endowed St. Thomas Hospital in
Southwark, grants the Lands and Revenues belonging to the same, to the Mayor
Commonalty and Citizens of the City of London, for the benefit of Sick and Lame
indigent Persons, with liberty in his Charter reserved to visit and enquire
into the management of the trust.

According to the usage of the City, the house has been always governed by
Citizens and others appointed by the Court of Aldermen, the Governors of the
house for the time being, and the Court of Aldermen, according to the laws and
customs of the City, chose A their Clerk.

A Quo Warranto being afterward brought against the City and Judgment Anno
1683. being thereupon had and entered, a Commission was thereupon granted to
certain Aldermen and others to regulate the said Hospital, and ( inter alia)
to appoint Governors and Officers of the house.

The said Commissioners appoint B. to be Clerk of the house instead of A.
during the pleasure of that Court of Commissioners.

His Late Majesty ( James the Second, when this Case was stated) restores to
the City their ancient government, Lands, Tenements, Franchises, Privileges,
etc. and soon after issues out his Proclamation for restoring Corporations,
etc. dated the 17th of October 1688. and dissolves the said Commission.

The Case being thus stated the question is.

Whether by the said restitution of the Charter, etc. and by the said
Proclamation or either of them (B not having been discharged of his office by
the Commissioners) A has any right to be restored to his office of Clerk;
especially if the Court of Aldermen has since the restitution of the Charter,
confirmed all officers belonging to the City in their respective places and the
right should appear in that Court to choose a Clerk of the said Hospital.

Sr. Francis Pembertons resolution of this Case.

I conceive that the Court of Aldermen being the persons who authorized the
Governors of this Hospital by their order, when the Corporation of the City
of London was dissolved by the Judgment in the Quo Warranto, the authority of
those Governors of the Hospital ceased, and they cannot act again without a
new order or appointment of the Court of Aldermen, and I conceive the King's
proclaimation in October, 1688. does not give any Authority to the former
Governors of the hospital to Act by the former Authority to them given by the
former order of the Court of Aldermen, but they ought to be Commissionated by a
new order, before they Act as Governors.

I do apprehend this place of Clerk to the Governors not to be a standing
Office, but rather an Employment in it is nature, to be put in or out by the
Court of Aldermen if they please, or, if the Court of Aldermen please, by the
Governors, but such Clerk has no fixed interest in his Employment, and A. has,
I conceive, no right to this place, unless be should see a new chosen and
appointed thereunto by a new Order, and the Kings Proclamation in October
extends to the enabling and empowering all members and Officers of Corporations
to act as they might have done before the Quo Warranto's were brought, but that
extends only to what they might do, as members or Officers of those
Corporations, but not to any collateral matters, which they might have done by
virtue of any collateral Commissions derived from those Corporations, as the
case of these Governors and clerk of this Hospital are.

And I conceive that any Governors of this Hospital appointed by those who
acted as Mayor and Aldermen of London by virtue of any Letters Patents, since
the Judgment in the Quo Warranto, are all disabled to act or do any thing as
Governors, Letters Patents to those Mayors and Aldermen being set aside by
this Kings Proclamation in October last, and all the authorities derived under
those Letters Patents, as depending on them, falling with them.

Fr. Pemberton.

Mr. Pollexfen's Opinion of the same Case.
I conceive that the Clerk has not any Office or Estate, but is only a Servant
to the Governors, not within the Charter of restitution, or the Proclamation,
claiming any legal right or interest; but is at will of the Governors, and
they at their will and pleasure may put out or take in, or employ in the place
whom they think fit.

Hen. Pollexfen.
Jan. 11. 1688.
Sir John Holt's Opinion to the same purpose.
I conceive that the Clerk not being a Charter Officer is not restored by the
Kings Proclamation, which extends only to such Officers and members of the
Corporations, which were made upon the Original constitution, or by virtue of
some Charter, but the Clerks place is only a Service or an employment, which is
wholly at the disposal of the Governors, as they shall think fit.

J. Holt.
January. 15. 88.
The First observation I shall make from hence shall be taken from the stateing
of the Case it self, wherein it is set forth that this Hospital being Founded
by King Edward the Sixth, the care and trust of it from time to time was
committed to the Mayor, Aldermen, and Commonalty of the City of London,
reserving to himself and Successors a liberty to visit and enquire into the
management of the trust, and without any such express reservation in the
Charter it self, it is but reasonable and Just that in all Hospitals that are
of Royal Foundation, the King should be the proper and Supreme Visitor, because
without this the King and his Successors can have no Assurance, but that his
Royal Intentions may be disappointed, his Charity Embezled, and the trust which
is reposed in certain Persons for the due management of it betrayed, and
besides the Nature of the thing added to the express reservation of our Royal
Founder in his Charter, the King by Act of Parliament is the Supreme Visitor of
Hospitalls and Public Charities, to see that they be conferred upon fit and
suitable objects, and managed by Officers well qualified for their Employments.

Now from hence it appears that the avoidance of the Charter and the Regulation
of the Hospitalls that Followed quickly after it, have no manner of Connection
with each other; it is true indeed that after Judgment was had and entered
against the Charter, all trusts that were reposed in the City, as a
Corporation, did of necessity fall together with it, but yet it is Equally true
that the King might have visited and regulated this and other Hospitalls though
the Charter had stood, he being Supreme Visitor and Inspector of the same, but
more Especially of Royal Hospitalls that owe their Foundation, derive their
Constitution, and receive their very being from the Crown, so that it is plain
that the old Officers might have continued in this house, if the King had so
pleased, notwithstanding the Charter of the City was made void, and that the
destruction of the Charter had no immediate or consequentiall Operation upon
the Officers of this House, they not being Charter Officers, but Persons
Employed in a trust under the King, whom he may always place or displace at his
pleasure, and of whose fitness and capacity for their respective Employments he
is the Supreme and unaccountable Judge. What therefore can the man do that
comes after the King? Eccl. 2. 12. Or what inferior Authority can annull that
which the Supreme has ordered and appointed? To be plain in a Case that is not
to be dallyed with, my meaning is this, that during the Life of that Glorious
and Blessed Prince King Charles the Second, it would not have been Lawful for
any inferior Authority, though the Charter had been restored, to displace any
Officer of his Appointment in this house, by virtue of any Arbitrary Power
lodged in them, without a cause of Misdemeanor, or of incapacity particularly
assigned and represented to the King himself, whose gifts, that are properly
and Legally in his disposal, cannot be taken away by any subordinate Power,
without his consent First had and obtained in the matter. But yet I grant, that
now after the decease of that incomparable Prince, and the Restitution of the
Charter, all the Trusts that were Formerly lodged in the City do naturally
return together with it, and that the ordinary Visitation of this Hospital is
in them, unless the King and Queen shall please to interpose, which they may by
Law do as often as they think Fit, and take the Jurisdiction in General or the
ordering of any particular matter or affair into their own hands, but yet still
it continues good, that that which was Legally Established by a Lawful and
rightful King, cannot, and ought not to be changed or altered by any
Subordinate Power or Authority whatsoever, without a Cause assigned, without a
Grievance proved, without a fault alleged, in the Person that is intended to
be displaced, because this is not so much to claim a Jurisdiction over A. or B.
to whom I grant as Governors, they are Superior, but to Challenge and Arrogate
a Power to themselves Superior to that, From which alone they derive it, and
that is From the King, which all Men must needs see to be impossible and
absurd. Neither let any man here object that we were placed here by the Kings
Commissioners not by the King himself, and that the Commission was Arbitrary
and Illegal. For First, it is a Maxim in Law and reason, quod quis facit per
alium Facit per^se, what the King does by his Commissioners he does by himself,
and though I will not meddle with the Legality of the proceeding in the
avoidance of the Charter, and entering up Judgment against it, yet thus much I
will say, that the Charter, whether right or wrong, being Actually voided,
there was no way left to manage the Affairs of the City but by Commission from
the King, and that what is necessary in the present Circumstances for the quiet
and peaceable Administration of so Populous a City, may be said at least to
have Secondary Lawfnllness, a Lawfullness deriving and holding from that
necessity, though that which gave occasion to it, should be allowed and
admitted to be Illegal, a Controversy with which I have nothing to do, and
which I do not pretend to understand; but as for that part of the Commission
which concerned the Hospital, it was in Virtue of a Power, which was always
vested in the King, and which he might always delegate to whom he pleased, so
that all the Acts they did in this affair, were unquestionably valid and
Lawful in themselves, and cannot be cancelled or evacuated by any less
Authority, without a reason of Equity, or an Emergent reason of necessity
assiign'd. Suppose the King and Queen should graciously commit to the Mayor,
Aldermen, and Commonalty of the City, the care and management of the Tower of
London, and the disposal of the Places of Constable and Lieutenant, and Master
of the Ordinance etc. they shall still be presumed notwithstanding this, to
reserve a Power of Visitation to themselves, it is reserved in the nature of
the trust, though it were not expressly and positively provided for, and so it
is here, the Kings Charity is as much and as naturally in his own disposal
whenever he pleases to concern himself about it, as his Arsenalls or Magazins,
and, indeed the difference between these two is no more, then that by the one
the King provides for the Safety and defense of his Subjects, and by the other
he relieves the necessities of those by an effect of his mercy, whom all his
power cannot defend against the wants and Infirmities that are and will be
always incident to humane Nature, and it is but fit he should be satisfied,
whenever he desires it, as to the Conduct and management of one of these
trusts, as well as of the Other. If the King notwithstanding such Commission,
should after Enquiry and Visitation made, displace the respective Officers in
the Tower, and put others in their stead, there is no man living, I believe, in
this case that will pretend to dispute his unquestionable right in doing it,
neither would it be Lawful to displace them without his consent, though in all
other matters, and in all Future Elections when a Vacancy shall happen, the
Commission should still continue and the powers to act under it remain entire
as before, but their Commission cannot extend to things already determined by
the King, because the Kings authority is the Fountain of their power; and to
reverse his determination without a reason of equity or necessity, is to disown
that authority under which they act, and by consequence to disannull their own,
for rivers must be dry when the Fountain is destroyed.

If a man be Tenant to a Landlord and have a lease under him, he performing the
Covenants that are stipulated between them, he cannot be ejected out of his
Farm, or deprived of his Tenant-right, which is a sort of secondary Frcehold,
so that he may renew his lease from time to time, and ought to be considered
caeteris paribus, beyond any other pretender, this being a kind of
Charter-Office under the Lord of the Fee, but if a man take a Servant without
any other condition then that of paying him wages for his service, he may part
with him at pleasure for a good reason or for none at all, for the law does not
tell us who shall be are servants, ^ or oblige us to ^^ep them who her we will
^^honi which were in some sense ^^^^ (...) our (...) our (...), and I to (...)
order of Government (...) of things, but we may k^^^ whom we please; and as
long as we please, and dismiss them (...) humor as well as for a reason. If
therefore ^^e in this Hospital are Servants to a^ Master, receiving wages and
Salaries for our work, which Master is first of all the King, and Secondly a
Corporation entrusted by and under him, there is (...) question but that the
King in whom the first power is lodged, may eject (...) or Mr. (...) at his
pleasure, and we cannot complain of any legal wrong. neither can we renew any
pretentions for the future, (...) the (...) of a legal right, we never having
had any other sort of right then what was orbitrary and dependent upon his
will; but a Corporation acting under him, though the general (...) be actually
(...) upon them, yet they cannot displace a particular person whom the King
has chosen, with out first representing to his Majesty the reasons of it in
order to the obtaining his consent, so long as he is alive. For a deputy and a
servant can do no legal act in opposition to the principal from whom the
power is derived, but they may and ought to represent their reasons, if they be
of consequence to the good of the house, and if he will not Dear them, they
have discharged their duty, and ought to be content with the honor and
satisfaction of having endeavour^ to do justice, and of having eased their
consciences of the guilt that would have lain upon them, by a wilful neglect
of the trust committed, to them, and after his decease, as it is in our case,
only the Successor can destroy, what the Predecessor has done out of the
fullness and plenitude of his power, it being as impossible for a lesser power
to destroy the act of a greater, as it is for a private man by virtue of any
private authority and right, which he may assume or fancy to himself, to choose
whether he will obey an act of Parliament that concerns him, (...) be (...)
with by another act, of equal authority in its legislative original, and of
greater in its post liminious application, because it supercedes the obedience
to the other, and for any less power without a reason given or an application
made to the Sovereign then in being, to reverse what the (...) by his own
rightful power has ordained, is for servants to assume that dispensing power
to themselves, which they decry so loudly and so desprvedly in their Masters,
for there is no right in nature but legal right, and for any that have not
authority, to reverse the legal act of a superior power, must needs be
inauthoritative, illegal, and void.

If this argument which I design only to justify my self, and to show upon what
bottom my title to the place of Hospitaller stands, does in its application
prove too much, and extend it self to others as well as my self, those
Gentlemen that claim and are actually repossessed upon the restitution of the
Charter, may thank themselves for soliciting Mr. Hughes to come up and renew
his cracked and illegal pretentions, and for making this defense, which I would
have been very glad to have let alone, to become as necessary with respect to
me, as is is just and honest in it self.

If the Right Honorable the Lord Mayor, and the Honorable Court of Aldermen,
to whom I pay all that deference and respect which their great quality and
Character Justly calls for, shall look upon this as written in derogation to
them, and to the power and trust committed to their Honorable Court, I humbly
hope. when they have duly considers of the matter, they will concur with me,
and that if I should maintain the contrary position they would think themselves
concerned out of a principle of Lo^alty and duty to eject me out of this house,
that it is by no means a d^minution to their just Rights, in those things which
the Sovereig^ has not determined, to acknowledge his Legal Sovereignty in the
which he has, For the King acted in the Regulation of this House, (...) Virtue
of any Arbitrary Power, which he unjustly assumed and arrogat^^ to himself, but
by such an one, as is inherent in him, by the reserve in the Charter of the
Royal Founder, by Act of Parliament, and by the very Nature and reason of the
thing, by which he must always be supposed to be invested with a Power, to see
that his own Charities be rightly disposed. The King is the First Visitor of
this Hostell de die^, this House of Invalids, the Lord Mayor and Court of
Aldermen are the Second, acting by a Power derivative from him, and therefore
it is plain they cannot res^ind an Act of his, which would have been Legal in
it self, because all Legal Acts done and passed by a Legal Superior Power,
cannot be rescinded without the consent of the Sovereign, by any Subordinate
Authority acting under it, because this were to rob and deprive him of that
Supremacy and to assert his Prerogative to themselves, and if that grave and
wise Assembly in this hurry of Affairs have yielded a little too far to the
Solicitations and Importunities of Men without a Title, and proceeding upon a
false and Erroneous Hypothesis of the Restitution of the Charter, which has no
manner of connection with our Case, yet a Facto ad jus Consequeutia non valet,
the Fact and the right are two things, and the Judgment of that right, in what
Persons it is placed, we humbly conceive with all imaginable submission to the
Court of Aldermen, lies unquestionably before the King, whose just Power in
this or any other matter, I hope it will never be a crime to maintain. For as
one Act of Parliament cannot be repealed but by the Act of another, so the Act
of a King in those Affairs wherein he has a proper cognizance and Legal Power
can only be rescinded by himself or his Successor in the Imperial Seat, unless
they be such Acts as are Limited by time, as in the affair of Parents or
Temporary Proclamations or the like; and then at the expiration of that term
they die, and are repealed of themselves; so that having been placed in this
Station by one King and allowed by another, I trust his present Majesty shall
have no occasion to think any otherwise then Favorably concerning me, and I
rely upon the Grace and Goodness of King William and Queen Mary, that the Gift
of Gods Viccgerents will still be without repentance, as well is those of the
Divinity it self.

That I appeal to the Throne, it is because I see the whole affair lying so
naturally prostrate at the Footstool, and that the Judgment of it cannot
appertain to any other Court or Judicature whatsoever, till it be remitted from
thence, and I shall very willingly acquiesce in the Determination of that
Power, in whomsoever it is lodged, (is being too little an Employment for the
thoughts of Princes that have so vast objects to exercise themselves upon) to
whomsoever the Sovereign shall please to referr it, but more especially I
repose an entire confidence, a Fixed, unshaken, and I had almost said; a
demonstrative assurance, in the Favor of that Honorable Court to which the
ordinary inspection and Visitation of this house belongs, being in some sense
an Orphan of the City, left destitute by a good, but an unfortunate Parent,
that was undone in part by the Fatal Conflagration, and in part by other
accidents incident to Trade. I have a great deal of reason to expect from such
a Constitution, where the Lord Mayor, next under his Majesty whom God preserve,
is my Political Father, the Aldermen my Guardians, and the Commons all allied
to me in the Quality of Brethren, I say, I have a great deal of reason to
expect and I do with great assurance wait for it, that I shall not only have
strict Justice done me, if my cause come to be determined at that Bar, but
that I shall have all the Favor that Equity will afford me, and such an Equity
that is mixed with something of affection to a shrubb of their own growth, that
calls for no raines, no dewes but what are Natural and Hereditary to it, for
water and Refreshment.

I know no person in the Court of Aldermen, whom upon this account at least, I
have not reason to believe my friend, unless it be one Gentleman, Sr Patiente
Ward I mean, before whom when I preached, when he was Lord Mayor of this City,
I had the misfortune to leave him out of my prayer before Sermon, for that it
was an involuntary thing, arising from an undesigning negligence, without any
ill intention, I call the great God of Heaven and Earth to witness, and this is
no more then what I have affirmed a thousand times in the company of my
friends, when I had no interest to persuade me not to own it, if the affront
that was suspected, had been real on my part, and it is further observable
that I did not only omit him, but the Aldermen, Sheriffs, and Commonalty too,
who are all of them prayed for upon these occasions; now there is no man in his
wits but must suppose me to have been quite out of them, if I had designed a
Public affront to so Venerable an Assembly, so Illustrious a Bench, so great
and populous a City, in which I had not only received my Nativity, and a great
part of my Education, but in which I had at that time among all ranks, so many
favorers, Godspeeders and friends, and if after this any suspicion can remain
upon the mind of that Gentleman, that it was designedly done, which to me it
seems impossible that it should, then I humbly entreat him if no other
consideration will prevail with him, to let the memory and old friendship of my
deceased Father, intercede with him for my forgiveness.

But if it be as I have represented, that the true and only legal decision of
the controversy between Mr. Hughes and me lies solely and entirely in the Kings
breast, unless he shall please to put it into some other hands; Mr. Hughes
knows who it is that preached a famous Sermon at Abingdon Assizes upon a most
infamous subject, the justification of the worst of parricides, of the
Execrable Murder of that glorious Martyr, who fell a Sacrifice to the Church
of England and the Protestant Religion. He justified and gloried in that horrid
Fact when many of the pretended Judges themselves had repented, he Crucified
the Royal Saint afresh and put him to an open shame before a numerous
assembly, and in the face of justice it self, when others were washing off that
blood with their tears, and would have been glad with the expense of their own
lives to have retrieved the inestimable loss of his, which brought so black a
guilt, and was followed by so miserable usurpation and confusion. Now what
favor can Mr. Hughes expect from the Royal Grandson of that Martyred Prince,
when the principles of that Sermon are levelled at himself and at all
Succeeding Princes whatsoever, when Mr Hughes and his Partisans are angry:
though there be no good Subject but has ever maintained that the Persons of
Princes are unquestionably sacred, notwithstanding the real and gross exercise
of Arbitrary Power, whatever becomes of their Political capacity and Regal
administration. Mr Hughes may think it pleasant to wash his impure hands in
Royal blood, but that was not that washing which the Prophet David required in
all that minister in the holy things. I will wash my hands in Innocence, said
he, and so will I go to thine Altar. It is true the act of oblivion pardons
this crime, but to pardon and to forget are two things, to pardon and to reward
are two more: if Salmosius would have accepted of so small a pittance, as the
place of Hospitaller of St. Thomas Southwark, he would have become the place
and title very well, because it was very suitable for him, to eat the Kings
bread who had defended his cause, but Milton would certainly have been an
awkward man in that station, and what is Mr. Hughes I pray better then he?
unless, it be that Mr. Milton understood reason, argument and wit, if he would
but have employed those-talents to better purpose, which Mr. Hughes does not;
but that Mr. Hughes is more malicious, black and Saturnine in his Sermon, then
Mr. Milton in his book, and that the one is more dull and Phlegmatique then the
other. John Goodwin a man of much more honesty and sense then Mr. H. being so
far carried away by the Republican bigotry of those unhappy times, which
overflowed and bore-down Loyallty with a rapid and resistless torrent, was
content with his pardon and leave of retirement into a private corner, without
perking up impudently for preferments and rewards, when he had so justly
forfieted his life; and the same was Mr. Milton's case, who en deavoured to
make some sort of atonement for his crime in the English History which he
after Published, by offering up a devout sacrifice of praise and admiration to
the memory of that excellent and incomparable King, and giving him that great
and lofty Character which he deserved: but what has Mr. H. ever done to make
amends for his fault? what instance can he produce of his sorrow and
repentance? And yet so foul a crime so publicly committed, a preaching and a
printed crime, can never be said to be truly repented of without a preaching
and printed fatisfaction, for otherwise though there may be some inward
compunction and remorse, yet the satisfaction and the injury are to hold some
sort of proportion with each other, and to do a public, a notorious crime,
without a repentance and satisfaction equal to it, does not come up to the
nature of true repentance, but it is like robbing our Brother of a Pound and
paying him a Penny by way of Restitution, which is but to continue in the
Robbery still, and rather to own and justify the fact, then to condemn and
disapprove it.

Mr. H. can farther inform us if he pleases, who it was that vexed and
persecuted his neighbor for teaching a School without a license, and yet had
no license for himself at the same time, but answered to the name of Thomas
instead of William to save his Bacon at a Visitation, and he can tell us
further of the self-same person, how he stood engaged by promise for the
payment of a sum of money, and yet refused it after seven years time, under
the protection of the statute of limitation, and many other things Mr. H. can
tell of that man, when he has a mind to furnish a Biographer with materials
for the life of fo matchless a worthy, and if this man should happen to be the
same with the the other, I doubt me he has not yet repented of his Treason, for
this is treason too; it is treason against humane Society, which such
principles and such practices would certainly destroy, and this is the very
foundation of Treason against Princes, whose Persons are so Sacred above all
other men, not so much upon their own private account, as for the sake of the
public, which is highly concerned and interested in their safety, and suffers
in all the injuries they receive, and thus much may suffice for the Character
of Hugonides and his Friend, whom I would not have treated at so rough a rate,
but that they have turned raillery into a pertinent thing, and made it so
absolutely necessary for me to expose them, that it may appear at least there
is no merit of congruity betwixt my small preferment and them.

What has been said hitherto, has been upon occasion of the Stating of the
Case, as it was represented to Three worthy Gentlemen, learned in the Law, in
order to obtaining their Opinions upon it, I come now very briefly to say
something with relation to the Opinions themselves, by all which it is agreed
that the ordinary Power of Visitation and inspection into the affairs and
Officers of this House is in the Governors for the time being, that is to say,
First in the Lord Mayor and Court of Aldermen, and Secondly those other
Gentlemen and Citizens that are deputed by them or allowed by their permission
to manage and Transact the Hospital Affairs, and that the respective Officers
belonging to it, are not Charter Officers that have a fixed Interest and a
settled right, but only Servants at pleasure receiving wages for their work, and
to be dismissed at discretion, when the Governors think fit, though behaving
themselves well in their several Employments, they may be said to have an
Equitable right, and that it would be an Hardship in the Governors, which they
could not justify to themselves, to turn them off against their wills in such
Circumstances as these, but however these Opinions do at least say thus much
for us, that the Persons claiming against us have no Legal right, and that
there is no necessary Connection betwixt the Regulation of the Hospital and the
Restitution of the Charter, so that Mr Hughes is very much out of the way, when
he insists so unskillfully upon a Legal right, and proves himself to be as bad
a Lawyer, as he is a Divine or a man.

But yet I confess there is one thing in the opinion of that great and
Excellent Person Mr Sergeant Pemberion, which I cannot perfectly assent to,
though I should not presume to own a difference in matters of this nature from
a Person so profoundly Learned in his Profession, but that the Success of our
cause does in some measure depend upon it, he is pleased to say that upon the
Restitution of the Charter, and the avoidance of that Commission that supplied
its place, there were no Governors left either old, or new, but that it was
perfectly at the discretion of the Court of Aldermen to regulate and order all
those matters as they pleased; but in an humble Opposition to this, I presume
to offer, that the King being at all times vested with a Power of Visiting the
Hospitalls and of making from time to time such Regulations in them as to his
Princely Wisdom shall seem most meet and Expedient, though the Commission be
dissolved, yet the Regal Power and Authority still remains, and what a King
has done by virtue of his Legal, and rightful Power, always inherent and
vested in his Person, that nothing less them a King can destroy, so that those
new Governors being a Constitutive and Essential part of this very Regulation,
they must stand Independent from the Court of Aldermen, till the King declare
them to have nothing to do in this House, and the old ones that were Ejected,
whether Officers or Governors cannot be readmitted without the Kings consent,
the Kings Authority and the Validity of it in all those Acts to which it
extends it self, being always the same, though indifferent Persons that are
invested with it, so that in all the Legal Jurisdictions of a King, it is ille
aperit and nemo claudit, he opens and no man shuts, he shuts and no man
opens, nothing but a King can dissolve those Obligations or annull those Rights
which a Lawful King has Established. And indeed it were a great incongruity in
the King, very unbecoming either his wisdom or greatness, and a great
diminution to his power, if he should erect and constitute a Commission to
regulate abuses, in such things as do naturally and legally belong to his
visitation and inspection, and yet when the Commission was disolved, the
regulation should cease, which would be to as little purpose, as if no such
regulation had ever been made, only it would reflect a disparagement upon the
King as weak and inconsiderable, and pretending to more power then really he
had, for that regulation which is actually dissolved, after the dissolution of
that Commission by which it was made, must needs have been unjust and unlawful
before it, for lawful and just things will-endure. Nay, I appeal to all the
world, what confusion it would introduce into the affairs of the City, if all
the acts of the Commissioners for the space of five years together, should by
the expiration or dissolution of the Commission be rendered null and void,
though yet upon supposition that the Charter could not be voided, which I do
not concern my self whether it could or no, the Commission was so far illegal,
if we look down to it is root, though its necessity may perhaps plead something
in its excuse, as I have hinted before; but as for that branch of the
Commission which concerned the Hospitalls, it was as I have shown, strictly
legal, and therefore all those acts which passed under and from it, of which
the election of Governors and Officers were two, must need be legal and
consequently valid. No Mr. Hughes, do not please and flatter your little self
with vain imaginations, the regulation is as valid, as the first authority from
whence it sprang, and that is the Kings, though the Commission that managed and
ordered that whole matter be now actually dissolved, and I think I have given
so very good reason for it that even your own impudence, that face of yours
which is your unquestionable Property, and is peculiar to your self, cannot
without some small discoloring, some streaks and Essays toward the Modesty of
a blush, oppose it any longer.

But yet I grant, that though the Governors do manifestly hold by a Superior
Tenure, to any that the Court of Aldermen can give them, yet the Charter being
restored, the Ordinary Visitation and Inspection of the Hospital returns
together with it, and the Aldermen in the Course of things and in the Right and
Power of Administration being Superior to the Commons of the City, and much
more to any among the Governors that are not Free of the City, they may so tie
up the hands of the Subordinate Powers, as that they shall have no right to any
thing but their Green S^aves, and cannot move one step in any Emergent business
of the House without the direction of the Court of Aldermen or at least their
tacit consent, so that I confess the Aldermen have Fully retrived the exercise
of all their Power, in all Emergencies that shall happen de futuro, and in all
matters which the King has not determined, and which none but the King can
Evacuate or disanull, and have left the others little or nothing, but the Style
and Title of Governors, of which I conceive they cannot be divested without the
Kings express, or at least implicit concurrence by referring the whole matter
to the Honorable Bench, but for us that are Officers, it is a little
otherwise; it is true we are at his Majesty's disposal, as well as the others,
but only that during his Majesty's pleasure, we know our respective Places and
our Stations, and are obliged to act in our respective Spheres; otherwise the
business of the house must be at a stand, and by consequence the Royal Charity
be disappointed, and this is true likewise as to our Masters themselves, as to
some particular Acts, that is, of taking in the Sick, and dismissing the Sound
or the Incurable and auditing the Accounts, but only they can make no new order
as a Court, without the Express or at least the tacit and implicit consent of
the Court of Aldermen. It is no derogation to that great and wise Court to say
that the King is their Superior, not only in General in his Transcendent
Dignity and Power, but more particularly in all those matters which belong
naturally and Legally to his inspection and care, though by the Charter of his
Royal Predecessor, the ordinary administration of that very Province be
committed to them. For this I am sure there is none of them but will very
readily grant and Zealously assert, that the King is their unquestionable
Superior in all Lawful matters, and that the King of England never dies, but
is always the same, and we do very willingly acknowledge that by the
Restitution of the Charter, their old Authority returns together with it, only
that that Authority has now a Partial and a Temporary restraint upon it, by
the King, (who is the Fountain of that Power by which they Act,) his having
already determined the Rights and Stations of some particular persons, and we
say we are legally possessed of our respective places, till we are legally
ejected, that is, till it be done by an equal authority to that which put us
in, or till the King please to determine otherwise concerning us, either
expressly or by returning back to the Court of Aldermen the entire ordinary
power of visitation, which it does not appear to me that he has yer done, in
things that by the Royal authority have been already determined and ought to
stand firm till they be annulled by the same: and I do not speak this, neither
would I be so understood, as if I were afraid of the Judgment of that
Honorable Court, for I know their Justice, their Goodness, their Integrity and
Candor, and am not afraid to throw my self upon it, but I have said this for
no other reason, but that in my apprehension, upon the best and most impartial
judgment I can make of things, it is the true state of the Case, and I hope his
Majesty will not be offended with me for having thus largely vindicated his
Royal rights, though in an instance of greater consequence to us his poor
Suppliants and Servants then himself, and I entreat the Right-Honourable the
Lord Mayor and the Honorable Court of Aldermen to consider, that it is not we
that encroach upon their rights or pretend to dispute their lawful
jurisdiction, but it is they who upon grounds which they cannot justify, would
supplant us, for they pretend a legal Claim upon the restitution of the
Charter, which is to disown the ordinary Jurisdiction and to put themselves out
of the discretion of the Court, upon a bottom of legal property, which they
have not, whereas we do not disown it upon any other account, then only upon an
Emergent point of Law, particular to the circumstances we are in, in which the
Kings honor and prerogative are concerned.

It remains now only that I consider as clearly as I can, the circumstances
peculiar betwixt Mr. Hughes and me, as to the right or equity of our Case, and
I think in general it is already proved, supposing Mr. Hughes to have had a
legal choice, when he first made his entrance upon this little preferment, yet
that he was legally Ejected, that is, Ejected by virtue of that
Authority-Royall, which has reserved to it self in the very Charter and
Constitution it self (besides other reasons that do naturally suppose and
justify such a of visiting and inspecting the affairs of this house, with a non
obstante to all former orders of any inferior and delegated power concerning
them, and if these two authorities may mutually reverse what either of them
has at any time ordained, then Superiority and Subjection does manifestly
loose their nature; and there is nothing but disorder and confusion succeeding
in their stead, for no Government can stand in any place whatsoever, where
there are two contrary Authorities dissolving one another, and rescinding each
others Constitutions and Decrees. Mr. Hughes being therefore ^ejected by the
King, and I by the same Authority put into his place, does in vain insist upon
the Illegality of my choice, or upon the Firmness and validity of his own,
unless he can show an Authority Superior to that by which he was ejected and I
chosen, which was done, as he knows very well, by the Supreme Ordinary and
Visitor of this house, or unless he can give a reason why a Master of an house
may not act with his servants after an arbitrary and unaccountable manner, so
far as the retaining them in his house and service, or the dimissing of them
from it is concerned, and since he cannot say any thing to the diminution of
one King, especially in a matter of incontestable right, which does not equally
strike at the unquestionable right and prerogative of another, he will do well
to tread gingerly upon so tender a point, and to speak very softly concerning
it, and yet when he has done and said the most he can, the Hospital though
they may possibly pretend to be exempt from Episcopal Jurisdiction, and if
they had not pretended to thus much at least, Mr. Hughes had never come
thither, yet they will never I hope, be exempted from the Kings, and will not
only remain to be a real, though lame and imperfect part of his Dominions, but
also the object of his peculiar care; who is in general the Father of his
Country, but more especially the refuge of the Infirm and Weak.

Mr Rustat whose Exemplary bounty and Munificence founded those Scholarships
that are called by his name in the Flourishing Society of Jesus College in
Cambridge, reserved to himself during his own life time, the Approbation of
such as should be chosen into them, and it would have been very hard to deny
him, though he had not claimed it, a Prerogative so natural and so just as
this, much more would this have been ungrateful and disloyal in Subjects to
their King, during the whole Reign of Edward the 6th, after the Foundation and
Endowment of this House, to deny him a right of Enquiring from one time to
another into the management of so great a trust, though no reservation in his
Charter had been made, which reservation must for that reason more especially
respect his Successors then himself, who had an undoubted and unquestionable
right of Inspecting and inquiring into that Royal Charity which was so
strictly and so immediately his own; it was I say, a reservation to his
Successors rather then to him, which gives them a right of Law, (besides a
right of Congruity which they will always have in the Donations of their
Predecessors, to see that their Piety and Charity be not abused) to examine or
inquire into the management of this Trust, and to confirm or alter, what is
already Established by a Subordinate Power, as to their Princely Wisdom shall
seem meet, and when Mr Hughes or any of his Friends, can clear themselves
handsomely of this one consideration, which stabs his whole claim, and goes to
the heart of his cause, then I will yield to him without any more ado, though I
have several other material things to suggest in bar to his pretenses, which
are so unsound and rotten in every Point and Circumstance, that no man ever
appeared to lay his claim to any thing with greater disadvantage then Mr Hughes
has done.

For first it is notorious that when he was first admitted into this place and
for about three years after he never was Episcopally ordained, as the
Constitutions of the Church of England, and the several Acts of Uniformity,
but more especially that which is called the Bartholomew Act, do unavoidably
require, nothing of that Act being ever yet repealed that I know of, unless it
be that Clause which concerned the Solemn League and Covenant, which was
intended to be only a Temporary thing and was to expire of it self after a
certain term of years, which is now long since Elapsed. He says he was chosen
into this House by Fourscore Governors, and to do him a kindness it shall be if
he pleases, four thousand, For let them be never so many, it was in it self a
void Act, For they could not choose a Nonconformist to be Chaplain here, to eat
at the Kings cost in the Kings House, who is the Protector and Guardian of the
Laws, and to be maintained by way of Salary under the Notion of an
Ecclesiastical Person out of the Public Revenues of the State, as if
Nonconformity were to be encouraged out of the Public Revenue, at the same
time when it was so severely and expressly forbidden by the Statute Laws of the
Kingdom, several times reiterated and repeated.

I do not speak this out of any want of Tenderness to a Religious dissent, For
God Forbid but every man should Act according to his Conscience, neither did I
ever oppose any dissenting Party, so as to think them in Justice punishable for
their dissent, out of any other Principle then what was merely Political, for
the Preservation of the Public Peace, which is the certain and undoubted
measure upon which the Acts of Parliament in that behalf have proceeded, and if
I have any where said any thing with heat or with contempt of Separatists and
Dissenters, out of too much precipitance in writing, or out of the rashness and
inadvertency which is incident to Youth, yet it was always my Principle, that
all Mankind by nature are Endowed with all that Liberty of Action, of Opinion
and Enjoyment, which is consistent with private peace and rest, on with the
Safety and Tranquillity of the Public, which in a Society or body Politic
is that which is most especially to be regarded, and that the Legal restraints
are only Artificial things superinduced by necessity, experience and length of
time, to promote the advantage of a Nation, by making provision for its Peace,
Ornament, Plenty and Protection, or to prevent its ruin by restraining and
curbing those interferring passions that have a Natural Tendency to so bad an
End; No man can complain of me that ever I Persecuted him for his Conscience
sake, but some that have been actually under the Hatches of the Law, I have
endeavored to relieve and bring off as well as I could, as the Persons, if
they be living, whose names I have now forgot, may remember; I never pronounced
an Excommnication in my life, and am naturally very tender in a matter of such
dreadful consequence as that is, but an Absolution from it, I have with great
Chearfullness and Alacrity recited; there is nothing in the whole world that
has afforded me greater trouble and dissatisfaction of mind, then to see the
Frailty, Folly, and perverseness of humane nature to be such, that we must
needs be Falling out and Squabbling about opinions, which may be United in
Charity, though never so opposite or distant in themselves, and which are by no
means incompetible or inconsistent with our common happiness and Salvation; but
yet I have always been and I am still in my own thoughts a professed Enemy to an
unlimited Toleration, though the Natural tenderness and compassion of my
Temper, to which even Justice has a Cruel and Frightfull appearance, will
never suffer me to vex my Neighbor upon a Religious account; my reason why I
am against it, is, because long experience has Taught and inculcated a
Lamentable truth, that men will always be Embroiling the Peace of their Country
upon Religious pretenses, that there is a mixture of passion, a leaven of
design, a secret root of Ambition or Revenge, that frequently lies hid under a
sanctified appearance, and that it is not so much Salvation in the other World
or truth in this, as power that is aimed at and contended for; and if these
inconveniences could any way be prevented without the rigours and severities of
humane Laws, I for my part should think it the blackest Tyranny in the World,
that the Liberty of thought and of opinion, or the freedom of a pleasant and
diverting Conversation (that ought in reason to be the result of such
differences as these, by men's comparing their Sentiments together) which are
the first, most Natural, most Essential and deeply rooted Liberties of
mankind, so long as they keep within the bounds of modesty and Friendship,
should be Fettered and Entangled by positive Constitutions, which is the true
Spirit and Mystery of the Papacy it self, and is the greatest enemy that can be
to that curious and inquisitive temper, that Philosophical Genius, that
soaring and searching disposition of our minds, in which the true perfection
and dignity of humane nature consists, and if any expedient of comprehension
can be found, that shall upon experiment prove successful to the reconciling
those Feuds and Animosities which we labor under, by making the passage into
our Church so much more wide and spacious then it was before, that weak, but
conscientious men may enter in without the danger of being Crowded or hurt, if
any way can be contrived that Liberty may be granted without injury to the
Public, even to those who will still separate after the largest Concessions,
there is no person living that would more sincerely rejoice, to see that
punishment was rendered an useless and unnecessary thing, by Charities being
substituted in the place of Justice, and all those breaches made up by a
Practical agreement, which it is impracticable and impossible ever to
reconcile, by a concord of thought, or a Symphathetique harmony of opinion, but
this though I could wish to see with all my heart, yet I must needs say I never
can expect it, and therefore all that can be reasonably done in such a case, is
to make the Terms of Communion so large, which I am glad to see doing by the
Wisdom and Prudence of this present Parliament, as that great numbers of Honest
and good men, who cannot get rid of their prejudices and mistakes may be added
to the Church, taking care all the while, which I doubt not but such a wise
Assembly will effectually do, that we do not pull down the Church under
pretense of Enlarging it, for a Vineyard is always supposed to have its Fences,
and a Church that has no Walls or Hedges to defend it is so far from being a
Christian Society, that it is indeed no Society at all, and is rather to be
called a common Field then a Catholic Church or a Garden full of Spices which
the Lord has blessed.

It is not therefore Mr. Hughes his dissent from the Established worship, when
he took upon him first to be Chaplain of this place, that I reprove or find
fault with, but that he only washed the outside of the Cup and Platter, and was
like those Tomb-Stones which our Savior speaks of, which notwithstanding they
had an outward comelyness and Beauty in the sight of those that past by, yet
within they were full of rottenness and dead men's bones, for what else but such
a False and Pharis^icall disposition as this should make him less afraid of
Sacrilege then of a Surplice? Of Robbery then of Common Prayer? Of Prostrating
and Prostituting his very Soul and Conscience to the Unrighteous Mammon, then
of bowing to the Name, and by that gesture adoring the Divinity of the Holy
Jesus? and what was it less then this for him to take the King's Money for
disobeying his Laws, and to receive the rewards of the State, which are paid
and distributed out of the Public Revenue, for those very Actions or rather
Omissions of his to which the Law had allotted nothing but Fines and
Imprisonments and such like grievous things? Mr. Hughes knows very well that
his Salary could not be Legally paid to him as Chaplain or Hospitaller of this
House, upon any other supposition then that of his Conformity to the Established
Church, and to the Laws of the Land, of which the King is the Guardian and
Protector, and whatever his Friends might give him as a dissenting Preacher,
which I should never envy him, though it were never so much, Yet for him
unjustly to rob the Church of its Patrimony, and to appropiate to himself, what
the Law never designed for a Person so unquallif^ed to receive it, as he then
was, how little does it differ in its nature from picking of Pockets? Or
padding upon Clapham Common, or between that and London? though the Governors
would have given it him, unless it were out of their own proper pockets, not
out of the Stated and Public Revenue of the House, yet Mr. Hughes ought not
in Conscience to have received it, it was in him a point of Knavery to receive,
in them a breach of Trust to give, he dispensed with his Conscience and they
dispensed with theirs, and with the Laws to boot, which it seems it is the
clear Prerogative of Subjects to do, though at the same time we justly take it
in, that our Princes should not Govern themselves and us according to them, or
rather it is the peculiar Privilege of some sort of men with a non-obstant^ to
the rest of mankind. Those Fourscore Governors he talks of, that Voted him
hither, who they were I know not; neither shall I ever give my self the Trouble
to enquire, but this I am very sure of, that this was so great, so Criminal a
breach of Trust, the greater for being committed under the formality of a
pretended Authority and Power, that from that time forward they have forfeited
their Title and ought to have broken their Green Staves, as my Lord High
Steward does his white one after the Trial of a Peer is over, and never to
have pretended to the ordering or Government of this Hospital any longer, for
they were not sent hither to break the Laws of the Land and of the house
together, but to observe them both and to see that others in their Stations do
the same. At least, thus much, I suppose, will be granted by all impartial
Men, that as Governors they had no such Power, as that which they then assumed
and arrogated to themselves, so that they not being qualified to choose Mr.
Hughes, nor Mr Hughes to be chosen by them, it was a void Act on both sides,
and where then, I beseech you, is Mr Hughes his Title? What becomes of his
claim, and his fine show? When without Quo Warranto's, Forfeitures of Charters
and Commissions from above, the law in its own proper Channel ran so strong
against him, that he was Legally ejected at the very instant when he was so
Illegally chosen.

Mr Hughes, I presume, remembers what his answer was, when I put the question
to him, whether at his admission into this house, he were in Orders or not? his
Answer was affirmative and positive that he was; well pla^'d old Hugo, thought
I to my self, but Sir, said I, what Orders do you mean? (...) you Episcopally
Ordained at that time? this question did not please him, (...) after some
rumbling within, as if he were troubled with wind, occasion as I suppose, by a
contest betwixt Interest and truth, the man made a (...) after a very wry face,
which I have no words to describe, to make a ve^^ same answer every whit as
much distorted and awry as that; why truly said he, I do not well remember what
date my Orders do bear, which was but the second part of Shuffling and Cutting;
the First answer was an Equivocation, the Second no Answer at all, for he knew
very well that they did not (...) date, till very long after his admission into
this place: the first was thought a figure peculiar to the Jesuits, but now it
seems the Schoolmasters have ^^^ it too, God grant they do not teach it their
boys, the Second besides, that it was a very shameless evasion in it self, was
a very mean affront and (...)nity put upon me, as if I were so silly to swallow
such weak answers ^or ^^^^ and Substantial things. Heaven help the good
Gentleman and instruct him better by a ray of light from thence, for his noddle
is as shallow as the (...) is high, as cold and as numbed as the gray head of
Brecknock, where the sn^^ is a perpetual Incumbent all the year, even when the
Sun returning brings his Quo Warranto against the Winters Charter, or if two
Learned (...) please him better, because he pretends to something of that same,
let it be Rhodope and Haemus if he will, for the Top of Parnassus he has
nothing to do with, although he be a Paedagogue, and to that of Olympus I am
sure he will never come, unless he mends his manners.

I know Mr Hughes urges in his own defense, he did it to me in a short
Conference which we had together, that though it is true he were incapable by
Law to execute any Ministerial Office in this place when first he came to it,
and for a great while after, yet at last he leapt into a Cassock and a Girdle,
the knot of which was a great deal. Lower then it should be, and that his
peaceable Enjoyment to be computed from that time to the time of his Ejectment,
was to be interpreted as a new choice, and is to looked upon as a tacit consent
in the Governors who made no objections, but suffered him to go on silently and
smoothly in the execution of his Charge, and I am content upon one condition
that this Argument shall pass Muster in his behalf, and that is, that he refund
to the use of the Poor of this House, or to the Ornament of that Chapel which
he had converted into an Illegal Conventiele, all that ill gotten money,
amounting in all to about 200 pounds, of which he robbed the King, Cheated the
Hospital and bereft the Church, by withholding it from some other Person more
capable and more deserving, which is no more then what, I think, he is bound in
strict Conscience to do, he being the first man I believe to be met with in
History that ever received a Public and Stated Pension for a Public and
continned act of Disobedience and Contempt to the Laws of his Country, a
Pension from the King, in the Kings own House, who is the Guardian and Executor
of the Laws he broke. But yet supposing the connivence and sufferance he speaks
of, to have signified as much as a choice, or Approbation, yet he was Legally
ejected notwithstanding this, by a Legal Authority abundantly Paramount to
that Illegal and Arbitrary little Power by which he was first introduced into
his Place, it was done by the King the Supreme Visitor and Ordinary of this
House, whose hired Servants we all are, and may be Ejected at his pleasure
without any wrong or injustice, when ever he is weary of our Service, or is
disposed to take other Servants in our stead.

But I fancy I know Mr. Hughes his Temper so well that he will never consent to
this costly Proposition, of part with such a sum of money to appease a
Conscience, which is by no means squeamish, and that he would rather have staid
at home quietly in the Country, then have taken such a troublesome and
expensive Journey to meet with such an irksome demand, that had been made by
those that have Power to exact its performance; For it is plain he received
this money in the Hospitall's wrong and that in strict Justice he is bound to
Restitution. Wherefore since Mr H. will not part with his Coin, he must not
take it ill if we stick close to our Argument and to him, by disallowing and
Protesting against his tac^t consent, for it is plains this Notion of a tacit
consent involves the Court of Aldermen and the King and all the Superiors, as
much as it did those honest and worthy Trustees. who broke their Trust when
they chose him; For they did therefore only not oppose this choice, because
they knew nothing of it, they had no notice or Cognisence of the matter, and it
is as plain that neither the Court of Aldermen, nor the King would at that time
have suffered it, had a due and particular Representation of the matter been
made; not the Court of Aldermen, who were all of them Members and Communicants
of the Church of England, and much less the King who would never have consented
that the Panegyrist of Traitors, and the vile assertor of his Fathers
Parricide, should eat of his bread and live upon the fruits of his bounty, and
if this did still lie heavy against him even after his Admission into Holy
Orders, then the King who was the First Visitor and Inspector of our Affairs,
can never be supposed in any reasonable Construction to have given his Tacit
consent; so that in all this affair though we should admit a tacit consent of the
Subordinate Powers, yet the Court of Aldermen and the King not concurring, it
was a consent of Deputies against their Principalls which is a void thing in it
self, and is as much as no consent, a consent to that which they were obliged
by their trust and by their duty to their Principalls to disallow. I shall not
here trouble my self to compute how many infractions M. Hughes made upon the
known Laws of the Land, every minute was a repeated breach For after three
years that he was possessed of this place, it is enough that after his Conformity
to the Church, he was Guilty of very gross and Scandalous neglects of his duty,
of which I shall say more hereafter, and this is Sufficient to destroy his
Notion of a Tacit consent, for nothing ought to be tacitly consented to, that
cannot be explicitly and fairly defended.

Mr. H. his not being in Orders for so long a time, his having abused the
charity of the house, publicly affronted and mocked the laws of the Land,
cheated the King and interverted the public Revenue to an illegal use, was
reason enough to justify his expulsion from hence, notwithstanding his halt
conformity, for about a year or two before he left it, and if the King as a
master had not had a legal arbitrary power to turn away his Servant, as every
master has, even without a fault, yet I hope it was a sufficient reason for a
Son to proceed upon, that he had justified the Murder of his Father, and it
was still a further aggravation that in his proper business, as a Chaplain to
the house, after his pretended conversion to the Church of England, he was so
grossly neglectfull in the duties of his office, so that if ever Servant was
legally turned away, it must be confessed Mr. H. had law of his side when he was
dismissed from his employment, but has no Claim, no Shadow, no Color, no
imaginable appearance or pretense of right, for a reinvestiture into his lapsed
charge, forfieted by Sins of omission and of commission too, and forfieted for
such reasons that I had almost said, it would be a sin and a crime even in the
supreme power it self, which alone can legally ^^ (...) him, but by any
inferibur Authority it cannot be done, (...) the (...)ties and irregularity of
the proceeding, without affront to the memory of (...) blessed Kings, as well
as injury to the affairs of the house, for let him (...) what he will, he will
still be as negligent as he was before, he will (...) bury the Dead, nor visit
the Sick, nor read prayers to the Poor, a^ (...) were so strangely neglected
and omitted by him, that it ^^ (...) he (...) Clupham all the week round, and
his friend Mr's Knight re^ded here in (...) place, and was of the two more
properly to be styled the Hospitaller ^^ ^^ Thomas Southwark, she managed all
things in his absence, as she easily might, because there was nothing to do,
unless now and then a dead Corpse to ^^ put into the hole, to prevent stanch
and Annoyance to the living, which ^^ seems was the Sex'ton business and not
his, for the space of four year together, till toward the very Fag end of his
time; and then by the clamours of ^^ny but especially of Mr Molins, who was
then one of the Surgeons i^ (...) house, he was at last prevailed upon to take
some very little care that t^^ o^ three bodies should have Christian burial
according to the usage of ^^^ Church of England, whereas before the Sexton was
the Curat, a^^ (...) Service at the Grave was, Let the dead bury the dead for
William (...)

Can it be Prudent or Rational to trust such a Man again, ^ho (...)* once
discarded among other things for so foul and Criminal a (...) duty? or do we
think in earnest that Mr. W. H. is any other (...) then Hypocrites and
Apostates usually are, who have no Principle but (...) and fear; for by his
behavior after his Conversion to the very (...) or his being turned out of his
place, by his almost total neglect, and by his ^^ovenly performance of the
Offices of the Church, you may guess what respect he had for them, a Form of
Prayer made him puke, he sweat a^ the (...) and at the Second Service died
away, and he still hates every thing in (...) Church but its Preferments, and
this some of his Friends are so (...) ^ssu^^^ and satisfied to be true, though it
may be not quite so far a^ I have (...) that for this only reason they abett
his pretentions, in opposition to every thing that is either Just or Sacred
among Men, neither can it indeed be expected that he should be much a friend to
positive Constitutions, which must needs ly flat and cold upon his Stomach, who
scorns to be Fettered by those Eternal restraints the Convictions of truth, the
Laws of Essential and (...)terable reason, the Adamantine ties and obligations
of nature.

For my part double diligence in any Employment, is a thing which I (...)
pretended to in my Life, but without entering into Comparison with him. I can
say, that I have faithfully discharged my trust, or else have made Provision
that it should be done by others, when either my occasions called me abroad, or
my indisposition kept me at home, or my Studies were too importunate to be
denied my attendance upon them. For the first four years ^^ thereabouts, there
were Prayers duly twice a week, upon Wednesdays and Frydays according to the
Canon, and afterward when this did not satisfy the Governors, I allowed eight
Pounds yearly out of my Pocket, to which they were pleased of their goodness to
add twelve more for a Competence for a Reader every Morning and Evening* I have
visited the (...) as there ^as occasion, and administered the Sacrament, when I
thought it fit for in that I must beg leave to be my own carver, and all this
five years time and upwards I know not that ever a Sermon was omitted once a
week unless it were once, when I fell ill in the midst of the Prayers and could
not go thorough my whole task, and as I have done all the good I am able in the
House, as opportunity bath administered occasion for it, so I shall not only
still continue to do it as long as I stay there, but as long as I live it shall
have my good wishes, and all the small assistances I am able to afford it, even
though I be Illegally and arbitrarily dispossessed of what I have so long Legally
enjoyed.

One particular instance I ^rave leave here to insert of my readiness to serve
the Hospital upon any occasion, though it be only an expression of my good
will toward it, and at the same time an Intimation of my want of Power,
because the design dropped and fell to the Ground. It is now above three years
ago, as I remember, that there was a very worthy project under consideration of
Re building this decayed and ruinated house, which call^ for another Hospital
to receive it self, and is almost as weak, and crazy, as any of the Patients
within its Walls, the design went so far that if I am not misinformed, that
Famous Mathematitian and Architect Sir Christopher Wren, was brought hither to
take an Actual survey of the building intended, which upon so large and
spacious a plat of Ground improved by the great Genius of that Admirable man
would have made a most Noble and Magnificent Structure. A Private contribution
from one good man to another, whether among the Governors, or at Court or
abroad in the world, was the way proposed to bring this great work to
perfection, which I confess I looked upon to be Magnae molis, a thing of great
labor and difficulty, like the work it self, and that the Fatigue and
Tediousness of such a Collection, (especially when Chelsey College and other
public buildings, which I knew of, had Exhausted so much) would give a damp
and discouragement to the undertaking, not but that considerable sums might
have been advanced this way, but to help the business forward I was for
procuring a brief to be read in all Churches and Chappells thorough the
Kingdom, the whole Kingdom being more or less obliged to the Charity of this
House, and concerned in Gratitude and in prospect of what future occasion there
might be of applying to it for the relief of their Sick or wounded, as well as
out of a public Principle of Christianity and good nature, to contribute to so
worthy and useful a design. This I Communicated in discourse to Mr. Seymour,
who so well approved it, that he immediately imparted it to some others, and I,
while the fancy was warm and fresh within me, drew up, as well as I could, the
sor^^ of a brief, to be corrected and altered by such as understood the methods
of such things better than I do, which I have still by me, but after much
discourse and many Consultations, for what reason I know not, whether as
impracticable or unseasonable at that time, the thing fell asleep and past off
in Fumo without any effect. I mention this, I say, only to show my good will to
the House, and I desire Mr H. during his four years Reign and residence at his
Court at Clapham to give such another instance of his, and I do here again
Solemnly protest that no ill usage which I have never deserved, shall ever
alienate my affection from this House, but that I will always Remember, upon
all occasions, the kindness and support I have received from it, without
reflecting upon the wrongs and Injuries that are or have been done me.

So much for Mr. Hughes his not being in Orders and for his tacit consent, a
sort of consent which God abhorrs and utterly protests against, that ever it
should be given to unlawful things. These things have thou done, says he, and
I held my Tongue, and thou thoughtest wickedly, that I am even such an one as
thy self, but I will reprove thee and set before thee the things that thou have
done. And I must confess I do not a little wonder that the present Court of
Aldermen should ratify that Election with more then a tacit consent, which that
which was then in being, when Mr H. his Fourscore Governors pitched upon him
for the object of their Choice, if they had taken any cognizance or received
any particular Information of it, would have condemned and evacuated with the
last degree of Scorn and Indignation, but Mr. Hughes is now a Conformist, which
he was not then, and I do really attribute this unequal proceeding in a Court
of so great Justice and Honor as that is, to the misrepresentations of Mr H.
and his Friends, and to their want of sufficient Information in the matter.

It is next to be considered, that when Mr H. was Ejected out of this house,
for the Reasons that have been already declared, it was not long before he was
otherwise provided for, with a Freehold instead of an Arbitrary dependence, and
with a Living of at least Sixscore Pounds a year, that being the lowest
Computation that ever I heard made of it, instead of a Salary of Threescore,
dependant upon pleasure, which Living was bestowed upon him in pity to his
Circumstances, and out of that excess of Charity which is natural to great
minds, in lieu of what he was deprived of here, they believing, because they
were not capable of Hypocrisy themselves, that the pretenses of this Whineyard
were real, and that being so true a Convert to a Church which he mortally
hates, it was a great piece of hardship and next kin to Injustice, upon him, to
dispossess him of his place. I know Mr Hughes is used to say, he said it more
then once to me and to my Wife, and he has blown it about among all his
Friends, that this Living was not given him in lieu of what he had lost, but
for some other reasons best known to himself, which he is not pleased to
discover, but yet this he does discover by this Cryptic Method, which is
usually accounted an argument of Wisdom, that he believes me at the same time a
most despicable fool, and that he himself is a most Flagitious, abominable
Knave, for I love dearly to call things by their right names, and if the last
of these Characters especially be true, he should be no true Member of the
Church of England, which detests and devotes the Principles and practices of
such wretched Fellows. For I appeal with great assurance to those Reverend and
Learned Gentlemen that were concerned in this his new Promotion, whose great
and Venerable names I will not fully by inserting them in a just Satyr against
so vile a Caitiff, First, whether they would have stickled so hard to have this
Hypocrite restored, if they had designed or intended any other preferment for
him, which might have been an equal or a greater support then that was, I can
never induce my self to believe this, because it would look with so particular,
a pointed hatred against me, which I no more believe then I do that Mr H. is an
honest man, and with all Imaginable franckness, Sincerity and thankfullness I
speak it, though they thought Mr H. to have been a little too hardly dealt
with, I know that they are now, and I am very well satisfied they were then all
my Friends, and it shall be my constant endeavor, with a Proviso against this
Simpleton Mr H. whom I am resolved not to spare, and whose Interest against
mine in this particular Case, I am very confident they will no longer espouse,
not to undeserve the Honor of such good opinions.

Secondly, I presume to appeal to them, and do perfectly throw my self upon
their free and open answer to the Question, whether they did not really and
purposely prefer Mr H. or cause him to be preferred to his Living in the
Country upon this Consideration and no other, that they thought him hardly
treated in being ejected from hence.

But without the rudeness of Catechizing my Superiors, the thing speaks so
plainly for it self, that I might have spared those names which nature calls
him, and which all men of ^ense must acknowledge to be his due, for to what
purpose should they give him another Living in Conjunction with this? the whole
Salary of this was but Threescore pounds a year, and he must supply one of
these places by a Curate, to whom when he had allowed an Honest Maintenance,
what could he get? besides, that something may well be supposed to be lost by
Non-Residence upon his Country Living, for the Country people are usually as
sharp as their Parson, though it were Mr. Hughes his own self, and something
must be paid here for rent, had he lived out of the Hospital, as I take it
for granted he would never have lived in it, any more then he did before, for I
see not what inducement there could be to alter his mind, and of what
advantage, then could the Hospital have been at the Foot of this Account? or
would it not rather have been his Interest as well as duty, to have thrown up
this, leaving it free for me or any body else, and to have retired into his
Country Living, there to have spent the remainder of his days, as Nuns that
were no Nuns formerly do in a Cloister; in Beads and Penances for his Abingdon
Sermon, and for the Hypocrisy of his pretended Conversion, and all the other
sins of his Life? I say, it was his duty no less then his interest, and thereby
hangs a tale, for you must know this Mr H. among other of his works, writ a
very Pious and (...) Treatise against Pluralities and Non-Residence, and he
could not hold his Living and his Hospital together without confuting his
book. For two Livings I suppose, will be granted to be a Plurality, and it is a
known Maxim in the (...) Philosophy, which is like Mr Hughes for that, that it
is sometimes in the right, though it be but very seldom, that one and the same
numericall, and Individual body cannot be present in two Places at once, and
from thence Non-Residence must unavoidably have followed. So that Mr. H. in
this Case had no more choice then this, he must either have affronted his
Conscience (and what a Conscience is that that would Prostitute it self for so
very small an advantage, as I have computed this would have amounted too) or he
must have relinquisht one of his places, or reca^^ted his book and own himself
to have written or rather brayed Heresy before he was aware, like the dull
animal that mumbles Thistles. I grant indeed that in law these two preferments
would have made no plurality, because one of them is not in the legal style
properly termed cura animarum, but yet there are Souls in one place as well as
in the other, and it may be more in this then in his Country Living, so that it
is a plurality in Conscience though not in Law, and I challenge him to show me
one argument in his Book, that does not ^ly in his face and call him by those
names which I will not give my self the liberty to use, being sensible I have
called him but too severely already, for which I beg his excuse, as I hope he
will think it but just and honest to beg mine too, for having given me so Foul
a Provocation, by endeavoring to eject me out of what I legally and rightfully
enjoy, though he himself can get nothing by the bargain, which is infernal
quintessence, the Devil rectified to his highest pitch, it is Malice not in
words, (as he may perhaps interpret my raillery to be, a poor piece of business
for a man that is robbed of his right) but in very deed and in truth. I say, he
can get nothing but infamy and disgrace among all the Catholic Church of
honest men, for none but such do properly belong to the mystical body of
Christ, and if this be the gain he contends for, much good may it do him, and I
call it malice, because I cannot call it Revenge, for Revenge is the
retaliation of an injury received, but I never did him any; he delerv'd it is
true to be turned out of his place, but I knew not the man nor his place
neither, I never supplanted him, I scorn such profligate and degenerous acts, I
was actually appointed in his stead by the kindness of my friends, before I
knew the least Syllable or letter that any such thing was designed, and if I
had not had it, it is undoubtedly certain that some body else must, so that I
in particular was so far from doing him any injustice, that my very succeeding
him really did him no harm, since it must have been done by some body else, if
it had not been done by me, and yet if providence had not just then pointed out
that refuge for me to fly to, my affairs were brought to that extremity that I
was in danger of immediate ruin, so that he is angry with providence for
providing for my safety, as it did afterward more plentifully for his, he is
angry with me for giving my self up to the Guidance and conduct of those happy
Stars that would not see me perish with Hunger and Cold, and he makes it now
his business to procure my ruin, though at the same time he knows, he can get
nothing by it, but the odious reputation of the worst of men, so that if this
be not malice, there is no such thing, and if ever man were excuseable for a
sharp invective upon an invererate, but causeless Enemy, it is I.

But says Mr. Hughes, as to the business of Pluralities, it was his own
evasion when I urged it to him, Sauce for a Goose is Sauce for a Gander, why
may not I be a Pluralist, as well as you? No Mr. Hughes, it is not the same
case, for I never writ agrinst pluralities, as you have done, and besides you
cannot accuse me of non-residence, from whence all your arguments, if you would
speak any thing that looks like sense, must of necessity derive their force,
and by this you made the Hospital a Plurality though it were but one place: It
is not a plurality in law, because neither of the Places is cum cura animar^^
in the legal style, nor in Conscience, (though I am for Pluralities in a sober
sense, if I knew how to come at them) because they are contiguous, and may both
very well be sufficiently taken care of, even in the Judgment of those that
quarrel most at such things, by the same Person, it is after the Example of St
Bartholomew's it self, which is the older Foundation of the two, where both the
Hospital and Parish are United, it is pursuant to the reason and intention of
that Act of Parliament, by which small Livings were united and joined together
after the Fire of London, and there is no doubt but if that fatal Calamity had
spread it self so far, as by Gods great Mercy it did not, the same provision
upon the same ground would have been made here, and Lastly the Justice and even
necessity of it is acknowledged by the Excellent Dr. Burnet, now the Right
Reverend Lord Bishop Elect of Sar^m, in his Sermon before the Commons at the
beginning of this present Parliament, where among other things that are managed
like himself, with an Air and vigor peculiar to their Author, he piously
recommends the encouragement of the Clergy and the increasing of small Livings
for their support; I know not whether Mr. Hughes has read that Sermon or no,
but I am sure he dare not read his two other Admirable discourses, from the
Pulpi^, The Royal Martyr, I mean, and the Dutiful Subject, for fear of
reflecting too severely upon his own doubty Performance, to be admired for
nothing that I know of, but that it is so resinedly, so admirably wicked, His
Abingdon Law, his Banqueting house Entertainment, more Cruel then those of
Progne and Thyestes wherein he caressed himself and entertained his Friends ( O
scelus! O Flagitium!) with the Mangled and bleeding Father of his Country.

I shall conclude this whole matter with these two things. First, I desire that
it may be taken notice, that when upon the death of the Reverend and my late
dear friend Mr Sowton, the Parish of St. Thomas's became void, his Majesty King
James the Second, was pleased upon a Representation of the Equity of my Case to
him, the Hospital alone not affording a sufficient maintenance for a Clergy
Man in this Town, to withdraw a Mandate granted in behalf of another in my
Favor, and accordingly upon this notice that it was his Majesty's pleasure, as
I think a plainer Indication of it could not possibly be given, I had an Order
from the Commissioners for the Union, that is, in effect I had two Legal
Orders for the place of Hospitaller, and one for the Parish, the latter of
which two Orders was with his Majesty's particular knowledge and Approbation,
so that it was his own Act in his own House, and what more Legal choice then
this there can be, where the King meddles with nothing but what is Legally in
his own disposal, as this matter of the Union manifestly was, I would be glad
to be informed. For it is plain that this was not only the Act of the
Commissioners, who gave their consent, as indeed they could not well deny it,
to what they knew to be the Kings pleasure, but more immediately and expressly
of the King himself, who if he did many Arbitrary things, which I neither can
nor will defend, though in Gratitude I ought not to upbraid him with them, yet
I hope the Legal Acts of a Lawful and rightful King, as all men will
acknowledge that Prince to have been at that time, ought not to be the less
binding and valid, because afterward, (for this was in the first year of his
Reign) he did several things which were Arbitrary and Illegal. If a Mandate be
sent down to any College in either University for the admitting of a Master or
Fellow who could not Statutably be chosen, supposing he ly under no
incapacities by Act of Parliament or by the known Laws of the Realm, this
Mandate according to the common Practice of the University takes place without
any more ado, unless there be some great exceptions against the Person, or else
some other more deserving or more desirable Person be precluded by it, in which
Case they usually represent back again to the King, and Endeavor to get it
withdrawn, not that they dispute the Kings Power, but that they endeavor to
incline his will to a choice more agreeable and pleasing to themselves, or more
for the Interest and Honor of their Society, in deferrence to which it is very
well known that they do sometimes Court a Mandate instead of refusing it, and
are glad in such Cases where their local Statutes are a little too hard upon
Merit, that the King interposeth his Authority Royal for the Encouragement of
Arts and the advancement of Learning, and that in those Colleges that are not
of Royal Foundation, and yet by such Mandates a Freehold is conveyed, and the
Person invested has an equal right, in at common acceptance, with any other
Member whosoever. But whatever exceptions may possibly be offered against this
practice in the Universities, though nothing has been in repetition more
frequent, ever since I knew what the University was, and a great while before,
nor any thing in Fact more firm then such investitures by the King's letter,
yet no man sure will dispute the Kings Prerogative in his own Foundation, and a
Foundation in the Charter, of which there is an express reservation to himself
and Successors to inspect and visit at all times hereafter, and where the King
has an undoubted and unquestionable right of putting in and putting out when
he pleases, provided they be not unqualify'd by law for their employments which
was Mr. H's Case, when he came first to this house, who was so unqualify'd by
law for his place, that even the King himself could not dispense with him; in
such an house as this, I suppose it will be granted that the Kings Mandate
ought to take place, and I had more then a mandate, if more then that can be,
because a mandate was recalled for my advantage. I had the concurrence of the
King and Commi^^ioners, for an union of the two places, that is, for an actual
possession and enjoyment of them both, and what firmer title to a thing of this
nature there can be I cannot Imagine, and certainly the law would have done
very weakly to entrust the King with the disposal of so many and so great
Spiritual preferments, so as to entitle the persons on whom they are conferred
to a Freehold in the same, if at the same time he shall not be allowed to
place a Chaplain in his own house, of his own or his Royal Ancestors
Foundation, in the constitutions of which he has expressly reserved a right of
inspection and regulation to himself.

The Second thing I hinted at, with which I shall shut up all, is what I have
already pretty largely insisted upon, but cannot in this cause be too
frequently repeated, or too heedfully attended to, and that is, that the
dissolution of the Commission by which this regulation was made, does not at
all affect the regulation it self, so as that must of necessity be dissolved
together with it, for this were to suppose that an house can be no sooner
built, but it must tumble and fall down again, as soon as the Scaffolds, by the
help of which it was erected, are removed, and the Artificers dispersed and gone
away, whereas then indeed it is, and not till then that the house appears in
it is true Beauty and Strength.

It has been proved sufficiently already that the King had always a power of
visiting this house, even though the City Charter had stood, so that though the
administration of the City and the visitation of this house were both of them
entrusted with the same Commissioners, yet they were manifestly two Commissions
tack't together that were in themselves distinct from one another, and the King
if he had pleased, might have put the visitation of this house at that time
into other hands, and as soon as the regulation had been perfected, he might
have dissolved the Commission, but what a mock regulation had this been? what a
Scandal and Contempt would it have brought upon such a regulating design as
this, if the regulation had been dissolved together with it? or indeed to what
purpose would such a regulation have been? and yet if it be not actually
dissolved upon the dissolution of the Commission it self, then the Governors
and Officers must stand as they were, till they are displaced by the same or an
equal power, because in this it was that the regulation consisted.

Queen Elizabeth by her Commissioners visited the Universities, altered their
Statutes and made many great and lasting regulations which remain to this day,
notwithstanding the Commission be not only dissolved, but the Commissioners
long since dead and mouldered away to dust in their graves. And so in the late
Case of Magdalen College, there is no man of common sense can question but if
the Commission had been legal or managed and pursued after a Legal manner,
but the Regulation would have been valid, though the Commission had expired,
after the business, it was intended for, had been done, otherwise it would have
been a Commission as Ridiculous and absurd, as it is acknowledged to have been
Arbitrary and Illegal.

This is what I have to say for my self and my Friends and Fellow Servants in
this house, but against Mr. Hughes in particular all things are so strong, and
run upon him with so fierce a Stream, that I suspect the soundness of his
understanding for offering to attempt a thing in which he could reasonably
propose nothing but infamy and disgrace to himself, he seems to me to be got
into the predicament of Dr Rolls, and that even Hellebore and Anticyra it self,
are unable to restore him to his right mind, so far are his Wits run a
Woolgathering from it.

And now upon the whole matter I am very sure of the Victory, which I have
already obtained by dint of Argument against him, though he may possibly run
away with the Triumph, and I had much rather lose so fair a cause as mine is,
then gain a Scandalous Conquest, by succeeding in his

Victrix c^usa Deis placuit, sed victa Catoni.

POSTSCRIPT.
I Have two things further to add, which occur-now newly to my mind, and are, I
think, material to the purpose, the First as to the Regulation in general, the
design of which seems to have been, to displace all that were not at that time
Communicants of the Church of England, that being the interest which the Court
thought fit at that juncture to encourage: It is not my business in this place
to weigh the Merits of Causes or of Persons, neither do I at all intend by this
to reflect upon the Persons Ejected, as if they were defective in the discharge
of their trust, the contrary of which, bating only what concerns my Friend Mr
Hughes, is that which I did always and do still very firmly believe; but this I
say, that by this it appears, that it was a Regulation not only made by him,
that had a Legal right to do it, of which I have already spoken very largely,
but it was also such a Regulation, as the Laws of this Land, if they did not
Expicitely enjoin, yet they did manifestly encourage and abett, it being very
incongruous to prosecute the same Persons upon account of their Religion, which
was no more then what the Laws put in Execution would certainly have done, and
yet at the same time to reward them with public Salaries, for the same
services, that Members of the Established Communion were capable of performing
with equal, if not greater advantage to the House, I say, greater, in
reference to that part of the Governors, to whom their service will always be
most acceptable, who have without question, the most of the Gentleman in them,
and will at the long run, prove the most generous Benefactors to us, if they be
not disobliged, for he has no Honor that has no resentment. I appeal to the
greatest favorers of Mr. H. and others, if a set of Papists were put into the
House, to fill up the respective Offices belonging to it, whether they would
then grumble at a Royal Regulation, whether they would not allow the King a
Power of Visiting in this Case? whether they would not agree, that the Ejection
of such Persons, was not only necessary, but Legal too? and Lastly whether
they would not think it a very unreasonable thing, that they that stand
impeached and Condemned by so many Laws, should be Encouraged with Salaries out
of the public Kevenue, and preferred before those, upon whom the Laws never
look but with a kind and favorable aspect? I do not in this make any odious
comparison betwixt a Papist and Protestant Dissenter, as if the one were as
much to be discountenanced as the other, but yet I challenge any man to show a
reason, why a Papist should be Ejected, which will not, in the dry consequence
and Inference of the matter, affect and reach a Protestant Dissenter, to whose
dissent I cannot help it that the Laws are no friends, and that he cannot be
encouraged in an affair of this Nature, without something that squints toward
a dispensing Power. Not to prefer can never be thought a piece of Persecution,
and the Government will always choose its own Servants, as it is but reason it
should, so that this Regulation being made by a Legal Power and for a reason
agreeable to the Laws. I think it has all the Validity and Strength, that any
Act in the World can be supposed to have.

Secondly, the second thing I must Suggest, is only in Fayrness to the other
Side, that I may not seem to conceal or smuggle any thing, that has a
favorable Appearance toward them. It is, that our Orders run only during
Pleasure, therefore the Question is, upon the Dissolution of the Commission,
whether that pleasure be not dissolved, and I answer not, because first durante
beneplacito signifies till that Court otherwise determine, which they never
did. Secondly, though these express words had not been inserted, yet the thing
it self was plainly supposed, we being all of us at the pleasure of that Court
and of the King from whom they derived their Commission, and holding by no
other Tenure, so that all the question here is, whether all their Acts were
vacated by their dissolution, which I conceive they were not, and I hope I have
given some reason for it.

Thirdly and Lastly, that pleasure, being a real Power, can never dye, like
matter and motion that are always equal and the same taken in the gross,
neither can a greater pleasure be swallowed up in a less, any more then a
greater quantity can be, and for this reason the pleasure or Power of the
Commissioners can never be the pleasure or Power of the Court of Aldermen, but
returns back again to its Eountain the King, to whose Royal Justice, Goodness
and Wisdom, I am very willing to referr my Cause, if Mr Hughes think fit to
make his appeal to it, In the mean time I would willingly see a reason, before
I abandon and relinquish my possession.

FINIS.

